Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach
Estates/East Atlantic Beach
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

March 2014

Planning Committee:

This document was developed by the NYRCR Village of Atlantic Beach/
Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach Planning Committee as part of the
NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program within the
Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is supported
by NYS Homes and Community Renewal, NYS Department of State, and NYS
Department of Transportation. The document was prepared by the
Consultant Team, which comprises the following companies:

Jonathan Kohan, Co-Chair
Anthony Licatesi, Co-Chair
John Colletti
Annette Ellis
Jill Eulitz

URS Corporation

Alan Kaye

The LiRo Group

Eric Landsman

Sustainable Long Island

Scott Mason

Planning4Places, LLC

Marc Marinoff

AIM Development

Alex Michaelis

Two Twelve

Thomas Polsinelli

Worldstudio

Anthony Ponte
Howard Taub
David Woolfe
Municipal Liaisons:
Steven Cherson, Village of Atlantic Beach
Hon. Stephen Mahler, Village of Atlantic Beach
Representative from Nassau County Department of Public Works

Cover photo: Kate Murray, Town of Hempstead Supervisor

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Foreword
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in August 2011, the State
of New York experienced three extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the lives of
New Yorkers and their communities. These tragic disasters signaled that New
Yorkers are living in a new reality defined by rising sea levels and extreme
weather events that will occur with increased frequency and power. They
also signaled that we need to rebuild our communities in a way that will
mitigate against future risks and build increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo led the charge
to develop an innovative, community-driven planning program on a scale
unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program empowers the State’s most impacted
communities with the technical expertise needed to develop thorough and
implementable reconstruction plans to build physically, socially, and
economically resilient and sustainable communities.

Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo in April of 2013, is a
more than $650 million planning and implementation process established to
provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities severely
damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy.
Drawing on lessons learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program
is a unique combination of bottom-up community participation and Stateprovided technical expertise. This powerful combination recognizes not only
that community members are best positioned to assess the needs and
opportunities of the places where they live and work, but also that decisions
are best made when they are grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by
the latest innovative solutions.
One hundred and two storm-affected localities across the State were
originally designated to participate in the NYRCR Program. The State has
allocated each locality between $3 million and $25 million to implement
eligible projects identified in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for these projects
is provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

Foreword

(HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
program.
Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising one or more of the 102
localities, were created and led by a NYRCR Planning Committee composed
of local residents, business owners, and civic leaders. Members of the
Planning Committees were identified in consultation with established local
leaders, community organizations, and in some cases municipalities. The
NYRCR Program sets a new standard for community participation in recovery
and resiliency planning, with community members leading the planning
process. Across the State, more than 500 New Yorkers represent their
communities by serving on Planning Committees. More than 400 Planning
Committee Meetings have been held, during which Planning Committee
members worked with the State’s NYRCR Program team to develop
community reconstruction plans and identify opportunities to make their
communities more resilient. All meetings were open to the public. An
additional 125-plus Public Engagement Events attracted thousands of
community members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR planning
process and proposals. The NYRCR Program’s outreach has included
communities that are traditionally underrepresented, such as immigrant
populations and students. All planning materials are posted on the NYRCR
Program’s website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several
ways for community members and the public to submit feedback on
materials in progress.
Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were supported by
staff from the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR), planners from
New York State (NYS) Department of State (DOS) and NYS Department of
Transportation (DOT), and consultants from world-class planning firms that
specialize in engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green infrastructure, and
more.
With the January 2014 announcement of the NYRCR Program’s expansion to
include 22 new localities, the program comprises over 2.7 million New
Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent to 14% of
the overall State population and 12% of the State’s overall geography.

Page i

Foreword

The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR Plan. Governor Cuomo
has allocated over $650 million of funding to the program for implementing
projects identified in the NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Communities are also eligible
for additional funds through the program’s NY Rising to the Top Competition,
which evaluates NYRCR Communities across eight categories, including best
use of technology in the planning process, best approach to resilient
economic growth, and best use of green infrastructure to bolster resilience.
The winning NYRCR Community in each category will be allocated an
additional $3 million of implementation funding. The NYRCR Program is also
working with both private and public institutions to identify existing funding
sources and create new funding opportunities where none existed before.
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated with State and Federal
agencies to help guide the development of feasible projects. The program
has leveraged the Regional Economic Development Council’s State Agency
Review Teams (SARTs), comprised of representatives from dozens of State
agencies and authorities, for feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR
Communities. The SARTs review projects with an eye toward regulatory and
permitting needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources.
The NYRCR Program is continuing to work with the SARTs to streamline the
permitting process and ensure shovels are in the ground as quickly as
possible.
On the pages that follow, you will see the results of months of thoughtful,
diligent work by NYRCR Planning Committees, passionately committed to
realizing brighter, more resilient futures for their communities.

The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more resilient
community. Each NYRCR Planning Committee began the planning process by
defining the scope of its planning area, assessing storm damage, and
identifying critical issues. Next, the Planning Committee inventoried critical
assets in the community and assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On the
basis of this work, the Planning Committee described recovery and resiliency
needs and identified opportunities. The Planning Committee then developed
a series of comprehensive reconstruction and resiliency strategies, and
identified projects and implementation actions to help fulfill those strategies.

Foreword

The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan are divided into three
categories. The order in which the projects and actions are listed in this
NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the NYRCR Community’s
prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects
proposed for funding through a NYRCR Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR
funding. Featured Projects are projects and actions that the Planning
Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and has
analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through the NYRCR
Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are projects and
actions that the Planning Committee would like to highlight and that are not
categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects. The Proposed
Projects and Featured Projects found in this NYRCR Plan were voted for
inclusion by official voting members of the Planning Committee. Those voting
members with conflicts of interest recused themselves from voting on any
affected projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics Handbook and Code of
Conduct.
NYRCR Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach Community
is eligible for up to $9.0 million in CDBG-DR implementation funds.1
While developing projects for inclusion in this NYRCR Plan, Planning
Committees took into account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the
effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical
assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees also
considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be eligible
for CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented with this source of
Federal funding must fall into a Federally-designated eligible activity
category, fulfill a national objective (meeting an urgent need, removing
slums and blight, or benefiting low to moderate income individuals), and
have a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding is linked. These are
among the factors that the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery will
consider, in consultation with local municipalities and nonprofit organizations,
when determining which projects and actions are best positioned for
implementation.
1

The following localities’ allocations comprise the NYRCR Community’s total allocation: East
Atlantic Beach and Atlantic Beach Estates – $6.0 million; Village of Atlantic Beach – $3.0
million.

Page ii

Foreword

The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR
Community’s CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed
Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review, HUD
eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the
projects and actions found in this NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan
does not guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for

Foreword

CDBG‐DR funding or that it will be implemented. The Governor’s Office of
Storm Recovery will actively seek to match projects with funding sources.
In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions outlined
in this NYRCR Plan will become a reality helping New York not only to
rebuild, but also to build back better.
March 2014

Page iii

NYRCR Communities2

Find out more at

www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr
2

Map includes those NYRCR Communities funded through the CDBG-DR program, including the NYRCR Communities announced in January 2014

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page iv

Table of Contents
Executive Summary

ES-1

Section I: Community Overview

1

A. Introduction

2

B. Geographic Scope of the NYRCR Plan

2

C. Description of Storm Damage

5

D. Critical Issues

10

E. Community Vision

11

F. Relationship of the NYRCR Community Plan to Regional Plans

13

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

16

A. Community Asset Inventory

17

B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities

23

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies 34
Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles
A. Proposed Projects

50
53

Harden Water Reclamation Plant

55

Emergency Medical Services

59

Complete Streets/Drainage along Beech Street

62

Solar-Powered Street Lights

66

Village of Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center

69

East Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center Feasibility Study

73

Install Backflow Preventers

76

Table of Contents

Assess Feasibility and Economic Impact of Perimeter Dune System

79

Atlantic Beach Village Hall

82

B. Featured Projects

85

Microgrid Power System

86

Cell Phone Tower Resiliency

88

Underground Utilities Feasibility Study

90

Stormwater System Improvements

93

Emergency Preparedness Guidebook

96

Identification of Vulnerable and Special-Needs Populations

98

Section V: Additional Materials

100

A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations

101

B. Master Table of Projects

103

C. Public Engagement Process

107

D. Community Asset Inventory

111

E. Endnotes

117

F. Glossary

120

Page v

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figures
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

ES-1
I-1
I-2
I-3
I-4
I-5
II-1
II-2
II-3
II-4
II-5
IV-1
V-2

Tables
Geographic Scope
Geographic Scope
Preliminary Coastal Inundation Risk
Superstorm Sandy Storm Surge Extent
Hurricane Irene Storm Surge Extent
Vision Statement and Word Cloud
Asset Inventory
Risk Assessment
Risk Assessment Score
Land Use Classifications
Percentage of Low-Moderate Income
Project Locations
Risk Score Interpretation

ES-6
3
6
7
8
12
18
21
24
27
30
54
114

Table
Table
Table
Table
Table
Table
Table
Table
Table
Table

ES-1
II-1
III-1
III-2
III-3
III-4
III-5
III-6
V-1
V-2

Table V-3
Table V-4

Table of Contents

Table of Proposed and Featured Projects
New York State Department of State Risk Areas
Strategy #1 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy #2 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy #3 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy #4 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy #5 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy #6 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Proposed, Featured, and Additional Resiliency
Recommendations
Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment
Scores
Risk Assessment Scores

Page vi

ES-3
20
39
41
43
45
47
49
101
103
112
115

Executive Summary
The geographic scope of the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach Plan
encompasses the Village of Atlantic Beach and the unincorporated hamlets of
Atlantic Beach Estates and East Atlantic Beach, which are all in southwestern
Nassau County, NY. The geographic scope is referred to as the “Community,”
and the NYRCR Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic
Beach Plan is referred to the “NYRCR Community Plan.”
The Community is on the western end of Long Beach Barrier Island, off the
south shore of Long Island. Reynolds Channel is to the north, the City of
Long Beach is to the east, and the Atlantic Ocean is to the south and west.
The Village of Atlantic Beach covers one square mile; Atlantic Beach Estates,
which is part of East Atlantic Beach, covers 0.9 square mile; and the
remainder of East Atlantic Beach covers 0.6 square mile. The Village of
Atlantic Beach is an independent, incorporated village; East Atlantic Beach
and Atlantic Beach Estates are under the jurisdiction of the Town of
Hempstead.
Collectively, the Community is eligible for up to $9.0 million in U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development Community Block Grant –
Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding to implement the proposed actions
(Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional Resiliency
Recommendations) that are described in this NYRCR Community Plan. Of the
total amount, the Village of Atlantic Beach is eligible for up to $3.0 million,
and East Atlantic Beach and Atlantic Beach Estates are together eligible for
up to $6.0 million.

Superstorm Sandy Impacts
Much of the Community was inundated by Superstorm Sandy in 2012,
including oceanfront beach clubs and nearly the entire the bayside area
(north of Park and Beech Streets). An estimated 1,003 of the approximately
1,900 housing units in the Community sustained damage, with 684 suffering
at least 50% damage.

Executive Summary

The storm also damaged key infrastructure assets and systems, including
roads, electrical systems, drainage systems, government facilities, bulkheads,
and dunes. The Atlantic Beach Rescue dock and pilings and the Village of
Atlantic Beach Tennis Center were damaged. The Atlantic Beach Village Hall
and Water Reclamation Plant were kept operational during and after
Superstorm Sandy, though only through extraordinary provisional measures.
Many of these assets had already been subjected to repetitive damage and
loss during previous storm events, including Hurricane Irene, because of low
elevations and inadequate mitigation and hardening.
The projects and actions described in this NYRCR Community Plan are
necessary to continue the Community’s recovery from the extensive damage
inflicted by Superstorm Sandy and to improve resiliency against future
disaster events.

Critical Issues
The NYRCR Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach
Planning Committee (Committee) identified three types of critical issues that
must be addressed to improve the Community’s resiliency and mitigate
future risks related to storms and flooding: key infrastructure, other key
assets, and hazard mitigation.
Key infrastructure, including public utilities and significant buildings, must be
hardened to withstand damage. Although future storm and flooding events
are inevitable, relocation or protection of key systems can improve continuity
of operations for emergency services, minimize or prevent disruption of
health and human services to vulnerable populations, and minimize or
prevent disruption of business operations. Other key assets, which include
the oceanfront beach clubs that provide the Community’s economic base,
must be protected. Finally, the Committee recognized that the mitigation of
hazards through improved and increased services and regional coordination
is a major need.

Page ES-1

Village of Atlantic Beach, Atlantic Beach Estates, and East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Working Together to Rebuild Stronger,
Smarter, and Safer
Early in the development of the NYRCR Community Plan, the Committee
used a consensus-based approach to develop a Vision Statement that
reflects the Community’s goals for the future of the Community. The Vision
Statement reflects an allegiance to the history and traditional character of
the Community and recognition that the Community must identify proactive,
innovative solutions to ensure long-term resiliency.

Public Outreach
The Committee presented the Vision Statement to Community residents at a
Public Engagement Event on October 16, 2013, the first of the three Public
Engagement Events to date. A fourth Public Engagement Event is planned.
Attendees expressed strong support for the Vision Statement and agreed
that it appropriately reflects the Community’s character and aspirations.
Extensive outreach was conducted through online and in-person
opportunities throughout the planning process to ensure broad public
participation and awareness of this planning opportunity.
Committee Meetings were open to the public, and comment cards were
available for attendees to provide input and to submit contact information to
receive updates. The Committee responded to written questions from
attendees during group discussions.

The Committee used a variety of outreach methods to maximize participation
at the first three Public Engagement Events. The methods were electronic
and social media, email, flyers, 25 lawn signs throughout the Community,
500 door hangers, and notices printed by local media outlets. With the
Committee’s assistance, 4,500 flyers and/or custom letters were mailed or
emailed to Community residents and organizations.
Committee Meetings and Public Engagement Events were also announced on
the NYRCR website and Facebook page, both of which also served as
sources for information, documents, and answers to questions about the
NYRCR Community Plan.
Outreach materials were also distributed to the Committee, whose members
are active in local groups, including school boards, civic associations, and
sports leagues. Committee members distributed these materials to local
organizations, friends, family, neighbors, and colleagues. In total, more than
4,500 flyers were delivered to Committee members, displayed at public
gathering places, or distributed to local organizations and businesses in the
Community and in the adjacent City of Long Beach.
As a result of the extensive outreach effort, a total of 260 Community
residents attended the first three Public Engagement Events.

Blueprint for Implementation

Participants at Public Engagement Events received exit surveys and comment
cards and were asked for feedback and email addresses so they could be
informed about upcoming meetings and other Public Engagement Events.

In the early stages of the planning process, the Committee identified six
strategies to reduce the Community’s exposure to risk from flooding during
high tide and storm events, enable the Community to rebuild smarter and
stronger, and support residents and businesses by protecting the
Community’s considerable assets. The Committee then developed a list of
proposed actions to implement the strategies.

NYRCR Atlantic Beach/East Atlantic Beach/
Atlantic Beach Estates Vision Statement

The actions are divided into three categories: Proposed Projects, Featured
Projects, and Additional Resiliency Recommendations. All categories are
important to the Community. The categories are defined as follows:

We are committed to protecting our natural assets and beach
community by strengthening our infrastructure and shoreline
along the Barrier Island to reduce the likelihood of threats to the
health and safety of our residents in the event of future storms.

Executive Summary



Proposed Projects: Projects designed to be fully funded through the
NYRCR Program using the Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funds.



Featured Projects: Innovative projects and actions that the Planning
Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and

Page ES-2

Village of Atlantic Beach, Atlantic Beach Estates, and East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

has analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through the
NYRCR Program.


Additional Resiliency Recommendations: Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are projects and actions that the Planning Committee
would like to highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects
or Featured Projects.

Table ES-1 provides a list of strategies and the associated Proposed and
Featured Projects. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are located in
Section V, Table V-1. The strategies and project are not listed in order of
importance, rank, or priority.

Table ES-1: Table of Proposed and Featured Projects
Project
Category

Cost

Harden Water Reclamation Plant – Provide resiliency to the existing Water
Reclamation Plant and three pump stations to maintain functionality during rain
and hazard events.

Proposed

$720K

Infrastructure

Emergency Medical Services – Protect and fortify the existing Atlantic Beach
Rescue Building through improved infrastructure and communication systems.

Proposed

$460K

Infrastructure

Complete Streets/Drainage along Beech Street – Use Complete Streets to
provide phased drainage and street improvements along emergency evacuation
routes through stormwater best management practices, infrastructure
improvements, and traffic safety and management measures.

Proposed

$5.5M

Infrastructure

Solar-Powered Street Lights – Provide light-emitting diode (LED) street
lighting that is solar powered to prevent loss of lighting in the event of power
outages.

Proposed

$1.3M

Infrastructure

Install Backflow Preventers – Install backflow preventers and storm drain
covers throughout the Community to mitigate flooding and prevent debris from
entering drains.

Proposed

$360K

Infrastructure

Microgrid Power System – Conduct a feasibility study and implement a
power microgrid system throughout the Community.

Featured

$19.2M

Infrastructure

Underground Utilities Feasibility Study – Conduct a feasibility study to
determine the potential for underground utilities in areas, specifically East
Atlantic Beach, that are at risk of flooding.

Featured

$100K

Infrastructure

Stormwater System Improvements – Study adaption of existing open
spaces for floodwater catch basins.

Featured

$10K

Infrastructure

Strategy

Project Name

Protect critical Infrastructure to
create community resilience and
sustainability to ensure continuing
services needed before, during, and
after disasters

Executive Summary

Project Category

Page ES-3

Village of Atlantic Beach, Atlantic Beach Estates, and East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table ES-1 (Continued)
Project
Category

Cost

Village of Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center – Retrofit the
Tennis Center in the Village of Atlantic Beach to be used as a Community
Assistance Center, including improvements to drainage and the incorporation of
active and passive recreational elements.

Proposed

$2M

Community
Planning
and Capacity
Building

East Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center Feasibility Study –
Evaluate and identify a location for a Community Assistance Center in East
Atlantic Beach and Atlantic Beach Estates.

Proposed

$50K

Community
Planning and
Capacity Building

Atlantic Beach Village Hall – Provide upgrades and protection to Atlantic
Beach Village Hall to maintain continuity of operations and protect vital records
during and after storm events.

Proposed

$400K

Community
Planning and
Capacity Building

Emergency Preparedness Guidebook – Draft and disseminate an
emergency preparedness guidebook in coordination with Nassau County, Town
of Hempstead, and the City of Long Beach for distribution to all residents.

Featured

$100K

Community
Planning and
Capacity Building

Assess Feasibility and Economic Impact of Perimeter Dune System –
Study the cost-effectiveness and technical feasibility of a dune perimeter system
on the beach clubs including benefits and risks.

Proposed

$500K

Economic
Development

Cell Phone Tower Resiliency – Improve cell phone tower resiliency during
emergencies.

Featured

$1.6M

Economic
Development

Protect critical Community health
and social services assets and
increase the capacity to provide
needed emergency and community
services before, during, and after
disasters

Emergency Preparedness Guidebook – Draft and disseminate an
emergency preparedness guidebook in coordination with Nassau County, Town
of Hempstead, and the City of Long Beach for distribution to all residents.

Featured

$100K

Health and Social
Services

Encourage and facilitate housing
resiliency and sustainability
measures throughout the
Community

Emergency Preparedness Guidebook – Draft and disseminate an
emergency preparedness guidebook in coordination with Nassau County, the
Town of Hempstead, and the City of Long Beach for distribution to all residents.

Featured

$100K

Housing

Identification of Vulnerable and Special-Needs Populations – Identify
vulnerable and special-needs populations through a special-needs registration.

Featured

$8K

Housing

Strategy
Increase the Community’s capacity
to facilitate and foster actions that
lead to greater resiliency,
emergency preparedness, and
sustainability

Implement measures to make the
Community’s economic drivers more
resilient

Executive Summary

Project Name

Project
Category

Page ES-4

Village of Atlantic Beach, Atlantic Beach Estates, and East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table ES-1 (Continued)
Strategy
Restore and enhance natural
resources for both resiliency and
recreation purposes while also
protecting important cultural
resources

Executive Summary

Project
Category

Cost

Project
Category

Assess Feasibility and Economic Impact of Perimeter Dune System –
Study the cost-effectiveness and technical feasibility of a dune perimeter system
on the beach clubs including benefits and risks.

Featured

$500K

Natural and
Cultural Resources

Stormwater System Improvements – Study adaption of existing open
spaces for floodwater catch basins.

Featured

$10K

Natural and
Cultural Resources

Project Name

Page ES-5

Figure ES-1: Geographic Scope

Executive Summary

Page ES-6

Section I:
Community Overview

Section I:
Community Overview
A. Introduction
The State of New York (State) has developed the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program, an innovative post-disaster planning
process, to help recovering communities rebuild better, safer, and more
resilient.
The NYRCR Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic
Beach Planning Committee (Committee) is composed of community
representatives partnered with planning experts from the New York
Department of State and Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery. The Village of
Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach are referred to
collectively in this document as the NYRCR Community (see Figure I-1). The
Committee used a community-based planning process to develop an NYRCR
Community Plan that addresses the need to repair existing damage and
mitigate future threats to create a safer and more resilient community. The
Committee has focused on developing the NYRCR Community Plan in
coordination with the State team through Committee Meetings every 2
weeks, Public Engagement Events, and meetings with stakeholder
representatives.

incorporated village; East Atlantic Beach and Atlantic Beach Estates are
under the jurisdiction of the Town of Hempstead (Town). The Committee
identified the geographic scope (see Figure I-1) based on municipal
boundaries, the extent of the Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene storm
surges, and other flooded or damaged areas.
Three road bridges provide access to the Barrier Island. One of them is the
Atlantic Beach Bridge (New York State Route 878), a toll bridge that provides
access from the Village of Atlantic Beach to the Village of Lawrence, NY, on
the mainland of Long Island and Queens County and the rest of New York
City. The two other bridges are in the City of Long Beach and the hamlet of
Point Lookout, which are both east of the Community.

B. Geographic Scope of the NYRCR Plan
The geographic scope of the NYRCR Community Plan encompasses the
Village of Atlantic Beach (Village) and the unincorporated hamlets of Atlantic
Beach Estates and East Atlantic Beach, which are all located in southwestern
Nassau County, NY. The Community is on the western end of Long Beach
Barrier Island (Barrier Island), which is off the south shore of Long Island.
Reynolds Channel is to the north, the City of Long Beach is to the east, and
the Atlantic Ocean is to the south and west. The Village of Atlantic Beach
covers one square mile; Atlantic Beach Estates, which is part of East Atlantic
Beach, covers 0.9 square mile; and the remainder of East Atlantic Beach
covers 0.6 square mile. The Village of Atlantic Beach is an independent,

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Genesee Dune, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: Kate Murray, Town of Hempstead Supervisor

Page 2

Figure I-1: Geographic Scope

Section I: Community Overview

Page 3

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The Community is almost exclusively residential, with limited commercial
uses along Park Street and The Plaza in the Village of Atlantic Beach and
Beech Street in East Atlantic Beach. The Community also has a seasonal
economic anchor—14 oceanfront beach clubs that occupy a large portion of
the Community’s Atlantic Coast.1 The Community now comprise a thriving
beach community whose population increases during the summer with an
influx of seasonal residents from New York City and nearby Long Island
towns who are drawn to these waterfront amenities.
Most Community housing consists of detached single-family housing with
front, side, and rear yards. Nearly 70% of the Community’s housing stock
was constructed prior to 1960, with many units dating back to the 1920s
when the Community was developed. These development patterns
contribute to the Community’s historical character, but the age of the
housing also implies a high degree of risk.
Most housing structures in the Community were built before the Community
adopted National Flood Insurance Program requirements and before Flood
Insurance Rate Maps. As a result, many were constructed at elevations
below the base flood elevation (BFE), making them vulnerable to flooding.
Additionally, homes constructed before 1980 were based on BFEs that did
not account for wave action, making them vulnerable to surge damage.
This risk profile is magnified by the historical geomorphological
characteristics of the Community. The Village of Atlantic Beach was

developed in the early 1920s when a local banker financed the dredging of
tons of sand from Reynolds Channel to be piled onto what was then a
“shifting sand bar.”2 Between 1835 and 1990, the Barrier Island and the inlet
system evolved to its present configuration. The shoreline change, which has
historically ranged from as erosive as -23 ft/yr at the eastern end of the
Barrier Island to as accretive as +51.0 ft/yr in the western end (following the
construction of the East Rockaway Inlet jetty), indicates the great potential
for sediment movement that exists along the entire Barrier Island shore.
Stabilization efforts, namely construction of inlet jetties, groin fields, and
seawalls, as well as periodic beach fill, have reduced the observed rates of
accretion and erosion along the Barrier Island, except in the area just west
of Point Lookout, where erosion rates remain high in spite of human efforts. 3
Structural protective measures, including bulkheads and dunes, have been
constructed in some areas, mitigating some risk associated with flooding and
erosion. Nonetheless, the Community’s exposure to risk is magnified by its
original construction and lack of a protective dune system, meaning that key
facilities and infrastructure systems have substantial hazard-related
vulnerability.
The demographic profile of the Village and the two hamlets is fairly typical of
many other seasonal beach communities in the City of New York
metropolitan area. The community is generally affluent and well educated,
though not all residents are affluent and well educated. The Community also
contains a wide range of socially vulnerable populations who may require
special considerations in the planning process.
More than half of Community residents have a bachelor’s degree or higher,
and nearly 70% of adults 16 and over are in the active labor force. 4 Most
workers commute to nearby economic centers because the Community
provides only 567 private-sector and 45 public-sector jobs.5 The commuters
tend to work in highly skilled positions such as management, business,
science, and the arts.6 Of the residents who are eligible for the labor force,
97.7% are employed.7

Sun & Surf Beach Club, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: Creative Common Flickr

Section I: Community Overview

The median household income in the Community of $110,268 is considerably
higher than the Nassau County median income of $81,300. 8 Although the
Community is generally affluent, 10% of all households have annual incomes
of $24,999 or less.9 The lower income residents may be particularly

Page 4

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

vulnerable to residential displacement or significant financial hardship in
post-disaster settings.
According to the Federal Government’s generally accepted definition of
housing affordability, the housing costs of 24% of homeowners with
mortgages and 39% of renters in the Community exceed housing
affordability. Housing unaffordability is potentially an issue for approximately
280 households in the Community.10
Additional vulnerable populations in the Community are individuals with
disabilities, senior citizens, and civilian veterans. In 2012, there were 181
civilian veterans in the Community and 249 people with a disability. More
than half of the disabled population was 65 or older.11 Approximately 20% of
the population was also 65 or older.

C. Description of Storm Damage
Superstorm Sandy struck New York on October 29, 2012, causing a peak
storm tide elevation of 17.48 feet in Long Beach, and bringing storm surge
flooding of three to six feet above ground level across the Barrier Island12. It
was the largest storm in New York’s recorded history to land ashore.
Superstorm Sandy was the second major coastal storm to hit the area in just
over a year. On August 28, 2011, Hurricane Irene made landfall in New York

Superstorm Sandy Centered off Maryland and Virginia, October 29, 2012
Source: NOAA

Section I: Community Overview

as a tropical storm, with sustained wind speeds of approximately 63 mph.
Storm surge of nearly 4.5 feet was recorded at nearby locations in Point
Lookout and East Rockaway, and flooding was exacerbated by approximately
five inches of rainfall.13 Inundated areas included the beach along the
Atlantic Ocean and the bayside along Reynolds Channel (north of Park
Street).The storm also caused hundreds of millions of dollars in property
damage in New York City and Long Island.
Tropical-storm-force winds along with heavy rains resulted in 10 deaths
statewide. Flooding and saltwater incursion also caused power outages for
1.1 million residents across much of Long Island that lasted up to one week.
In total, Hurricane Irene caused more than $1.3 billion in statewide
damage.14 Though Irene caused localized flood damage in Nassau County
and inconvenienced many residents, its impact on the Community was
relatively minor, especially compared to Superstorm Sandy. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) estimated countywide damage
necessitating Public Assistance Program funding at approximately $5.5
million, as compared to approximately $250 million in Manhattan.15
Superstorm Sandy was a more devastating storm than Hurricane Irene, both
locally and across much of New York State. Superstorm Sandy caused
widespread damage to lives, homes, businesses, core infrastructure,
government property, and an economy beginning to recover from a financial
crisis. The storm caused 53 fatalities,16 destroyed an estimated 305,000
homes,17 affected more than 2,000 miles of roads, produced catastrophic
flooding in subways and tunnels, and damaged major power transmission
systems. Fourteen counties in New York were declared Federal disaster
areas.18 Economic losses in New York as a result of Superstorm Sandy were
estimated to be between $30 and $50 billion, with an estimated $10 to
$20 billion in insured losses.19 New York State Governor Andrew M. Cuomo
stated that storm damage would cost New York State nearly $42 billion, with
the vast majority of damage centered on the City of New York and Long
Island.20
In anticipation of severe flooding from Superstorm Sandy, Nassau County
Executive Ed Mangano issued a mandatory evacuation order, effective at
5:00 PM on October 28, 2012. Perhaps recalling Irene’s relatively restrained
impact, many Community residents opted to shelter in place. Sandy flooded
almost the entire Community, including nearly the entire bayside area (north
of Park and Beech Streets) and the western portion of the Village of Atlantic

Page 5

Figure I-2: Preliminary Coast al Inundation Risk

Section I: Community Overview

Page 6

Figure I-3: Superstorm Sandy Storm Surge Extent

Section I: Community Overview

Page 7

Figure I-4: Hurricane Irene Storm Surge Extent

Section I: Community Overview

Page 8

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Beach. A water stage recorder near the Atlantic Beach Bridge recorded water
levels in excess of the 100-year BFE for several hours during the afternoon
and evening of October 29. On the oceanside, water levels reached as high
as three feet above street level on Ocean Boulevard and six inches above
street level as far inland as Beech Street in East Atlantic Beach.
In the Community, oceanfront business and facilities, including the
boardwalk and most of the 14 private beach clubs, incurred heavy damage.
The damage included the loss of cabanas and cabana decks and the flooding
of and damage to the beach club buildings.
Many club owners were able to secure loans, make renovations, and reopen
in time for the 2013 summer season but at a significant cost. Several beach
clubs, including the Ocean Club and the Sands Atlantic Beach Club, replaced
the old wooden pilings with reinforced concrete pilings that raised the new
structure above the flood level. They also installed hurricane clips and straps
to fortify the decks where new cabanas were built.
Approximately 1,000 of the 1,900 housing units in the Community suffered
some level of damage, mostly all from direct flooding.21 As of June 2013,
approximately 944 homeowners in the Community had registered for
assistance with FEMA, with a total estimated damage of more than
$8 million. More than 684 homes across the Community suffered more than
50% damage. Flood damage affected 961 units, and 75 residences had more
than four feet of water.22
The storm damaged key infrastructure including roads, electrical systems,
drainage systems, government facilities, bulkheads, and dunes. The Atlantic
Beach Rescue dock and pilings and the Village of Atlantic Beach Tennis
Center were damaged. The Atlantic Beach Village Hall and Water
Reclamation Plant were both protected by extraordinary measures. Although
saltwater incursion caused the failure of the power lines feeding the plant,
both the plant and its substations remained operational during and after the
storm thanks to the extensive and prolonged use of temporary generators.
Atlantic Beach Village Hall served as a Community Assistance Center after
the storm and provided services and information to Community residents.
Many of these key assets had already been subject to repetitive damage and
loss during normal storm events because of low elevations and inadequate
mitigation and hardening.

Section I: Community Overview

Storm damage as a result of Superstorm Sandy, East Atlantic Beach
Source: NOAA

Storm surge and strong winds caused extensive damage to Long Island
Power Authority (LIPA) infrastructure, leading to power outages for nearly all
LIPA customers in Nassau County. Because of the Community’s geographic
location and its vulnerability to both wind and surge damage, outages were
prolonged and extensive. In addition to damages caused by saltwater
incursion, damage also occurred when winds caused trees and broken limbs
to fall into overhead electric distribution circuits and power lines. Up to two
weeks after the storm, roughly 7% of Nassau County customers, including

Page 9

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

many Community residents, remained without power, according to the
Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery.

infrastructure landward of areas with fragmented low or absent dunes were
damaged by waves and inundation.

Power was not restored to the Community until weeks after the storm
because the Long Island Power Authority (LIPA) determined that the Barrier
Island could not safely receive power before major repairs were completed.
FEMA deployed a Mitigation Assessment Team (MAT) to New Jersey and
New York to investigate building performance during the storm event. The
23
MAT reached the following conclusions:

Erosion control structures: The effectiveness of erosion-control
structures, including bulkheads, seawalls, and revetments, which exist on the
bayside of the Community, varied widely depending on the height, age, and
condition of the structures. Some buildings within 10 to 20 feet of erosioncontrol structures that were parallel to the shore were overtopped by
floodwaters and damaged by floodwater and/or erosion, even when the
erosion-control structures survived.

D. Critical Issues
The Village of Atlantic Beach, Atlantic Beach Estates, and East Atlantic Beach
are all located in extreme or high risk areas for flooding and other impacts
from potential future storms. Hardening key infrastructure, protecting
community assets, and establishing hazard mitigation efforts are critical
themes to address for the Community.
Issues of primary concern for the Community during and after Superstorm
Sandy are as follows:
Storm damage as a result of Superstorm Sandy, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: Building Plans Examiner

Buildings: Foundations that met current State building standards (codes
that mandate elevating buildings above the BFE) withstood flooding as a
result of Superstorm Sandy. In East Atlantic Beach, homes that were
constructed in accordance with current State building standards and codes
remained intact while most other houses were damaged by floodwaters.
Buildings below the flood level sustained damage as a result of inundation,
hydrodynamic forces, waves, or floating debris loads. Many buildings
affected by flooding had damage to basements with finishes, contents, and
mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems.
Dunes: The presence of wide beaches and tall, intact dune systems in some
areas of East Atlantic Beach and Atlantic Beach Estates reduced damage to
buildings and infrastructure landward of the dunes; conversely, low and
narrow beaches and dunes were eroded in many areas, and buildings and

Section I: Community Overview



Hardening key infrastructure: Hardening key infrastructure, including
public utilities and significant buildings, to help prevent or minimize
damage from future storms is necessary because much of the key
infrastructure is located in extreme or high risk areas. Potential actions
include relocating and/or installing emergency generators, developing a
power microgrid, and fortifying key critical facilities. These actions would
improve continuity of operations for emergency services, minimize or
prevent disruption of health and human services to vulnerable
populations, and minimize or prevent disruption of business operations.



Securing community assets: Official, governmental records and
operations must be protected during a disaster in order for the
government to serve the public. Increased support for the
oceanfront/coastal perimeter dunes and existing beach clubs is critical
for both key economic and community-wide assets.



Implementing hazard mitigation: Hazard mitigation is needed to
improve community resiliency. Improving underground drainage for
stormwater runoff, clearing blocked sewers, and upgrading drainage and

Page 10

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

stormwater infrastructure were all identified as critical issues and seen as
ways to reduce flooding in the Community. Providing emergency medical
services and establishing Community Assistance Centers for potential
future hazard events were primary concerns expressed by the
Committee and the public at Committee Meetings and Public
Engagement Events. The Committee also identified improved planning
and emergency preparedness and response coordination between the
Community and the Town of Hempstead and Nassau County as a key
objective.
Since Superstorm Sandy, the Community has undertaken the following
actions to help make the Community more resilient:


The Greater Atlantic Beach Water Reclamation District has applied for a
FEMA hazard mitigation grant for emergency power generation



The Village repaired its Putnam and Vernon chair houses and built new
concrete block chair houses at The Plaza and Dutchess beaches



The Village of Atlantic Beach repaired and rebuilt the Boardwalk and the
Plaza ramp in the Village of Atlantic Beach



The Village of Atlantic Beach replaced/repaired damaged street lighting
and missing street signs



The Village of Atlantic Beach replaced damaged sidewalks and repaired
roadways within



The Village of Atlantic Beach replaced fencing at beach entrances and
bulkheads

E. Community Vision
A Vision Statement was developed using a consensus-based approach at the
Committee Meetings and at Public Engagement Events. Key words were
identified and presented to the public along with the Vision Statement at a
Public Engagement Event on October 16, 2013 (see Figure I-5). Attendees at
the Public Engagement Event expressed strong support for the Vision
Statement

Section I: Community Overview

Page 11

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-5: Vision Statement and Word Cloud

Section I: Community Overview

Page 12

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

F. Relationship of the NYRCR Community
Plan to Regional Plans
Local and regional planning documents were reviewed for information
relevant to the three communities. The documents included the Town of
Hempstead Building Zone Ordinance24 (1939, as amended) and the Code of
the Village of Atlantic Beach25 (1998). Documents with a regional focus
included pre- and post-Sandy documents and information on local projects in
the Community in various stages of planning and execution.
Many of the recommendations in this NYRCR Community Plan align with the
strategies set forth in the regional plans described below. Strategies and
implementation actions for the Community are detailed in Section III.
Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve: Comprehensive
Management Plan (2001)26
The vision of the Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve: Comprehensive
Management Plan (CMP) is to preserve, protect, and restore the ecosystem
of the Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve. The primary goals of the
plan are to reduce nonpoint and point-source pollution, improve the
estuarine health of the bay, restore and protect coastal habitats, and
increase open space preservation.
The Committee has ratified a list of Proposed and Featured Projects, many of
which will have indirect environmental benefits that align with the objectives
of the Plan. For example, structural hardening of the Water Reclamation
Plant would limit or eliminate discharge of raw or partially treated sewage
into Reynolds Channel during storm events. The project would therefore
contribute to estuarine health, while promoting public use of water
resources.
Nassau County Hazard Mitigation Plan (2007)

27

The Nassau County Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP) contains historical data on
hazard impacts to the communities, long-term erosion projections and flood
zones, and hazard mitigation opportunities through capital improvements. The
HMP identifies drainage improvements that could be made to the Park Street
corridor to limit inundation and ponding during and after storm events. The
Committee has included a similar project to improve drainage along Beech
Street in East Atlantic Beach that can be linked to Complete Streets in the City

Section I: Community Overview

of Long Beach, and is on the list of Proposed Projects (see Complete
Streets/Drainage Improvements along Beech Street in Section IV.A).
Sustainable Strategies for Long Island 2035 (2010)28

Sustainable Strategies for Long Island 2035 provides policies and strategies

to help communities prepare for economic, social, and environmental
changing. Recommendations include developing a climate change resilience
plan that addresses sea level rise, coordinating emergency preparedness
across jurisdictions, and revising building codes for East Atlantic Beach to
promote flood protection and provide guidance on replacing structures lost
as a result of coastal erosion.
The Committee has incorporated several recommendations and prescriptions
in the Proposed and Featured Projects related to Community Planning and
Capacity Building. The Committee strongly supports cross-jurisdictional
preparedness planning to mitigate some of the response and capacity issues
that were observed in the aftermath of Sandy.

Strong Island – The Story of a Region’s Recovery and Resurgence:
The Strategic Economic Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk
Counties (2013)29

Strong Island – The Story of a Region’s Recovery and Resurgence: The
Strategic Economic Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties was

developed by The Long Island Regional Economic Development Council
(LIREDC). The 2013 update addresses economic development in the region
including critical issues post-Superstorm Sandy. The Community is in the
LIREDC jurisdiction.
Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan (2013)30
The Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan includes
regional priorities that are relevant to the NYRCR planning process. Key
regional priorities are:


Advancing Superstorm Sandy recovery and rebuilding by providing
incentives for greener and more resilient developments, encouraging
relocation locally outside the floodplain, and encouraging rapid
restoration of the electric grid. The Community is considering several
greener and more resilient infrastructure projects.

Page 13

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Improving energy efficiency. The Community is encouraging solar power
as an alternative energy source.



Improving transportation options. The Community is proposing a
Complete Streets project to improve transportation.



Increasing the development of green infrastructure to control flooding
and decrease pollution from stormwater runoff. The Community is
proposing projects to implement green infrastructure and improve
stormwater drainage.



Encouraging regional coordination of sustainability planning and its
implementation.

The 2013 Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan also
recommends strategies to address climate change, such as updating
comprehensive plans to address sea level rise, flooding, and storm surges;
updating building codes; adopting protection and mitigation measures to
protect infrastructure; and updating emergency management plans. The
Community is proposing mitigation measures to protect key facilities as part
of the NYRCR planning process.

identify instances in which multiple Committees were responding to similar
issues and challenges. The SARTs offered useful input on issues discussed in
this NYRCR Community Plan that cross political jurisdictions and could be
coordinated on a regional basis. It is also important for the Community to
address the greater region and to consider the entire Barrier Island, Nassau
County, and greater Long Island.
Neighboring municipalities and communities on the Barrier Island include the
City of Long Beach, Lido Beach, and Point Lookout, which are part of the Town
of Hempstead. The Village of Lawrence and the hamlet of Inwood, also under
the jurisdiction of the Town of Hempstead, are located across Reynolds Channel
to the north, as is the Queens neighborhood of Far Rockaway. All of these
communities participated in the NYRCR planning process.

Regional Perspectives

Coordination with these communities may help provide an economy of scale
to obtain needed resources for larger efforts such as implementing regional
storm barrier projects, improving established evacuation routes, making
Complete Streets and stormwater improvements, and establishing microgrids
to help deal with common issues such as the need for bulkheading,
emergency services, transportation connectivity, and potential alternative
power generation. Intergovernmental disaster response agreements with
these communities may be beneficial to all.

Mitigating the risk of damage from future storms to increase resiliency will
require both regional and local actions in addition to implementing the
elements in the regional plans described above. The Village of Atlantic Beach
is an incorporated village in Nassau County, and the unincorporated areas of
Atlantic Beach Estates and East Atlantic Beach are part of the Town of
Hempstead. East Atlantic Beach had to rely on assistance from the Village of
Atlantic Beach after Superstorm Sandy. The Community has expressed a

Coordination with Nassau County and other communities would be beneficial
in developing green stormwater infrastructure, such as permeable pavement,
bioswales, rain gardens, and gray water reclamation. In addition, Nassau
County and the Town of Hempstead can coordinate on restoring marsh and
wetland areas already affected by storms. Recreational opportunities such as
bicycle and pedestrian facilities along major transportation corridors offer
additional opportunities to increase public recreational opportunities.

strong interest in coordinating emergency services and planning and in
creating Community Assistance Centers to serve the Town and Village needs.
Section IV Implementation – Project Profiles includes projects the
Community has identified as fulfilling these needs.
The Community has meaningful opportunities to collaborate with neighboring
municipalities and jurisdictions to develop projects and coordinate resources.
As part of the planning process, Governor Cuomo activated State Agency
Review Teams (SARTs) to review Proposed Projects. The purpose of the
review was to identify potential regulatory or eligibility issues and also to

Section I: Community Overview

Page 14

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Silver Point County Park, Atlantic Beach
Source: LiRO

Power and natural gas are supplied to the Community by substations and a
pipeline that is located (and originates) outside the Community. Coordination
with National Grid and the Public Service Electric and Gas Company (PSEG),
which manages the Long Island Power Authority’s electric system, is
necessary to secure backup power sources and protect transmission and
distribution facilities that are vulnerable.
A need for improvements to communication systems also warrants regional
coordination. The Community is proposing improvements to communications
for emergency management, the Nassau County Office of Emergency
Management, and cell tower resiliency.
On December 5, 2013, representatives from four of Nassau County’s
NY Rising Communities—Atlantic Beach, Long Beach, Lido Beach, and
Oceanside—held a workshop to discuss regional issues. The issues included
coastal protection for the bayside and the oceanfront, stormwater
management, green infrastructure, Complete Streets, water/wastewater, and
microgrid systems. The purpose of the workshop was to provide an
educational context for the Nassau County NYRCRs to discuss the benefits
and applicability of resiliency and protective measures and to provide
examples of models that have worked well in other areas.
An iterative engagement process with these stakeholders is underway and
will build on the goals and vision articulated in this NYRCR Community Plan.

Section I: Community Overview

Page 15

Section II:
Assessment
of Risk and Needs

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs
A Community Asset Inventory was developed for the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Community (Community), which comprises the Village
of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach. The Community
Asset Inventory includes Community assets and asset systems.
A Community asset is defined as a facility within or outside the Community that
is crucial to emergency response functions following natural disasters and that if
impaired as a result of hazard events, would compromise the essential social,
economic, or environmental functions of the Community. Assets include shelters,
critical facilities such as police stations and health facilities, and vital
infrastructure assets.
An asset system is defined as a system within or outside the Community that if
impaired as a result of flooding, would affect Community assets or functions.
Examples of asset systems are transportation services, telecommunications, and
water supply.

Site visits were conducted of the following key facilities and critical
infrastructure in September 2013 and again in February and March 2014:
Atlantic Beach Rescue Building and Dock, Water Reclamation Plant, Tennis
Center, the Atlantic Beach Village Hall, Town of Hempstead Beach Club, and
the newly constructed chair houses used by the Village of Atlantic Beach
(Village) residents to store beach chairs in the summer. The Community’s
roadway network was also toured, which included driving the Beech Street
corridor and Atlantic Beach Bridge.
The Committee finalized the Community Asset Inventory based on input and
feedback from the public. As a part of the development of the inventory, the
assets were classified according to four of the six Recovery Support
Functions. The six Recovery Support Functions are as follows:
The Six Recovery Support Functions

The Community Asset Inventory is provided in Section V.D. The locations of the
assets in the Community Asset Inventory are shown in Figure II-1.

Community Planning and Capacity Building: How the community
will restore or enhance its ability to organize, plan, manage, and
implement its recovery.

The potential impact of hazards on the assets in the Community Asset
Inventory was assessed by performing a risk analysis based on current
conditions, goals, and strategies. The purpose of the risk assessment was to
investigate potential flood impacts to Community functions and develop a
baseline understanding of flood risk that could be used to evaluate
management options. The analysis helped the Community document methods
of mitigating risks.

Economic Development: How the community will restore economic
and business activities and develop new economic opportunities.

A. Community Asset Inventory
The development of the Community Asset Inventory was based on an
iterative process that included input from the NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee), Public Engagement Events, and local and State officials. The
process combined the relevant knowledge of local and State officials and
technical support provided by the Consultant Team. The public reviewed the
Community Asset Inventory at a Public Engagement Event on October 16,
2013.

Health and Social Services: How the community will restore and
improve essential health and social services, including for vulnerable
populations.
Housing: How the community will meet the demand for affordable
housing (and promotion of affordable housing), address post-disaster
housing needs, and encourage disaster-resistant housing for all income
groups.

Infrastructure: How the community will restore, repair, and manage
essential infrastructure services.
Natural and Cultural Resources: How the community will approach
natural and cultural resource management from a risk reduction and
economic development context.

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Source: Guidance for New York Rising Community Reconstruction

Plans: A Planning Toolkit for CR Planning Committees

Page 17

Figure II-1: Asset Inventory

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 18

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Catalina Beach Club on Ocean Blvd., Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: Creative Community Flickr

The assets in the Community Asset Inventory were categorized according to
the Recovery Support Functions of Economic Development, Health and Social
Services, Infrastructure, and Natural and Cultural Resources. A summary of
the assets in each Recovery Support Function is as follows:


Economic Development: The Community’s economy is driven by
beach clubs and recreational facilities that encompass more than 40% of
the land in the area and provide significant seasonal employment
opportunities.31 The operating assets in the Community include 14
private beach clubs along Ocean Boulevard and a public beach club at
Silver Point County Park, which all front the Atlantic Ocean. The beach
clubs are a major source of non-residential property tax revenue to the
Community, and they remain particularly vulnerable to storm surge and
natural hazards.



Infrastructure: The infrastructure assets in the Community are an
electric substation, three sewer substations, and two wastewater
treatment plants. Each facility provides services on which residents and
businesses in the Community depend. Operation and functionality of the
utilities are critical to the health and well-being of the Community at all
times.



Natural and Cultural Resources: Eleven natural and cultural
resources assets in the Community were identified. The assets are the
approximately 1-mile-long Boardwalk, which extends between The Plaza
and Putnam Boulevard in the Village; several chair houses; and the
Atlantic Beach Tennis Center. The Tennis Center currently functions as a
recreational facility. The Boardwalk and beaches are Community
gathering places that provide residential access to the ocean.

When the list of assets was finalized, the Committee developed detailed
information about each asset, which included landscape attributes in the
vicinity of the asset and vulnerability of the asset to flood damage. The
assets were then assigned a high, medium, or low priority based on factors
such as probability of being affected by flooding, capacity to return to service
after a storm, and time needed for recovery. Assets that had limited
interruption of the delivery of core community services were assigned a low
vulnerability index.

Superstorm Sandy had a severe impact on local businesses. Small
Business Administration (SBA) data show that business losses of SBA
loan applicants amounted to approximately $4 million in the Community,
but total SBA-approved loans covered only 63% of the losses.


Health and Social Services: The four assets in this category are the
Village of Atlantic Beach Post Office, Atlantic Beach Rescue building, the
Atlantic Beach Village Hall, and the Police Booth. The Atlantic Beach
Village Hall functioned as the Community Assistance Center during
Superstorm Sandy, helping to ensure delivery of critical services. The
other assets provide emergency services and other essential services
that the public depends on in post-emergency situations.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Oceanfront at Sun & Surf Beach Club, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: Creative Community Flickr

Page 19

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Assessment of Risk to Assets
The New York State Department of State (NYS DOS) risk areas defined in
Table II-1 were used to evaluate risk to assets in the Community. The Risk
Assessment Map (see Figure II-2) shows that nearly all of the Community is
in an extreme or high risk flooding area. Moderate risk areas are limited and
include a small area in the northwestern corner of the Village of Atlantic
Beach and several small areas directly behind the discontinuous dunes in
East Atlantic Beach and Atlantic Beach Estates.
A risk assessment to determine the potential impact of hazards on
community assets was conducted. The results helped guide the selection of
proposed strategies, such as infrastructure improvements and changes in the
building environment. The risk assessment helped the Community choose
mitigation options to reduce future risk. Input from the Committee and
extensive input from the public on areas with the highest risk of flooding
were used to supplement the Risk Assessment Map (Figure II-2).

Program based on a standard storm scenario: the chance that a 1% annual
risk storm (100-year flood event) would occur during a 100-year planning
time frame. Exposure scores were calculated as an expression of the local
topographic and shoreline conditions that tend to increase or decrease the
effects of coastal hazards on assets. The mapped risk areas also contributed
to the exposure scores because assets experience flood hazards more
frequently and with greater impact depending on their geographic location.
Landscape attributes were used to calculate a total landscape attribute score,
which included the following characteristics:


Erosion rate ≥1 foot per year or unknown



Waterline frequently at shore defense or upland vegetation



Shore defenses absent, not constructed to anticipated conditions



Protective vegetation between asset and flood source absent

Risk Assessment Methods



NYS DOS developed a risk assessment tool to quantify risk to community
assets. The three factors that were used to assess risk were hazards,
exposure, and vulnerability. Hazard scores were provided by the NYRCR

Dunes absent, below base flood elevation (BFE), eroding, little
vegetation; bluff slope unstable, little vegetation



Asset on coastal barrier island or filled wetland

Table II-1: New York State Department of State Risk Areas
Extreme Risk Area
 FEMA Coastal V Zones
 NWS advisory thresholds for shallow coastal

flooding

 Areas within three feet of elevation of mean

higher high water shoreline from the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

High Risk Area
 FEMA 1% annual (100-year) flood risk

(FEMA Zone V and Zone A)
 Areas within three feet elevation of NWS

advisory thresholds for shallow coastal
flooding

Moderate Risk Area
 FEMA 0.2% annual (500-year) flood risk
 Areas within three feet of elevation of

FEMA 1% annual flood risk (base flood
elevations)

 Area bounded by SLOSH Category 3

hurricane inundation zone

 Areas prone to erosion
Source: New York State Department of State

NWS = National Weather Service

FEMA = Federal Emergency Management Agency

SLOSH = Sea, Lake, and Overland Surge from Hurricanes

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 20

Figure II-2: Risk Assessment

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 21

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Vulnerability scores are an expression of the capacity of an asset to return to
service after a storm. Assets that can quickly recover or that experience
limited interruption to their delivery of core community services were
assigned a low vulnerability index.
The Risk Assessment Tool calculates a risk score using the following formula:
Hazard score x Exposure score x Vulnerability score = Risk score
The risk score represents the risk of Community assets relative to one
another. An asset whose total risk score is severe typically has very high
hazard, exposure, and/or vulnerability scores. In a barrier island community
like this one, which has limited natural and structural protection from storm
surge and flooding, most variability in risk scores is the function of
differences in observed outage time. In other words, the vulnerability score
tends to be the greatest contributor to variability in total risk score across all
Community assets
See the Table V-4 in Section V.D. for detailed hazard, exposure, vulnerability,
and risk scores.
Risk Assessment Results
The assets in the Community Asset Inventory were assessed for risk, and
risk scores were calculated for each asset using the Risk Assessment Tool.
Figure II-3 shows the results of the risk assessment. See Section V.D for
additional information about the Community Asset Inventory and risk
assessment of the assets.
The risk scores of the assets in the Community range from relatively low
scores in the case of beach clubs that were spared major damage to extreme
scores in the case of exposed beachfront assets that were rendered unusable
for several weeks or months following the storm. The assets with the highest
risk scores include the chair houses and beach clubs along the Atlantic Beach
coastline, which are within an extreme risk area and are more vulnerable
than the other assets. Their location in an extreme risk area and proximity to
storm surge make them particularly vulnerable.
Assets with lower risk scores, such as the Water Reclamation Plant, remained
functional during Superstorm Sandy and were spared damage because of
extraordinary measures that were taken. The Atlantic Beach Village Hall is a
good example of an asset whose total risk score is perhaps artificially low

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

because of a combination of good luck and diligent storm preparation. The
Atlantic Beach Village Hall avoided major damage thanks to extensive
sandbagging prior to Sandy, although outbuildings on the property flooded.
Similarly, the Community’s sewer substations, which are located in high and
extreme risk areas, were kept operational during Superstorm Sandy by
sandbagging.
Provisional measures such as sandbagging are not an optimal means of
mitigating long-term risk, however. Sandbagging a facility is time-consuming
and diverts energy from other vital storm preparation activities. It is also not
a failsafe method of mitigating damage: there was significant evidence after
the storm that sandbagging failed to protect other Community assets,
including homes, from the storm surge and flooding.
Assessment of Risk to Systems
The assessment of risk to systems highlights the initial risk assessment
results for system asset groups (i.e., infrastructure, public services) that do
not lend themselves to assessment as individual point assets. The risk
assessment methods and risk assessment results described in the previous
subsection were used to determine the risk score of systems. Results are
shown in Section V-D.
Economic Development: All 14 beach clubs, including the public Sun &
Surf Beach Club in Silver Point County Park, are located in Zone VE on
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
These assets are therefore vulnerable not only to storm surge but also
storm-influenced velocity wave action. According to local residents and
Committee members, all of the beach clubs were at least partially damaged
by Superstorm Sandy. The clubs also all experienced at least minor flooding
during Hurricane Irene. Six beach clubs sustained major damage during
Superstorm Sandy including the Shores West, New Plaza, Sunny Atlantic,
Clearwater, Ocean Club, and Atlantic Beach Club. As with all other assets
located in VE Zones, these clubs cannot be rebuilt to pre-storm conditions
because substantially damaged facilities would need to be elevated above
the BFE. In the case of the beach clubs’ cabanas, elevation would be
expensive and impractical, according to club owners.
As noted previously, the Village of Atlantic Beach lacks dunes and other
forms of beachfront natural or manmade protection. Not surprisingly, many

Page 22

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

of the Village’s beach clubs, including Clearwater, Sunny Atlantic, New Plaza,
and the Sands, sustained the longest outage times post-Sandy.

basis and will be addressed using the strategies, projects, programs, and
actions described in Section III.

Health and Social Services: During Superstorm Sandy, the Atlantic Beach
Village Hall’s governmental records were at risk of flood damage. The
records were not damaged because of extraordinary efforts to protect the
building, including sandbagging. The Community’s emergency service assets
received some of the lowest risk scores in the Community because of the
manner in which the Risk Assessment Tool calculates risk. In a barrier island
community with limited natural and structural protection from storm surge
and flooding, most variability in risk scores is a function of differences in
observed outage time. Critical assets such as Atlantic Beach Village Hall, the
Rescue Squad building, and the Water Reclamation Plant were spared
significant damage only because of extensive and time-consuming efforts by
staff prior to the storm. These measures protected the assets during Sandy
but cannot be relied on in the future to mitigate risk as effectively. These
assets are all still vulnerable to storm surge, wave, and wind action.

The needs and opportunities that were identified are related to the six
Recovery Support Functions: Community Planning and Capacity Building,
Economic Development, Housing, Health and Social Services, Infrastructure,
and Natural and Cultural Resources.

Infrastructure: Infrastructure assets in the Community include an electric
substation, three sewer substations, and two wastewater treatment plants.
During Superstorm Sandy, these facilities were subjected to bayside surges.
Maintaining power to these facilities during an emergency is critical to
continuity of operations.
Natural and Cultural Resources: Protecting natural and cultural assets is
critical to protecting the heritage of the Community. During Superstorm
Sandy, the Boardwalk and many of the chair houses sustained significant
damage or were completely destroyed. Several of the chair houses that store
resident beach chairs received high risk assessment scores, mainly as a
result of their location and lack of protection.

B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
The needs and opportunities for the Community were identified during
Committee Meetings and Public Engagement Events and through an online
survey. Consensus building was used to identify capacity and reconstruction
needs and opportunities that address resilience to potential future storm
events. The needs and opportunities were identified on a non-prioritized

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Community Planning and Capacity Building
Community Planning and Capacity Building Needs
As described above, the Village of Atlantic Beach Hall was protected by
extensive measures to prevent flooding and protect governmental records
that were vulnerable to flood damage. During and after Superstorm Sandy,
the building served as the primary Community Assistance Center for
dissemination of information and provision of basic services. The Atlantic
Beach Village Hall was used as a staging center for operations by the Indiana
Incident Management Assistance Team, which assisted the Village of Atlantic
Beach with emergency relief efforts after Superstorm Sandy. Because it was
not designed to serve this function, the Atlantic Beach Village Hall did not
meet the Community’s capacity need.
The Village of Atlantic Beach was also asked to provide services to East
Atlantic Beach and Atlantic Beach Estates residents. These requests put
further strain on emergency provisions. In addition, power outages and other
utility failures compromised the Village’s ability to coordinate regional needs
and simultaneously provide vital communication and emergency assistance
to residents and constituents after the storm.
Coordination and communication between the Town of Hempstead and East
Atlantic Beach were limited during and after the storm, according to hamlet
residents. Residents attributed the lack of physical presence and relevant
information from Town personnel to the hamlet’s relative isolation on the
Long Beach Barrier Island (Barrier Island) and its location between the
incorporated Village of Atlantic Beach and City of Long Beach. Community
members had limited or no access to the Town of Hempstead and sought
assistance from the Village of Atlantic Beach, which already had severe
capacity limitations.

Page 23

Figure II-3: Risk Assessment Score

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 24

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

View of Atlantic Beach Rescue Dock, Atlantic Beach Bridge
Source: LiRo

The Community has expressed a greater need for regional planning
coordination that would yield increased emergency services such as fire
rescue and medical services in post-disaster settings. The Committee
discussed the need for coordination with representatives of Nassau County
and the Town of Hempstead.
The insufficiency of local emergency preparedness capacity also impeded
response efforts that were already complicated by the unreliability of key
services, including electricity and cell service. Many residents who sheltered
in place or who returned to their homes after the storm encountered
sustained cell phone or Internet outages. The lack of reliability of the local
communications network was not only inconvenient but potentially
dangerous in the days immediately after Superstorm Sandy. The Community
expressed a strong need for bolstered power supply during storm events to
ensure that communication and power supplies are maintained.
Community Planning and Capacity Opportunities
The opportunities to establish Community Assistance Centers and emergency
preparedness protocols through local and regional coordination may be
accomplished by:

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs



Protecting key governmental facilities so that they can maintain
continuity of operations after major storms.



Addressing the need for Community Assistance Centers to coordinate
emergency management activities and information after storms.



Coordinating regional planning, emergency management, and zoning
code updates between the Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach
Estates/East Atlantic Beach, the Town of Hempstead, and Nassau County
to make the communities more resilient. Community interest in
improving coordination is high.



Designating a trained coordinator for emergencies to increase
communication opportunities and serve as a liaison between the
communities and surrounding municipalities.



Identifying funding and technical assistance opportunities, such as the
Local Government Records Management Improvement Fund Shared
Services grant program, to update and improve recordkeeping
protection.



Updating the existing zoning and building codes in the Incorporated
Village of Atlantic Beach and the Town of Hempstead to address
community resiliency and comprehensive planning strategies.
Coordinating local zoning code amendments with the Town of
Hempstead and the Village of Atlantic Beach to promote regional
planning approaches, including adopting best practices related to
stormwater management, land use, and hazard mitigation.

Economic Development
Economic Development Needs
Local economic activity is mostly confined to the beach clubs and other
recreational facilities, which generate significant revenues during the
summer. The estimated 80 businesses in the Community, which includes the
beach clubs, supply more than 500 primary jobs. Other local businesses are
focused primarily on supporting these assets, the tourists they attract, and
serving the specialized retail, financial, and commercial needs of local
residents. On Park Street in the Village of Atlantic Beach, these businesses
include a local deli and specialty surf shop.

Page 25

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

currently used as beach clubs (see Figure II-3). In addition, the Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach do not have economic development
plans that could help foster continuity of economic advancements across the
Community.
Economic Development Opportunities
The opportunities to advance the economic viability of the Community
through beach club and streetscape improvements may be accomplished by:

Reconstruction of the Sands Beach Club Cabanas,
which were lost during Superstorm Sandy
Source: FEMA / Kenneth Wilsey

The beach clubs remain vulnerable to storm surge and velocity wave action
because of their location in Zone VE on FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
Beach club owners have historically resisted the idea of new dune
construction, which would mitigate this risk. The owners fear the impact of
the barriers on viewsheds, beach access, and beach enjoyment and say that
dune construction would destroy the financial viability of the clubs.
Consequently, the clubs act as seawalls in many locations, taking the brunt
of storm surge, and for this reason, all of the clubs sustained damage caused
by the ocean storm surge during Superstorm Sandy and some damage
during Hurricane Irene. Many beach club owners had to pay out-of-pocket
expenses for repairs.
Opportunities for new commercial development are circumscribed by zoning
and the existing density of the built environment. Currently, the marine
recreation zoning of the beach club areas does not permit any other nonresidential or residential use, expansion, or redevelopment. Land use and
zoning in the Community is focused on residential uses (see Figure II-4).
Only a limited number of parcels are zoned for business use, with oceanfront
parcels zoned primarily for marine recreation. Most of the parcels are

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs



Encouraging and helping beach clubs and small businesses prepare
business continuity plans for power outages and other emergencies.



Improving the access, streetscapes, and parking areas surrounding the
beach clubs.



Implementing Complete Streets design improvements to improve traffic
circulation; provide traffic calming, bicycle routes, and parking; and
reduce vehicle-pedestrian conflicts, improve safety, and improve
stormwater drainage.



Study the potential effects of dune installation on the economic viability
of the beach clubs.



Consider mixed-use zoning and development to expand beach clubs to
include diverse commercial opportunities.

Housing
Housing Needs
In 2012, there were a total of 1,963 housing units in the Community, with
991 in the Village of Atlantic Beach, 314 in Atlantic Beach Estates, and 658
East Atlantic Beach.32 Eighty-six percent of homes were occupied, and 13.3%
were vacant.33 The relatively high vacancy rate was likely the result of homes
that serve primarily as summer and vacation residences. Most residences are
detached single-family homes (89.2%), and the remaining units are twofamily homes (8.5%) or three- to four-unit homes (2.1%).34 As of 2012,
there were 259 occupied units with renters.35 The median rent was more
than $2,000 per month.36 An estimated 32% of renters (84) had housing
costs that were more than 35% of their household income.37

Page 26

Figure II-4: Land Use Classifications

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 27

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

during future storm events. Expanding on existing ordinances that aim to
mitigate flood damage will help meet the need for improved prevention
measures.
Housing Opportunities
The opportunities to address the needs of residents who experienced flood
damage to homes may be accomplished by:


Supporting homeowners and beach club owners through funding and
other resources to implement energy efficiency during reconstruction.



Using housing assistance programs, such as the Community
Development Block Grant and NY Rising Housing Recovery Program to
provide assistance with home repair/rehabilitation, mitigation/elevation,
and acquisitions as they become available. Other programs include the
New York Smart Home Repair and Reconstruction Program, New York
Smart Home Resilience, Small Multi-Family Repair and Reconstruction,
and the Small Multi-Family Mitigation/Large Multi-Family Mitigation
programs.



Identifying or creating opportunities to secure funding allocation for
floodproofing residential structures.



Implementing stricter standards and requirements than those in the New
York State Building Code to ensure the resiliency of homes that are
rebuilt or renovated.

Oceanfront Houses in the Community with Fragmented Dunes
Source: Kate Murray, Town of Hempstead Supervisor

Many of the housing units in the Community were built between 1940 and
1969 (43.1%), and a significant percentage (39.7%) were built before
1940.38 Modern building codes enacted in the 1960s and later provided
resiliency measures to reduce damage from floods. Many of the housing
units were substantially damaged during Superstorm Sandy because of their
age. Many had utilities in basements that were damaged by flooding, leading
to power and service outages for most Community residents. The need to
increase homeowner education to increase housing resiliency was identified
as a way to mitigate damage from flooding.
The bayside surge in the Community and across the entire Barrier Island
caused significant flooding and other damage to residences. The severity of
this damage points to an urgent need to harden buildings and relocate
utilities above the BFE to mitigate building damage from flooding and to limit
the extent and duration of power outages caused by future flooding. In
many cases insurance payments were inadequate to cover the cost of repairs
and reconstruction of homes, many residents used personal capital to repair
or rebuild their homes and continue to need financial assistance for larger
infrastructure project to mitigate damage from future storms. Residents at
Public Engagement Events expressed interest in the need for greater
technical assistance for home repairs.
The Village of Atlantic Beach and Town of Hempstead flood damage
prevention ordinances both require only two feet of freeboard, which is
insufficient to insulate most of the Community from severe flood damage

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Health and Social Services
Health and Social Service Needs
The Community does not have high concentrations of vulnerable populations
with accessibility or service provision needs. The Community identified the
need to address vulnerable populations as a necessary function to ensure
39
resiliency. These populations in the Community are as follows:


181 veterans (less than 5%) and 249 people have disabilities (more than
half of the disabled are 65 and older)40



425 speak a language other than English

Page 28

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

expressed a need for improved access to medical service provisions both
during and after disasters.
The Community has expressed a need for designated Community Assistance
Centers following storm events, particularly because the Atlantic Beach
Village Hall served as the central gathering place and a Community
Assistance Center during Superstorm Sandy but was inadequate in delivering
critical services following the emergency. Both the Atlantic Beach Village Hall
and the Tennis Center buildings are vulnerable to storm surge, wave, and
wind action during hazard events. In addition, the Atlantic Beach Rescue
building, a key community asset and primary service during storm events,
was vulnerable to storms because of its location on the bayside under the
Atlantic Beach Bridge.
New Nautilus Hotel, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: LiRo



Projections for 2020 are a significant decline (almost 18%) for individuals
between 45 and 54 years old and a 31% increase in individuals 65 to 74
years old41



150 households (10% of all households) have incomes of $24,999 or less
and there are no designated low- and moderate-income census tracts in
the Community (see Figure II-5)42



Many residents of the New Nautilus Hotel experience mobility issues and
are dependent on others for transport and medical services

These socially vulnerable populations are not adequately identified and
require increased access to medical services and emergency assistance
during storm events. Only one facility, a hotel near the Tennis Center on the
oceanfront (with a large permanent senior population), had an evacuation
plan that was implemented before Superstorm Sandy. This type of plan is
needed for buildings throughout the Community.
Residents during Public Engagement Events noted the need for a full-service
hospital with an emergency room as opposed to a series of smaller, urgent
care facilities. The only hospital on the Barrier Island is in the City of Long
Beach and is closed because of heavy damage during Superstorm Sandy.
Obtaining health-related items, such as pharmaceuticals, was an issue after
Superstorm Sandy, particularly for vulnerable populations. The Community
Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Health and Social Service Opportunities
The opportunities to address the health and social service needs of the
Community may be accomplished by:


Improving coordination with the Nassau County Office of Emergency
Management and Nassau County Health Department to address healthrelated issues during emergencies, as well as better Community
education regarding appropriate emergency preparedness techniques.



Identifying ways to re-open the hospital on the Barrier Island.



Coordinating and implementing evacuation and emergency preparedness
plans for Nassau County, Town of Hempstead, the City of Long Beach,
Lido, Point Lookout, and the Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach
Estates/East Atlantic Beach.

Infrastructure
Infrastructure Needs
Superstorm Sandy caused significant damage to many of the Community’s
infrastructure assets and systems. Many key facilities that did not sustain
damage remain at risk because the provisional measures that were taken to
protect them are inefficient and cannot be permanently relied upon, as

Page 29

Figure II-5: Percentage of Low-Moderate Income

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 30

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

remained operational but are at high risk to damage from flooding. Given the
potentially catastrophic impacts of system failure on the natural and built
environments, the Community expressed the need for improved stormwater
systems to mitigate potential future flooding and other impacts such as
system failure from hazard events.
Discontinuous dunes were breached, resulting in damage to homes during
Superstorm Sandy. The water flowing through the breaches in the dunes
moved at high velocities during the storm and caused severe damage. Beach
club owners and Village residents generally oppose the idea of building
continuous dunes because of the potential for obscured ocean views and
effects to beach access.

Pump Station damaged during Superstorm Sandy, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: LiRo

described above. Community infrastructure needs were identified by the
infrastructure limitations and vulnerabilities experienced during and after
Superstorm Sandy. The Committee, public, and results from the online
survey were all unanimous in a key desire to fortify and harden key
infrastructure in the Community.
The bayside surge during Superstorm Sandy caused significant flooding
throughout the Community, preventing the stormwater conveyance system
from functioning properly. Buildings and other facilities experienced backflow
of stormwater as a result.
New water lines with return loops and sewer lines require preventative
maintenance, repair, or replacement throughout the Community. Backflow
preventers are needed on bayside outflows along with an expressed interest
in floodwalls at various locations throughout East Atlantic Beach. In addition,
a concrete retaining wall is needed running north to south along the Nevada
Avenue and Brookline Avenue beach area and park.
The Scott Drive substation experienced minor flooding during Superstorm
Sandy. All three sewage pump stations, including the Scott Drive facility,

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

As discussed in Section II.B, Community Planning and Capacity Building, East
Atlantic Beach and Atlantic Beach Estates do not have a Community
Assistance Center. The Committee has expressed the strong desire to
identify a building that can resist storm damage and function as a
Community Assistance Center. This facility must also be readily accessible in
the aftermath of a storm or other emergency. Appropriate facilities exist for
this purpose in the Village of Atlantic Beach, but they must be hardened to
mitigate risk and limit their exposure to flooding and other weather hazards.
In the Village of Atlantic Beach, the Atlantic Beach Village Hall, the Tennis
Center, the water reclamation plant and its three pump stations are key
infrastructure assets that are all vulnerable to storm and wind damage.
Additional generator capacity is required at the reclamation plant, both to
withstand prolonger power outages and ensure normal function when
existing generators must be shut down for maintenance. For the same
reasons, the Atlantic Beach Rescue building must be upgraded to protect
existing generators; provide additional, redundant power supply; and
enhance the resiliency of building communications systems.
The Community expressed the need for electrical, cable, and phone services
to be installed underground throughout East Atlantic Beach along with solarpowered light-emitting diode (LED) street lights to increase safety.
East Atlantic Beach streets are in need of repair, sink holes need to be filled,
and roads need to be repaved. New sidewalks and street signs are needed
throughout East Atlantic Beach.

Page 31

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Infrastructure Opportunities
The following are opportunities for repairing and improving the Community
infrastructure to aid in emergency preparedness and response:


Identifying improvements and alternatives to the existing stormwater
drainage system, including bioswales and other low-impact development
practices, to improve stormwater drainage and increase stormwater
conveyance.



Reducing impermeable surfaces, particularly surface-area parking lots, to
allow for increased drainage and green infrastructure practices.



Considering a regional and Community approach to bulkhead
improvement for property owners that could mitigate the risk of damage
from storm surge and flooding.



Coordinating with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ (USACE’s) Dune and
Beach Replenishment Project to assess beach renourishment and
planning for dune development.



Developing plans for a floodwall under the Boardwalk as a method of
providing flood protection. The City of Long Beach incorporated this
protection into the reconstruction of the Long Beach boardwalk.



Considering maintenance that would be conducted by the Village of
Atlantic Beach and would include inspections of storm drains, outfalls,
and bulkheads to ensure functionality.



Designating a centralized Community Assistance Center in the
Community to coordinate supplies and coordinate between the
Community, Nassau County, Town of Hempstead, and Village of Atlantic
Beach. Selecting the location of the facility carefully to allow access to
supplies and prevention of looting is recommended.



Considering solar generators at the Tennis Center as an alternative
power source for emergencies.



Evaluating improvements to the power grid, including smart grid
infrastructure, for backup power and telecommunications systems in
emergency/rescue buildings.



Hardening and converting electric and gas lines to marine-grade power
lines to improve resiliency.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Natural and Cultural Resources
During Superstorm Sandy, beaches and boardwalks were badly damaged by
exposing the Community to storm-related risk. East Atlantic Beach dunes in
particular were damaged by the storm. The East Atlantic Beach dunes,
beaches, and parks/facilities need to be repaired, strengthened, and
upgraded. The Committee recommends preserving and strengthening beach
access through the construction of dune system walk-over/drive-over
bridges, with the proviso that the Town of Hempstead Special Parks District
and resident-only status remain.
Residents generally supported a dune system with the caveat that the
system must be barrier-island wide. The public continued to register strong
support for hard and soft infrastructure solutions to mitigate stormwater and
flooding events and the need to address sewer and wastewater systems.
Residents, particularly from East Atlantic Beach, frequently expressed the
need for a perimeter dune system. Community support includes an
assessment of the extent of damage from Superstorm Sandy to vegetation,
trees, and water ecology. Trees and landscaping are also needed at various
locations throughout East Atlantic Beach.

Protected dunes, East Atlantic Beach
Source: URS

Page 32

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The approximately 100-acre Silver Point County Park is owned by the Nassau
County Parks and Recreation Department. The park is leased by Surf Point
Corporation and is operated as a private beach club. A portion of the park is
set aside as a bird sanctuary for piping plovers. Regional coordination is
needed among Nassau County, the Surf Point Corporation, and the Village of
Atlantic Beach to address dune restoration and mitigation.



Incorporating the Silver Point County Park, its lessee, and its beach club
into planning efforts for the Village of Atlantic Beach.



Providing resources and funding for testing water quality and
remediation efforts as necessary.



Consulting with the USACE on planning efforts, particularly those related
to beach nourishment and dune construction and any necessary groin
reconstruction or boardwalks.



Promoting green infrastructure, increasing the tree canopy, and
providing recreational opportunities throughout the Community and the
oceanfront areas during reconstruction.

Natural and Cultural Resource Opportunities
The following are opportunities for repairing and improving the Community’s
natural and cultural resources to help provide emergency response and
preparation:


Considering dune planting and vegetation stabilization programs and
improvements to Boardwalk facilities, including beautification and green
infrastructure, for the aesthetic benefits and protection of the
Community from storm damage.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 33

Section III:
Reconstruction and
Resiliency Strategies

Section III:
Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee
(Committee) developed the reconstruction and resiliency strategies that are
described in this section based on experience as residents of the Village of
Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach (Community),
insights gained from the visioning process, and information gained through
the needs and opportunities assessment and risk assessment processes.
The Committee prioritized potential strategies according to metrics that
included experience in the Superstorm Sandy disaster and the approach to
addressing opportunities. The strategies were used as a framework for
developing construction projects, policy directions, or other actions. The
strategies represent the Committee’s general recommendations for achieving
rebuilding, resilience, and economic growth.
The Committee initially discussed key strategies at a Committee Meeting on
September 25, 2013. The Committee continued to develop and refine the
strategies at subsequent Committee Meetings based partially on public input
from the second Public Engagement Event on November 13, 2013. Both the
Community and Committee consistently identified fortifying, restoring, and
repairing infrastructure as a priority.
The Committee identified resiliency and mitigation strategies related to needs
associated with all six Recovery Support Functions. Given the magnitude of
the storm surge and flooding associated with Superstorm Sandy, it was
inevitable that coastal communities such as the Village of Atlantic Beach and
East Atlantic Beach would experience a significant level of damage.
The Committee recognized that the failure or underperformance of key
infrastructure systems was a factor in magnifying the resulting damage. The
effects of prolonged, geographically extensive power outages were
compounded by a lack of redundancy and power generation capacity at the
local and building-specific levels. Many of the Committee’s infrastructure
strategies deliver environmental benefits, most notably improved water
quality. The basis of many strategy discussions was the Committee’s desire
to increase the resiliency of assets that directly support community residents,

such as infrastructure, protection of homes and businesses, and emergency
response capabilities.
The six Recovery Support Functions that are defined in Section II are
relevant to the Community as follows:
Infrastructure systems are critical to the Community, providing essential
networks and services that residents, businesses, and guests depend on for
day-to-day activities. The infrastructure strategy takes into consideration
how the Community will restore, protect, fortify, and manage existing
essential infrastructure and future infrastructure projects. This strategy
would enhance community resilience and protect housing, economic, health
and social services, and natural and cultural resources assets.
Health and Social Services are vital to ensuring the health and welfare of
residents in the Community, as well as facilities that serve the whole
Community. Socially vulnerable populations need special consideration
because they face challenges in obtaining necessary health and social service
resources. The health and social services strategy addresses how the
Community will restore and improve essential health and social services,
particularly to vulnerable populations, as well as maintain essential
emergency responder functions during emergencies.
Economic Development can help provide a sound financial base for the
Community to thrive and will help fund future resiliency actions. The
methods the Community will use to improve economic activities and enhance
the Community’s economic well-being will involve assessing existing
businesses and improving economic opportunity, as detailed later in this
section. The Community is evaluating opportunities to tie in resiliency and
infrastructure improvements with key economic assets.
Community Planning and Capacity Building are needed to achieve
greater resiliency. Although the Community has rebuilt and accomplished
much since Superstorm Sandy, continuous planning and action will be
necessary to develop a sustainable disaster recovery approach to coordinate

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 35

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

purpose of recovering and rebuilding from the impacts of Superstorm Sandy
and Hurricane Irene. These strategies are intended to make the NYRCR
Community more resilient.

Reconstrution of The Sands Beach Club deck, Atlantic Beach
Source: FEMA/Kenneth Wilsey

with other disaster recovery entities and include all residents affected by the
storm.
Housing that is safe and resilient is essential for current and future
residents of the Community. If homes are not resilient or sustainable,
resident property owners may not be able to rebuild after a storm and will
suffer substantial financial losses. The Committee explored options for
infrastructure projects to protect housing.
Natural and Cultural Resources are important for health, general
welfare, recreation of residents and guests, and the economic assets of the
Community. The oceanfront beaches are a vital natural resource but are also
a hazard zone. The natural and cultural resources strategy addresses these
important resources from a risk reduction and economic development
perspective.
Metrics such as resiliency effects, time frame, and technical feasibility were
used to advance the strategies into a series of capital projects, feasibility
studies, policy implementation, and regional cooperation efforts for the

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Coordination among State, Regional, and local planning entities and the
planning efforts of the Committee and Public Engagement Events in October
2013, December 2013, and February 2014 have been essential to the
development of the key strategies, projects, and management measures
discussed here. The strategies, projects, and management measures were
developed after the identification of needs and opportunities, resulting from
an assessment of the effects of Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene. The
NYRCR Plan aims to identify both short- and long-range recovery strategies
that protect community assets and capitalize on existing needs and
opportunities. Primary considerations throughout the development of these
strategies and actions have included assessment of risk to the Community
and its assets, the combined benefits of projects, protection of critical
facilities, value to the community, timing and coordination, estimated project
costs, and the availability of funding. The strategies and projects reflect the
needs of the community and include cost and feasibility factors.
Detailed information on the Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach
Estates/East Atlantic Beach’s Proposed and Featured Projects is provided in
Section IV.
The strategies are part of the Community’s larger vision to increase
resiliency, sustainability, and prosperity through projects and actions. Each
strategy is important on its own, and the Committee sought to address
specific strategies when formulating projects and actions. The discussion of
the reconstruction and resiliency strategies include Proposed and Featured
Projects that will help implement the strategy. The strategies, actions, and
projects identified through the planning process are tailored approaches for a
comprehensive recovery that positions the Community for greater future
success.
Project ideas that evolved from the Committee discussions are classified as
Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, or Additional Resiliency
Recommendations. For the purposes of the NYRCR planning process,
Proposed and Featured Projects and Additional Resiliency Recommendations,
are defined as follows:

Page 36

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Proposed Projects: Projects designed to be fully funded through the
NYRCR Program using the Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funds.



Featured Projects: Innovative projects and actions that the Planning
Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and
has analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through the
NYRCR Program.



Additional Resiliency Recommendations Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are projects and actions that the Planning Committee
would like to highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects
or Featured Projects

The estimated costs in in the project profile tables in Section III are based
on project’ capital costs, which are based on industry-accepted unit costs
using the currently available information. Costs are likely to change as
projects are developed further and additional information is gathered during
the implementation phase of the NYRCR planning process.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

The six strategies are:
#1 Protect critical infrastructure to create community resilience and
sustainability to ensure continuing services needed before, during, and
after disasters.
#2 Increase the Community’s capacity to facilitate and foster actions that
lead to greater resiliency, emergency preparedness, and sustainability.
#3 Implement measures to make the Community’s economic drivers more
resilient.
#4 Protect critical Community health and social services assets and increase
the capacity to provide needed emergency and community services
before, during, and after disasters.
#5 Encourage and facilitate housing resiliency and sustainability measures
throughout the Community.
#6 Restore and enhance natural resources for both resiliency and
recreation purposes while also protecting important cultural resources.

Page 37

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

#1 Protect critical infrastructure to create community resilience
and sustainability to ensure continuing services needed before,
during, and after disasters



Implement stormwater management best practices and prioritize areas
with immediate needs for improved stormwater management by using
green infrastructure



Improve traffic congestion, traffic circulation, traffic calming, bicycle
routes, safety, and parking and reduce vehicle-pedestrian conflicts by
implementing Complete Streets design considerations

The Community used extraordinary measures to keep the Water Reclamation
Plant and the Atlantic Beach Village Hall operating after Superstorm Sandy.
The Water Reclamation Plant continued to operate despite saltwater
incursion that burned out power feeders supplying the plant. The Scott Drive
substation received minor flooding damage. The Tennis Center suffered
relatively superficial building damage during Sandy. High winds stripped
siding from the building and broke windows in the building’s skylight system.
In large measure, though, the building’s vulnerability is a function of its
susceptibility to sustained power outages.

Replacement of the wood pilings that were destroyed by Superstorm
Sandy with steel, reinforced concrete pilings at the Ocean Club
Source: FEMA/Kenneth Wilsey

This section considers how the Community will restore, repair, and manage
the essential infrastructure provided by private entities and local
governments. Strategies, actions, and projects were developed that address
infrastructure resiliency and mitigation. The Committee, with assistance from
Public Engagement Event participants, determined the following actions for
infrastructure improvement:


Identify and implement site-specific remedies and improvements that
can be implemented quickly



Expand stormwater infrastructure through a system of conveyance and
storage systems for improved stormwater management and drainage

The Community had no power for weeks after the storm. The lack of backup
power sources is a major challenge during storm events for the Community.
Alternative energy solutions include the provision of solar street lights
throughout the entire Community. Solar-powered streetlights are proposed
throughout the Community, including in critical facilities locations and
intersections along the main corridor that connects with the countydesignated evacuation route. Ocean storm surge coupled with bayside surge
and flooding caused damage to residential and commercial structures.
Flooding affected key infrastructure including, pumping stations,
underground utilities, stormwater infrastructure, and the conveyance system.
Low-impact development practices including improved drainage, storm drain
covers, and back flow preventers would help mitigate future flooding events.
Capital projects, feasibility studies, and funding opportunities are important
elements of implementing infrastructure strategies. Technical support and
coordination among the Community with Nassau County and the Town of
Hempstead are important in finalizing and implementing large-scale
infrastructure projects. Addressing the regional coordination and potential
economic impact of projects such as a dune system or a microgrid power
system are necessary aspects of the ultimate success of these projects.
The Proposed and Featured Projects for Strategy #1 are listed in Table III-1.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 38

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-1: Strategy #1 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy #1: Protect critical infrastructure to create community resilience and sustainability to ensure continuing services needed
before, during, and after disasters
Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Harden Water Reclamation Plant

Provide resiliency to the existing Water Reclamation Plant and
three pump stations to maintain functionality during rain and
hazard events

$720K

Proposed

N

Emergency Medical Services

Protect and fortify the existing Atlantic Beach Rescue Building
through improved infrastructure and communication systems

$460K

Proposed

Y)

Complete Streets/Drainage
Improvements along Beech Street

Use Complete Streets to provide phased drainage and street
improvements along emergency evacuation routes through
stormwater best management practices, infrastructure
improvements, and traffic safety and management measures

$5.5M

Proposed

Y

Solar-Powered Street Lights

Provide LED street lighting that is hurricane resistant and solar
powered to prevent loss of lighting in the event of power outages

$1.3M

Proposed

Y

Install Backflow Preventers

Install backflow preventers throughout the Community and storm
drain covers throughout the entire NYRCR Community to mitigate
flooding and prevent debris from entering drains

$360K

Proposed

Y

Assess Feasibility and Economic
Impact of Perimeter Dune System

Conduct a study of the cost-effectiveness and technical feasibility
of a perimeter dune system

$500K

Proposed

Y

Microgrid Power System

Conduct a feasibility study and implement a power microgrid
system throughout the NYRCR Community

$19.2M

Featured

Y

Underground Utilities Feasibility Study

Conduct a feasibility study to determine the potential for
underground utilities in areas, specifically East Atlantic Beach, that
are not at extreme risk of flooding

$100K

Featured

N

Stormwater System Improvements

Study adaption of existing open spaces for floodwater catch basins

$10K

Featured

Y

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 39

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

#2 Increase the Community’s capacity to facilitate and foster
actions that lead to greater resiliency, emergency
preparedness, and sustainability

Third Public Involvement Event, February 12, 2014
Source: URS

This section focuses on the methods the Community proposes to restore
and/or enhance the ability to organize, plan, manage, and implement
recovery planning and capacity building. Actions address regional
coordination with the rest of the Long Beach Barrier Island (Barrier Island)
communities. Actions related to the strategies the Committee and
Community developed are:



Review and revise municipal procedures to improve emergency
preparedness, management, and response protocols



Improve links between members of the Community and the physical
environment of the Community by identifying locations for urban
gardens, plazas, squares, or courtyards



Repurpose public buildings to create emergency meeting facilities for use
after major storms

For improved resiliency to future disasters, the Community has expressed a
primary desire to improve emergency preparedness and recovery functions.
A lack of communication was frequently cited in both Committee Meetings
and Public Engagement Events as a major issue during and after Superstorm
Sandy. Strategies to improve communications and emergency planning
capacity and functions will help increase the Community’s resiliency. The
risks associated with Superstorm Sandy and potential future storm events
are addressed through capital and non-capital projects to help protect
against future hazards to the NYRCR Community.
Coordination of local zoning and planning efforts with Nassau County, the
Town of Hempstead, the Village of Atlantic Beach and the City of Long Beach
will be essential in promoting regional planning approaches and adopting
best practices related to hazard mitigation and stormwater management.
Funding and technical assistance for shared service projects are key
components to the functionality and timeliness of project implementation.
The Proposed and Featured Projects for Strategy #2 are listed in Table III-2.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 40

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-2: Strategy #2 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy #2: Increase the Community’s capacity to facilitate and foster actions that lead to greater resiliency, emergency
preparedness, and sustainability
Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Village of Atlantic Beach Community
Assistance Center

Retrofit the Tennis Center to be used as a Community
Assistance Center in the Village of Atlantic Beach, including
improvements to drainage and the incorporation of active and
passive recreational elements

$2M

Proposed

N

East Atlantic Beach Community Assistance
Center Feasibility Study

Evaluate and identify a location for a Community Assistance
Center in Atlantic Beach Estates and East Atlantic Beach

$50K

Proposed

N

Emergency Preparedness Guidebook

Draft and disseminate an emergency preparedness guidebook
in coordination with Nassau County, Town of Hempstead, and
the City of Long Beach for distribution to all residents.

$100K

Featured

Y

Atlantic Beach Village Hall

Provide upgrades and protection to Atlantic Beach Village Hall
to maintain continuity of operations and protect vital records
during and after storm events

$400K

Proposed

N

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 41

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

#3 Implement measures to make the Community’s economic
drivers more resilient

The focus of economic enhancement is primarily on the beach clubs, the
Community’s primary economic assets that suffered substantial damage
during Superstorm Sandy (and also during Hurricane Irene but to a lesser
degree). The beach clubs are located in designated Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) flood zones. Providing economic opportunities
in the form of technical support and planning is imperative for the future
viability of these key economic and Community assets. The provision of
effective and sustainable infrastructure will help create economic
opportunity.
The Village of Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach do not currently have
economic development plans, which are central in the development of
business continuity plans. Developing an economic development plan for the
Community may include reviewing land use patterns and zoning designations
in addition to developing strategies to support small businesses and possibly
support local entrepreneurship.

Separating debris from the sand during cleanup from Superstorm Sandy
Source: FEMA/Kenneth Wilsey

This section focuses on how the Community proposes to enhance economic
development and create economic opportunities. The following economic
actions are proposed:


Improve the economic viability of beach clubs



Improve streetscapes to enhance economic growth



Improve infrastructure to support economic activity

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

An assessment of existing land use and infrastructure along the oceanfront
areas currently zoned marine recreation is proposed. The evaluation would
include economic impacts and an assessment of whether the infrastructure is
adequate. Vulnerability is an especially critical problem for the beaches and
private beach clubs along the Atlantic Ocean. Resiliency strategies, including
dune construction, may affect the profitability of the beach clubs and need to
be thoroughly investigated. Incorporation of improved and new utility
systems would require funding and technical assistance for implementation.
The Proposed and Featured Projects for Strategy #3 are listed in Table III-3.

Page 42

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-3: Strategy #3 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy #3: Implement measures to make the Community’s economic drivers more resilient
Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Assess Feasibility and Economic Impact
of Perimeter Dune System

Study the cost-effectiveness and technical feasibility of a dune
perimeter system including benefits and risks

$500K

Proposed

Y

Cell Phone Tower Resiliency

Improve cell phone tower resiliency during emergencies

$1.6M

Featured

Y

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 43

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

#4 Protect critical Community health and social services assets
and increase the capacity to provide needed emergency and
community services before, during, and after disasters

First Public Involevment Event October 16, 2013
Source: Sustainable Long Island

This section addresses how the Community will restore and improve
essential health and social services with particular focus on addressing
vulnerable populations. The following health and social service actions are
proposed:




Provide information to residents about emergency preparedness and
emergency shelter information



Ensure a unified chain of command to provide up-to-date information to
residents



Repurpose public buildings to create emergency meeting facilities and
Community Assistance Centers for use prior to, during, and after major
storms

The Community needs a formal Community Assistance Center and
emergency protocols to ensure the resiliency of its health and social services
during potential future storm events. The lack of communication between
the community and first responders and officials during and after the storm
events was frequently mentioned by East Atlantic Beach members during
Committee Meetings and Public Engagement Events. East Atlantic Beach
Committee members reported that they felt cut off and isolated and sought
assistance from the Village of Atlantic Beach. The Community Assistance
Center project would address providing improved communications in the
event of future disaster events.
The Proposed and Featured Projects for Strategy #4 are listed in Table III-4.

Provide protection and services for vulnerable populations, especially
during emergencies

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 44

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-4: Strategy #4 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy #4: Protect critical Community health and social services assets and increase the capacity to provide needed emergency and
community services before, during, and after disasters
Project Name
Emergency Preparedness Guidebook

Short Project Description
Draft and disseminate an emergency preparedness guidebook in
coordination with Nassau County, Town of Hempstead, and the
City of Long Beach for distribution to all residents.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

$100K

Featured

Y

Page 45

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

#5 Encourage and facilitate housing resiliency and sustainability
measures throughout the Community

This section focuses on how the Community will meet the demand for
affordable housing, promote affordability to those displaced by the storm,
and encourage the provision of disaster-resistant housing for all income
levels. The following housing actions were proposed:


Inform residents about emergency preparedness and emergency
evacuation and shelters



Examine opportunities that would provide residents with a unified chain
of command for up-to-date information during storm events



Help provide assistance to restore and repair residential damage caused
by Superstorm Sandy

Flooding and bayside surge from Superstorm Sandy damaged many
residential, commercial, and utility structures throughout the Community.
Local ordinances mandate some level of hazard mitigation, but they apply
only to new structures. Existing structures are not protected from severe
damage during future storm events, particularly from flooding.

Single Family Residence, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: FEMA/ Eliud Echevarria

More stringent zoning codes and implementation of local flood damage
prevention ordinances across the Community are important in addressing
housing risks and needs. An assessment of zoning and building codes and
their implementation could address increased levels of hazard mitigation,
especially for flooding.
The Proposed and Featured Projects for Strategy #5 are listed in Table III-5.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 46

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-5: Strategy #5 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategies #5. Encourage and facilitate housing resiliency and sustainability measures throughout the Community
Project Name

Short Project Description

Emergency Preparedness Guidebook

Draft and disseminate an emergency preparedness guidebook in
coordination with Nassau County, Town of Hempstead, and the
City of Long Beach for distribution to all residents.

Identification of Vulnerable and
Special-Needs Populations

Identify vulnerable and special-needs populations through a
special-needs registration.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

$100K

Featured

Y

$8K

Featured

Y

Page 47

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

#6 Restore and enhance natural resources for both resiliency and
recreation purposes while also protecting important cultural
resources

This section addresses the management of natural and cultural resources
from a risk reduction and economic development perspective for the
Community. Actions for this section include enhancing existing resources,
educating the community, and evaluating the potential for re-establishing
natural dune systems.
The Committee, with assistance from Public Engagement Event participants,
determined the following actions for natural and cultural resources:


Investigate options for dune restoration and a perimeter system, which
should include flexibility for beach clubs and explore multiple options for
future uses



Gauge interest in adapting existing open spaces and parks as significant
storm floodwater catch basins

Superstorm Sandy affected dune systems, natural habitats, and the
Community beaches and boardwalks, all of which are important natural and
cultural assets. The Community has a primary need not only to reconstruct
existing damaged resources but also to expand and integrate natural areas
as a form of stormwater management and green infrastructure in
infrastructure projects.
Oceanfront, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: Kate Murray, Town of Hempstead Supervisor

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

The Proposed and Featured Projects for Strategy #6 are listed in Table III-6.

Page 48

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-6: Strategy #6 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy #6: Restore and enhance natural resources for both resiliency and recreation purposes while also protecting important
cultural resources
Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Study the cost-effectiveness and technical feasibility of a dune
perimeter system on the beach clubs including benefits and
risks

$500K

Proposed

Y

Study adaption of existing open spaces for floodwater catch
basins

$10K

Featured

Y

Project Name
Assess Feasibility and Economic Impact
of Perimeter Dune System
Stormwater System Improvements

Short Project Description

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 49

Section IV:
Implementation –
Project Profiles

Section IV:
Implementation – Project Profiles
The NYRCR Program has allocated to the Community up to $9.0 million
(Village of Atlantic Beach: up to $3.0 million; East Atlantic Beach and Atlantic
Beach Estates: up to $6.0 million, collectively). The funding is provided
through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
program. While developing projects and actions for inclusion in the NYRCR
Plan, Planning Committees took into account cost estimates, cost-benefit
analyses, the effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations
and critical assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees
also considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be
eligible for CDBG-DR funding.
The projects and actions set forth in the NYRCR Plan are divided into three
categories. The order in which the projects and actions are listed in the
NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the Community’s prioritization of
these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects proposed for
funding through the Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding. Featured
Projects are projects and actions that the Planning Committee has identified
as important resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in depth, but has
not proposed for funding through the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations (see Section V) are projects and actions that the Planning
Committee would like to highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed
Projects or Featured Projects.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in the NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR
Community’s CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed
Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review, HUD
eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the
projects and actions found in the NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in the NYRCR Plan
does not guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for
CDBG‐DR funding or that it will be implemented.

Section IV provides project profiles for the Proposed and Featured Projects
identified by the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning
Committee and NYRCR Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East
Atlantic Beach (Community). The project profiles are not listed according to
priority, importance, or rank. The Proposed and Featured Projects were
identified, selected, and advanced as a response to the risks, needs, and
opportunities described in Section II of the NYRCR Community Plan.
The Proposed and Featured Projects are some of the implementation
mechanisms for the reconstruction and resiliency strategies described in
Section III. The projects are expected to be implemented in the near future
to build resiliency and fulfill other important Community goals.
The project profiles indicate whether the project has regional significance.
Regional significance can mean that a Proposed or Featured Project protects
an asset that is used by several communities (e.g., the potential for flooding
is reduced on an established evacuation route) or an adjacent Community
(e.g., a community restores the dunes and the neighboring community also
proposes the same or similar project).
The projects were initially categorized with a basic project description, the
Recovery Support Function beneficiaries of the project (e.g., public/private,
local/regional) were articulated, and basic cost categories were provided.
The projects then underwent an initial feasibility and funding evaluation in
which various sources of funding for the projects were explored. Three site
visits were conducted of the proposed project locations to view the sites and
discuss technical project details.
The Committee used input from State experts, including the State Agency
Review Team (SART), which aided in reviewing the project proposals, input
from the Public Engagement Events, and the results of online surveys to
make decisions about which projects to select as Proposed and Featured.
The project selections at the Public Engagement Events were generally
consistent with the Committee’s selection of projects. Section V.C provides
more information about Public Engagement Events.

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 51

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The project profiles in this section include a detailed description of each
project and information on a cost-benefit analysis and risk-reduction
analysis, two important elements used by the Committee to evaluate the
value of each project. The benefits are presented with qualitative
descriptions that demonstrate how the projects assist the Community in
economic, environmental, and health and social services. The cost-benefit
analysis and risk-reduction analysis are described in the following
subsections.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
A cost-benefit analysis (CBA) is a tool used to calculate and compare the
benefits and costs associated with a project. The CBA provides decisionmakers with a framework for comparing different projects (i.e., anticipated
cost of implementation against total expected benefits) and determining
whether the benefits of a particular project outweigh the costs. The value of
a CBA is twofold: (1) to inform the Committee as it formulates and prioritizes
projects for implementation and (2) to help the Community prepare grant
applications for Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery
(CDBG-DR) funds and other funding opportunities that are identified in the
future.
Because the NYRCR Program is a community-driven process, the CBA is
focused on identifying project costs and benefits that relate directly to the
communities that the Committee represents. Community and Committee
input, informed by an understanding of local conditions, needs, and
community values, plays a crucial role in the selection of projects that would
be implemented. Risk-reduction benefits are included in this analysis and are
described in terms of how much a Proposed or Featured Project would lower
the vulnerability to damage from potential future disasters. The additional
benefits of the projects are provided in descriptive qualitative terms that
explain how these projects bring additional value to the community.

maintenance costs) are described in general terms. The CBA cannot forecast
costs or benefits with complete certainty. It provides the Community with the
potential estimated costs of project implementation and the potential
benefits that would accrue to the Community with the particular project in
place.
The cost of implementing a project is just one aspect of the justification for
funding a project. Another important variable is the future cost of not
implementing the projects, which has the potential to negatively affect the
long-term viability of the Community. Although “lost opportunity” costs do
not always lend themselves to quantification, they are no less important to
the analysis and are therefore addressed qualitatively. These costs include:


Economic loss to residents and to local and regional employers as a
result of the inability to work



Hindrance in the provision of life-safety and emergency services,
resulting in repeated inability to access vast areas of the community



Extensive, repetitive damage to personal property (vehicles, residences)
and public infrastructure resulting from frequent recurring flooding and
future storm events

Project Benefits
The types of benefits that are considered in the CBA are:


Risk reduction: Extent to which a project reduces the risk of damage
to a Community asset from a future storm event (discussed further
under each project profile as a “Risk-reduction analysis”)43



Economic: A project’s potential for minimizing economic costs and
reducing the time needed for the local economy to rebound from a storm
event. Economic data included, where applicable, an estimate of
permanent jobs secured or added; relationship to, and/or furtherance of,
Regional Economic Development Plan goals, specifically the Strategic
Economic Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties 44; potential
for additional economic activity; and the net effect on local municipal
expenditures.45



Health and social services: Qualitative information on the population
benefits of improved access to health and social service facilities

The costs and benefits that are considered in the CBA are explained in the
following paragraphs.
Project Costs
Project profiles include an estimated cost for implementing the project.
Factors contributing to the life-cycle costs of the project (e.g., operation and

Village of Atlantic Beach, East Atlantic Beach, and Atlantic Beach Estates NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 52

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

including public safety services and the degree to which essential health
and social service facilities are able to provide services to a community
during a future storm or weather event as a result of the project.


Environmental protection: Benefits include the protection of crucial
environmental assets or high-priority habitat, threatened and
endangered species, migration, or habitat connectivity; any cleanup
resulting from the action; creation of open space; or a new recreational
asset such as the Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center Tennis
Center that proposes stormwater mitigation under recreational
amenities.

Risk-Reduction Analysis
A risk-reduction analysis estimates the extent to which a project would lower
the flood risk to identified Community critical assets and population when the
project is in place. The risk-reduction analysis uses information from the risk
assessment discussed in Section II to determine the risk of an asset before
the project implementation. It then estimates how the risk will be lowered by
showing how much the project would lower the vulnerability score.

comments received through the NYRCR Program website. The locations of
the Proposed Projects are depicted on Figure IV-1.
The Proposed Projects, in no particular order or prioritization, are as follows:


Harden Water Reclamation Plant



Emergency Medical Services



Complete Streets/Drainage Improvements along Beech Street



Solar-powered Street Lights



Village of Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center



East Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center Feasibility Study



Install Backflow Preventers



Assess Feasibility and Economic Impact of Perimeter Dune System



Atlantic Beach Village Hall

The project criteria symbols are categorized under the following recovery
support functions:

A. Proposed Projects
Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding through a community’s
allocation of Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery (CDBGDR) funding. The Committee developed and selected the Proposed Projects
based on input from residents during multiple Public Engagement Events and

Village of Atlantic Beach, East Atlantic Beach, and Atlantic Beach Estates NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 53

Figure IV-1: Project Locations

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 54

Harden Water Reclamation Plant

VAB

Fortify the Existing Water Reclamation Plant
and Three Pump Stations
Project description: During Superstorm Sandy, flooding and power
outages nearly caused the failure of the Water Reclamation Plant (Plant).
Saltwater incursion through electrical manhole covers burned out power
feeders supplying the Plant. The Scott Drive substation received minor
flooding damage. This damage notwithstanding, the Plant and its
associated sanitary pumping stations remained functional despite having
to rely on auxiliary pumps and generators.
The continuous operation was thanks to extraordinary preparation and
work by Plant staff during and after the storm. The effort protected the
Plant and minimized bypass of raw and partially treated sewage into
Reynolds Channel. Failure of the Plant would put the environment and
health of the Community at risk. The Nassau County Bay Park Sewage
Treatment Plant, which discharges its effluent into Reynolds Channel, was
severely damaged by the storm surge from Superstorm Sandy. It caused
an estimated 104 million gallons of untreated sewage to enter Rockaway
Channel in the 42 hours after Sandy.46 To ensure the health and welfare
of the Bay Park and surrounding community residents against future storm
impacts, FEMA has provided Nassau County with $810 million to harden
that facility.
Cost Estimate

Timeline

$720,000

Three months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 55

Harden Water Reclamation Plant

The Committee identified mitigation of risk to the Plant as a key objective
from the beginning of the planning process. The Committee and the Greater
Atlantic Beach Water Reclamation District (GABWRD) staff both recognized
that emergency reliance on provisional measures is not a sustainable means
of safeguarding the Plant against future hazard events. The Committee
drafted the Infrastructure actions and a strategy related to implementation
of site-specific remedies and improvements specifically with Plant protection
in mind. The Committee facilitated site visits to the Plant and its substations
that permitted assessment of existing conditions. Based on these visits, a
project scope was developed that supports GABWRD’s proposals to harden
the Plant to mitigate flood risk.
This project would increase the resiliency of the Water Reclamation Plant
and three sanitary pumping stations in the Village of Atlantic Beach and in
Atlantic Beach Estates through the installation of four elevated generators as
backup power sources. The project would also remove and replace
approximately six existing doors with watertight bulkhead-type doors at
building entrances to prevent flooding and maintain functionality during rain
and hazard events.
Short description: Provide resiliency to the existing Water Reclamation
Plant and three pump stations to maintain functionality during rain and
hazard events.
Project cost: $720,000. This cost projection assumes the installation of four
elevated generators, one at each of the existing pumping stations.

Benefit or Co-Benefits to Be Derived from the Project
Health and Social: The Plant serves the entire Community. Hardening the
Plant would limit bypass of raw or partially treated sewage into Reynolds
Channel, improving water quality and limiting human exposure to hazardous
substances.

Water Reclamation Plant, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: VAB Building Plans Examiner

Economic: This infrastructure investment is critical to the short- and longterm health of the local economy. In the short term, this project would help
maintain jobs associated with the operation and maintenance of the Plant. In
the long term, the project would be vital to protecting the 534 primary jobs
in the Community and preventing disruption to public utilities after a disaster
would minimize disruption to business operations and allow residents to
return home more quickly after evacuations. Long-term economic co-benefits
may include reduction of local government expenditures; hardening the
water reclamation plant now could reduce potential future expenditures for
major infrastructure repair in the future.
Hardening the water reclamation plant fulfills part of a key regional strategy
identified in the 2013 Long Island’s The Strategic Economic Development
Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties.47 The plan states that the hardening of
“infrastructure, businesses and homes against the next major storm” is a
major strategy.

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 56

Harden Water Reclamation Plant

Environmental: Hardening the Water Reclamation Plant would reduce the
potential for discharge of raw or partially treated sewage or other
operational failure during hazard events. These improvements would reduce
the risk of contamination from wastewater flowing into floodwaters or
Reynolds Channel. The discharge introduces excess nutrients such as
nitrogen and phosphorus, bacteria, pathogens, and other hazardous
substances into local waters. These pollutants are harmful not only to public
health but also to plant and animal health in the coastal ecosystem.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated
with the Project

watertight doors would decrease the susceptibility of these facilities to flood
events. The project would deliver preventative measures to risks related to
water and sewer outages (such as contamination) during storm events.
Mitigating flood risk associated with hardening of the Plant would limit the
risk of human exposure to hazardous substances. Even in areas with
separate public drinking water and sewer treatment systems, the drinking
water supply can be contaminated during flooding events. This project
mitigates that potentially severe health risk to humans.

Assets: Economic development, infrastructure, health and social services,
and natural and cultural resources

This project would reduce the vulnerability of the Plant and three sanitary
pumping stations, which were identified as key Community assets by the
Committee and the public. Elevating backup power sources and installing

Population: 4,000+ (entire Community)

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 2150 Bay Boulevard



Obtain building permits



2 Sewer Substations (three locations)



Install backup generator

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Install Backflow Preventers

Page 57

Harden Water Reclamation Plant

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
Hardening the Water Reclamation Plant would extend the useful life of the
building. Typical water infrastructure life cycles can range from 20 years
(e.g., pumps) to 50 years (e.g., treatment plants)48 with regular
maintenance of the facility. Maintenance costs associated with the project
would be minimal and result in a reduction of exigent maintenance and
repair costs during and after future storms. No negative externalities or
opportunity costs have been identified.

General time frame for implementing actions: This project could be
completed within three months from inception.
Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: Regulatory requirements that would
need to be addressed, if applicable, include Village of Atlantic Beach building
permit regulations; Nassau County, Town of Hempstead; and all relevant
local, state, and international building codes.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The GABWRD manages and
operates the Plant and associated infrastructure and facilities, which are
under the jurisdiction of the Village of Atlantic Beach and Atlantic Beach
Estates in the Town of Hempstead, both in Nassau County.

Watertight door
Source: FEMA

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Watertight door
Source: FEMA

Page 58

Emergency Medical Services

VAB ABE EAB

Fortify the Existing Atlantic Beach Rescue Building
Project description: The Atlantic Beach Rescue (ABR) Squad is a private
not-for-profit volunteer rescue unit that provides emergency medical
services and water rescue services to the entire Community. The ABR
Squad’s importance to the Community is underscored by the density of
water-related uses that exist in Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.
The Community’s location on the western tip of the Long Beach Barrier
Island (Barrier Island) and its limited physical connectivity to nearby areas
underscore the importance of continuous local emergency response
services. Moreover, the Barrier Island’s only hospital, Long Beach Medical
Center, was destroyed by Sandy and remains closed, placing a further
premium on ready access to lifesaving and emergency services.
Because of the breadth and importance of the services provided by the
Squad, the Committee identified the Rescue Building as a key asset from
the outset of the planning process. The building is susceptible to the same
sustained power outages that affect the rest of the Community during
hazard events.
The Emergency Medical Services project would protect and fortify the
existing Atlantic Beach Rescue Building by installing solar panels,
relocating and providing redundant backup generators to a higher
elevation, installing a hard-wired interoperable communication system in

redundant locations, and placing new dock pilings for the squad’s rescue boat.
The project would strengthen ABR Squad’s ability to provide uninterrupted
emergency response during normal conditions and acute events.

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$460,000

6 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 59

Emergency Medical Services

Short description: Protect and fortify the existing Atlantic Beach Rescue
Building through improved infrastructure and communication systems.
Project cost: $460,000. This cost projection assumes that structural
modifications to the mezzanine level of the Rescue building would be
necessary to effect the improvements described above.

Benefit or Co-Benefits to Be Derived from the Project
Health and Social: The Atlantic Beach Rescue Squad provides vital
emergency response and lifesaving services to the entire Community. The
squad’s ability to provide continuous service is of vital importance to all
Community residents, particularly socially vulnerable populations, which
include the 25% of Community residents who are 65 or older and 6% of
residents with a disability. The number of residents between the age of 65
and 74 is projected to grow by more than 30% by 2020. As the Community’s
population continues to age, protection and fortification of existing
emergency medical services, including fire and police protection, will only
become more important.
Economic: Enhanced protection of the Rescue building would confer
significant indirect economic benefits on the Community. Atlantic Beach
Rescue’s improved ability to offer critical services on a continuous basis
would minimize the frequency and severity of emergency events that can

cause significant dollar loss and depress localized property values. The
availability of a dedicated, all-volunteer nonprofit provider of rescue services
is a significant asset because it minimizes the need for public expenditures
for these services. In addition, the availability of quality public services,
including emergency response, can serve as an inducement to residents and
businesses to remain in, or relocate to, a given area.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated
with the Project
This project would reduce the vulnerability of the Atlantic Beach Rescue
building. Elevation of building mechanicals and provision of redundant power
supply would greatly limit the building’s susceptibility to sustained power
outage. Enhancement of building communication systems is equally
important to ensure the squad’s ability to function and provide its full suite of
services following emergency events.

Assets: Economic development, infrastructure, and health and social services
Population: 4,000+ (entire Community)

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 Atlantic Beach Rescue





Village of Atlantic Beach Community Assistance
Center



Microgrid Power System

Obtain building permits

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 60

Emergency Medical Services

The project would also significantly reduce risk to the population. Access to
lifesaving and emergency services was limited even before the destruction of
the Long Beach Medical Center. During Superstorm Sandy, Community
residents reported having inadequate access to and communication with
emergency and fire services. By supporting the ABR Squad’s ability to
function during and after hazard events, this project would confer significant
benefits to all Community residents, particularly to socially vulnerable
individuals.

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
This project would extend the useful life of the existing building by
increasing its resistance to wind and flooding damage in future storm events.
The strengthening of emergency medical services would provide tangible,
sustainable benefits to the community and socially vulnerable populations
throughout the life of the emergency facilities. Long-term costs associated
with bolstering the emergency services would be minimal and relate to
routine building maintenance and upkeep.

The objectives of this project could potentially be accomplished through
other means, including enhanced coordination with regional emergency
service providers or establishment of mobile medical services. Enhancement
of existing services at existing facilities would be a more cost-efficient and
durable means of ensuring continuous, effective emergency response
services in the Community. The ABR Squad performs its rescue services on a
volunteer basis, Nassau County, the Village, and the Town of Hempstead all
derive substantial benefit from the reduced need for public expenditures on
emergency response services.
General time frame for implementing actions: This project could be
completed within six months of inception.
Local, State and federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: Submission of an application to
obtain a Village of Atlantic Beach building permit.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The project services the
Community. Jurisdiction over the project includes the Village of Atlantic
Beach.

Existing Rescue facility, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: LiRo

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Example of rooftop solar panels
Source: Creative Commons Flickr

Page 61

Complete Streets/Drainage along Beech Street

ABE EAB

Use Complete Streets Design Considerations
to Provide Drainage and Street Improvements
for Major Thoroughfare
Project description: Beech Street (signed as Nassau County Road 22)
form a primary transportation corridor that links the Barrier Island from
the Atlantic Beach Bridge to the City of Long Beach and designated
County evacuation routes. Intersections along the route are prone to
flooding. This project would provide phased drainage and street
improvements along emergency evacuation routes, specifically along the
0.91-mile stretch of Beech Street between Yates and Nevada Avenues and
other local flood-prone areas.
The project would include an evaluation of existing facilities to assess their
conformance with stormwater best management practices. The analysis
would include an examination of existing road section grades and cross
sections to assess the suitability of green infrastructure. Based on this list,
a prioritized list of improvements would be developed that may include
implementation of discharge or recharge structures under parking lanes or
sidewalks, construction of rain gardens, installation of permeable
pavements, or installation of piping and collection systems.

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$5,500,000

14 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 62

Complete Streets/Drainage Improvements along Beech Street

Additional potential improvements include enhanced streetscape elements
with curbs, continuous sidewalks and refuge areas to provide connectivity for
motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians and to promote these non-motorized
uses. The project would also include upgrading existing facilities to comply
with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and to enhance traffic,
bicyclist, and pedestrian safety, including pedestrian signals, high-visibility
crosswalks, and traffic signing and striping.
Short description: Use Complete Streets to provide phased drainage and
street improvements along emergency evacuation routes through
stormwater best management practices, infrastructure improvements, and
traffic safety and management measures.
Project cost: $5,500,000. This estimate encompasses implementation costs
for the first 0.4 mile of phased roadway and drainage improvements and
mitigations along the 0.91-mile corridor.

Benefit or Co-Benefits to Be Derived from the Project
Health and Social: This project promotes compliance with the 2011 NYS
Complete Streets Act,49 which was designed to ensure that residents are able
to “achieve the health benefits associated with active forms of
transportation.” Throughout the planning process, the Committee expressed
concern about safety issues along the corridor, citing regular accidents and
near misses involving pedestrians. The City of Long Beach is also seeking
funding to implement Complete Streets including a portion of Beech Street.
Coordination would provide an opportunity to establish a network of
Complete Streets.

improving stormwater and drainage infrastructure capacities, and increasing
safety at dangerous intersections and corridors. In addition, using bioswales
or other green stormwater infrastructure would reduce the demand on
existing hard drainage facilities. The stormwater and drainage improvements
would also reduce risk to properties and assets in these areas from flooding.
The Complete Streets project may indirectly promote economic vibrancy of
the community and promote higher property values in the vicinity of the
project corridor.
The Complete Streets project supports the 2013CGLI Plan Transportation
Strategy, which is “Improve safety of streets for pedestrians and cyclists
through implementation of Complete Streets, signal optimization, and a
comprehensive bike plan.” The CGLI also notes that “inland, more frequent
and intense rainfall events could also cause travel disruptions due to flooded
intersections, roadways and rail lines, impacts that would be mitigated by
this project.” 50
Environmental: This project would improve coastal water quality by
reducing runoff into Reynolds Channel. Bioswales and green infrastructure
would provide small informal open spaces, increase the amount of
permeable surfaces, and allow for natural groundwater recharge.

Assets: Economic development, infrastructure, health and social services,
natural and cultural resources
Population: 4,000+ (entire Community)

Economic: This project may reduce local, Town, and County government
expenditures by providing more efficient access to evacuation routes,
Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 Beech Street





Stormwater System Improvements



Solar-Powered Street Lights



Underground Utilities Feasibility Study

Obtain building permits to assess existing
facilities to assess conformance with
stormwater practices

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 63

Complete Streets/Drainage Improvements along Beech Street

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated
with the Project
Implementing the Complete Streets project along Beech Street would result
in a slight reduction of risk to critical assets including a sewer substation and
the water treatment plant because of the potential mitigation of nuisance
and low-volume flooding during recurring storm events. Primary reductions
are a reduction in risks associated with flooding and traffic safety concerns
along this primary route, which serves as the major transportation corridor
that connects with county-designated evacuation routes, and risks associated
with flooding to residences and businesses.
The Committee advocated strongly for including safety improvements in this
project. This goal is complementary to the objective of promoting better
stormwater and drainage management and resulting improvements to
coastal water quality. Despite relatively limited pedestrian activity in the
project area, a 2003 report by the Nassau County Department of Health
documented at least five instances of traffic accidents requiring pedestrian
hospitalization in the Community in the preceding decade.51 This project
would improve safety conditions for all road users.

Negative externalities of the project are related primarily to the long-term
cost and potential upkeep (financial and labor) the Community would
potentially incur. Opportunity costs are minimal because the Complete
Streets project encompasses a diverse range of alternatives originally
considered when addressing what the project aims to achieve: safety, flood
reduction, and long-term economic and community vibrancy.
General time frame for implementing actions: The project involves
multiple assessment and implementation phases. Additional work beyond the
steps included in the Project Description above could be added to the project
scope pending the availability of additional funds. As described above, it
would take approximately 14 months to complete this project.
Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: Regulatory requirements that would
need to be addressed, if applicable, include Nassau County, and Town of
Hempstead building permits. Coordination with local utility companies would
be required to address potential jurisdictional and operational issues.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The project is located in East
Atlantic Beach in the Town of Hempstead. Subsequent project phases could
extend into the Village of Atlantic Beach.

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
The Complete Streets project would provide long-term benefits to the useful
life of the streetscape and indirect benefits to the economic vibrancy of the
community and improved safety for the community.

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 64

Complete Streets/Drainage Improvements along Beech Street

Existing conditions along Beech Street, East Atlantic Beach
Source: Google Earth

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Visualization of Complete Street implementation
along Beech Street, East Atlantic Beach
Source: URS

Page 65

Solar-Powered Street Lights

VAB ABE EAB

Provide LED Street Lights along Major Thoroughfares
Project description: Power outages during emergency events are a
significant problem throughout the Barrier Island, particularly within the
Community. Blackouts and outages affect the ability of residents to safely
walk or drive to their homes, evacuate to emergency shelters, access
critical medical services or obtain basic supplies. Many traditional
streetlight electrical systems and connections were damaged or destroyed
by Superstorm Sandy and required repair or replacement. Committee
members and attendees at Public engagement Events reported that public
safety was compromised by streetlight outages and encouraged
trespassing and looting.
Solar-powered street lights that use stored energy from the sun instead of
electricity can provide lighting in critical locations during power outages
and help retain vital street lighting post-storm that could otherwise be
lost.
The Solar-Powered Street Lights project involves funding light-emitting
diode (LED) solar-powered lights to be located along Beech Streets, Ocean
and Bay Boulevards, and other side streets throughout the Community.
Beech Street and Ocean and Bay Boulevards comprise the major access
route within the Community. These roads provide direct access to the
Atlantic Beach Bridge and the City of Long Beach and are essential
components of the evacuation network.
Cost Estimate

Timeline

$1,300,000

6 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 66

Solar-Powered Street Lights

Short description: Provide light-emitting diode (LED) street lighting that is
solar-powered to prevent loss of lighting in the event of power.
Project cost: $1,300,000. The cost estimate assumes installation of 180
units across the Community.

Benefit or Co-Benefits to Be Derived from the Project
Health and social: Improved street lighting to the main thoroughfare that
leads to the county-designated emergency evacuation route can enhance
safety and accessibility to essential health and social services during and
after acute hazard events, including storms and floods. This project would
benefit all Community residents, including individuals with access and
functional needs for whom access to social or emergency services may be of
critical importance.
Economic: Solar-powered lighting would reduce local government utility
costs and would also likely reduce local government expenditures by
providing emergency lighting during power outages, resulting in a net
decrease in costs potentially incurred by the Community as a result of
reduced potential accidents from improved safety.

project is therefore consistent with Nassau County’s goal as a signer of the
Cool Counties Climate Stabilization Declaration to reduce emissions by 80%
by 2050.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated
with the Project
Installation of solar-powered street lights would improve pedestrian and
motorist safety, especially during power outages and other acute events,
resulting in a reduction of risk to two critical assets—a sewer substation and
the Water Reclamation Treatment Plant—and result in a cumulative risk
reduction to the Community as a whole. Solar-powered lighting during power
outages would also improve residents’ safety and security during stressful
post-storm periods by ensuring improved visibility on roadways and would
help residents feel more safe and secure.

Assets: Health and social services, infrastructure
Population:4,000+ (entire Community)

Environmental: Solar street lighting reduces demand on power generation
and transmission networks while also limiting greenhouse gas emissions. The

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 Beech Street



Obtain building permits



2 Park Street



Coordinate with applicable utility companies

Complete Streets/Drainage Improvements
along Beech Street



Microgrid Power System

3 Ocean and Bay Boulevards

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 67

Solar-Powered Street Lights

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
Solar-powered street lights have an extended useful life with sustained
benefits before, during, and after potential storm events. Upfront purchase
and installation costs are higher, and more street lights are needed to
provide standardized luminosity. However, long-term maintenance costs
associated with street lighting are minimized for solar-powered street lighting
due to the life of LED lamps. Given the safety risks associated with prolonged
streetlight outage and the Committee’s strong desire for continuous lighting,
the benefits of this project would justify the expenditures.

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: Regulatory requirements that will
need to be addressed are the applicable Village of Atlantic Beach, Town of
Hempstead, and Nassau County building permit reviews. Coordination with
local utility companies would be required to address potential jurisdictional
and operational issues.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The roads within the project
area are under the jurisdiction of Nassau County, the Town of Hempstead,
and the Village of Atlantic Beach. Coordination with local utility companies
would be required to address potential jurisdictional and operational issues.

General time frame for implementing actions: This project should take
approximately six months to complete.

LED street lights
Source: Creative Commons Flickr

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

LED street lights lamp housing
Source: Creative Commons Flick

Page 68

Village of Atlantic Beach
Community Assistance Center

VAB

Retrofit the Tennis Center to Be Used as a Community
Assistance Center in the Village of Atlantic Beach
Project description: Throughout the planning process, the Village of
Atlantic Beach staff and Committee members identified a strong need for
additional public space for post-disaster response and outreach services.
The Atlantic Beach Village Hall (Village Hall) avoided major flooding
damage because of extensive sandbagging before the storm. The building
was stretched beyond capacity after the storm, however, when multiple
agencies used the building as a staging center. Committee members
identified the Tennis Center, which is located across the street from
Village Hall, as an underused public facility with the capacity to serve as a
Community Assistance Center following disasters.
Personnel from the Village Department of Public Works stated that
improvements to the Tennis Center physical plant would also include
stormwater detention upgrades that would significantly improve the ability
of the local area to absorb stormwater and mitigate nuisance flooding
during regular storm events. According to Village personnel, local demand
for tennis facilities could be accommodated comfortably, even if six of the
13 courts were removed. The Village’s Public Works Department has
proposed stormwater and drainage improvements that would be
implemented if some of the courts were removed. Removal of the courts
would not compromise public recreational opportunities and would offer
an opportunity to upgrade local infrastructure in a manner consistent with
the Village’s recent improvements to drainage systems.
Cost Estimate

Timeline

$2,000,000

6 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 69

Village of Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center

The Center suffered relatively superficial building damage during Sandy. High
winds stripped siding from the building and broke windows in the building’s
skylight system. In large measure, though, the building’s vulnerability is a
function of its susceptibility to sustained power outages.

Benefit or Co-Benefits to Be Derived from the Project

The Village of Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center project would
retrofit the existing Village-owned Tennis Center building to create a
Community Assistance Center for post-emergency assistance. Building
upgrades would include installing solar panels and a backup generator to
allow the Center to function during local power outages. The project would
also remove six of the 13 tennis courts and install an underground drainage
detention type structure for stormwater runoff. Improvements would
incorporate active and passive recreational elements including a playground,
basketball courts, tables, benches, space for entertainment, landscaping, and
walkways with activity stations over the removed tennis courts.

Health and Social: This project would promote more efficient
dissemination of vital services and information in the aftermath of storm and
other critical events. More emergency response personnel would be able to
use Village facilities more effectively to provide supplies, relevant
information, and other critical services to Community residents. Project
benefits would be most keenly felt by socially vulnerable populations,
including the elderly and those with access and functional needs, whose
reliance on accessible public services and information in post-hazard
situations is greatest. Superstorm Sandy caused greater than 50% damage
to nearly 700 housing units the Community, including 174 within the Village
itself. In addition, 22% of FEMA registrants in the Community reported
household incomes of less than $30,000. Displaced and low-income residents
are among the populations that would benefit from this project.

Short description: Retrofit the Tennis Center in the Village of Atlantic
Beach to be used as a Community Assistance Center, including
improvements to drainage and the incorporation of active and passive
recreational elements.

As a secondary benefit, the project would provide more general-purpose
open and recreational space for public use. The loss of tennis courts would
be mitigated by the proposed installation of new active and passive
recreational infrastructure.

Project cost: $2,000,000. This estimate provides for structural and
architectural modifications to be implemented over 50% of the existing
building. It also includes incorporation of stormwater detention facilities
under the tennis court.

Assets: Health and social services, infrastructure
Population: 1,900 (Village of Atlantic Beach)

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 Atlantic Beach Tennis Center





Village Hall



Microgrid power systems



Create storm floodwater catch basins

Issue Request for Proposal

Economic: The Village of Atlantic Beach currently lacks a designated
Community Assistance Center. Providing emergency and recovery services
after storm events can reduce governmental costs by centralizing emergency

efforts. Indirectly, more efficient delivery of services and information in a
post-disaster setting can be useful in restoring and maintaining local resident
confidence and a desire to remain in the community.

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 70

Village of Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center

Environmental: This project would increase the absorptive capacity of
approximately 1 acre area north of the Tennis Center building. Reduction of
impermeable surfaces and installation of improved drainage infrastructure
would reduce stormwater runoff and reduce the frequency and severity of
nuisance flooding in the immediate area.
Establishment of the Community Assistance Center would improve the
efficiency of cleanup operations related to flooding and associated
contamination. The center would also disseminate information to help
prevent secondary impacts from related events such as fires.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated
with the Project

operations coordination is a vital need; the anticipated expenditure of
$2,000,000 to implement this project is justified. The project would provide a
broad range of social and environmental benefits.
General time frame for implementing actions: This project should take
approximately six months to complete.
Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: No permits are required for Villageowned property.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The project is located in the
Village of Atlantic Beach in Nassau County.

This project would result in the reduction of risk through providing central
Community Assistance Center that can offer information, supplies, and other
services to assist residents and businesses during storm events. The
stormwater drainage improvements would reduce the risk of flooding to the
Community. The entire Village of Atlantic Beach would be served.

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
The project’s useful life is tied to the useful life of the Tennis Center building.
Additional maintenance would be required to ensure the operation and
efficiency of new drainage and stormwater attenuation infrastructure.
Maintenance costs would be relatively minimal. Any necessary maintenance
and upkeep work could be performed by the Department of Public Works.
In light of these cost considerations and given strong public input that
additional public space for community assistance and post-disaster

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Example of rooftop solar panels
Source: Creative Commons Flickr

Page 71

Village of Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center

Tennis Center, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: VAB Building Plans Examiner

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Example of a backup generator
Source: Creative Commons Flickr

Page 72

East Atlantic Beach Community
Assistance Center Feasibility Study

ABE EAB

Create a Community Assistance Center
in East Atlantic Beach
Project description: The Committee was concerned about a lack of
existing formal space in East Atlantic Beach and Atlantic Beach Estates for
public gathering and community assistance coordination in post-disaster
situations. Committee members reported that after Sandy, residents in
these areas lacked access to information and necessary supplies. Because
the Community is in the floodplain and because most of the land in East
Atlantic Beach is privately owned and developed, there are a limited
number of locations where a Community Assistance Center could be
developed. Every potential location has advantages and disadvantages.
The East Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center Feasibility Study
project would consist of a feasibility study to assess potential locations for
a Community Assistance Center in East Atlantic Beach, including the Troy
Beach House and a park location on Scott Drive. The feasibility study
would consider the condition of existing facilities and potential regulatory
and structural issues associated with conversion of potential sites for
eventual use as a Community Assistance Center.
Short description: Evaluate and identify a location for a Community
Assistance Center in East Atlantic Beach for Atlantic Beach Estates and
East Atlantic Beach.
Project cost: $50,000

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$50,000

6 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 73

East Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center Feasibility Study

Benefit or Co-benefits to be Derived from the Project
Health and Social: As with the proposed Village Community Assistance
Center, this project would promote increased and more efficient
dissemination of vital services and information in the aftermath of a storm
and other acute events. Project benefits would be most keenly felt by socially
vulnerable populations, including the elderly and those with access and
functional needs whose reliance on accessible public services and
information in post-hazard situations is greatest. Sandy caused more than
50% damage to nearly 700 housing units in the Community, including 510 in
East Atlantic Beach. In addition, 23% of FEMA registrants in East Atlantic
Beach reported household incomes of less than $30,000. Displaced and
moderate to low income residents are among the populations that would
benefit from the project.

Environmental: Establishment of the Community Assistance Center would
improve the efficiency of cleanup operations related to flooding and
associated contamination. The center would also disseminate information to
help prevent secondary impacts from disaster events such as building fires.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated
with the Project
This project would result in the reduction of risk by providing an assessment
of a Community Assistance Center that could offer information, supplies, and
other services to assist residences and businesses during storm events.

Economic: East Atlantic Beach does not currently have a designated
Community Assistance Center.

Assets: Health and social services, infrastructure
Population: 2,000 (East Atlantic Beach)

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 East Atlantic Beach





Emergency Medical Services



Microgrid Power System

Issue Request for Proposal

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 74

East Atlantic Beach Community Assistance Center Feasibility Study

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
The minimal cost associated with a study is justifiable given observed issues
with post-disaster service coordination and information dissemination
following Superstorm Sandy. The feasibility study would provide valuable
information about various sites’ potential to serve as a Community Assistance
Center and would likely result in findings applicable to more generalized
emergency preparedness and response planning in the Community.
General time frame for implementing actions: This project would take
approximately six months to complete from inception.
Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: The feasibility study would
determine the feasibility of the Community Assistance Center. Coordination
with the Town of Hempstead is needed.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The project is located in East
Atlantic Beach, under the jurisdiction of the Town of Hempstead in Nassau
County.

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Elevated Community Assistance Center
Source: FEMA

Page 75

Install Backflow Preventers

VAB ABE EAB

Install Backflow Preventers and Storm Drain Covers
to Mitigate Flooding and Prevent Drain Blockage
Project description: According to the U.S. Geological Survey tide
mapping information, water levels reached three feet above ground level
along Ocean Boulevard and six inches above ground level as far inland as
Beech Street in East Atlantic Beach during Superstorm Sandy. During
events like Sandy that cause unusually high tides, stormwater outfalls that
typically drain into Reynolds Channel tend to backflow with seawater. The
backflow exacerbates flooding and associated damage. Even more
frequent heavy rain events can cause localized flooding whose effects are
magnified by drainage issues.
Based on the results of its 2009 Coastal Protection Study,52 the adjacent
City of Long Beach has initiated a program of installing backflow
preventers on outfalls and other flood mitigation measures. In addition to
the protection that these devices provide against water damage, effective
backflow prevention systems can reduce risks to public health posed by
flooding of building interiors. These risks include cross contamination from
comingled sewage or other pollutants.
Because the Community shares topographical characteristics with Long
Beach and because the Community is equally susceptible to flooding, a
similar program to install backflow prevention devices is proposed for the
Community. The project would install backflow preventers in Atlantic
Beach Estates and East Atlantic Beach on storm sewer outlets. Steel storm
drain covers would also be procured and installed throughout the entire
Community to prevent debris from entering drains prior to storm events.
Cost Estimate

Timeline

$360,000

Six months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 76

Install Backflow Preventers

Short description: Install backflow preventers and storm drain covers
throughout the Community to mitigate flooding and prevent debris from
entering drains.

savings of approximately $8,500. Equally as important, a reduction of flood
damage associated with this project would limit residential displacement
following storm and flooding events.

Project cost: $360,000. This figure assumes installation of 10 upland outfall
chambers in East Atlantic Beach Atlantic Beach Estates and installation of
steel storm drain covers throughout the Community, including in the Village
of Atlantic Beach.

Regionally, the project would help support the goals in the April 2013 CGLI
Plan53 Adaptation to Climate Change, where “inland, more frequent and
intense rainfall events could also cause travel disruptions due to flooded
intersections, roadways and rail lines.” This project would help reduce these
potential impacts. This project is also a response to the Strategic Economic
Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties54 Goal 4 under the
“Water” category to “control flooding and surface water pollution from
stormwater runoff.”

Benefit or Co-benefits to Be Derived from the Project
Health and Social: As noted in the project description above, the project
would reduce flooding associated with seawater backflow. To the extent that
homes are also protected from storm surge flood damage, the project would
provide additional benefit to homeowners and other residents. Based on the
income profile of FEMA registrants in the Community following Sandy,
approximately 25% of the project’s beneficiaries would be from households
with an annual income of less than $30,000.

Environmental: During Superstorm Sandy, debris that entered and blocked
drains caused severe flooding throughout the Community. This project would
reduce contaminated stormwater runoff and flooding from impermeable
surfaces and residential structures flowing into Reynolds Channel.

Economic: According to FEMA registrations, Superstorm Sandy caused more
than $8 million of damage to residences in the Village of Atlantic Beach and
East Atlantic Beach. Each housing unit that is spared significant damage in
future severe storm events by this project would represent a direct cost

Assets: Infrastructure
Population:4,000+ (entire Community)

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 Community-wide



Obtain applicable permits



Harden Water Reclamation Plant



Review compliance with the New York State
Department of State and the New York
Department of Environmental Conservation



Complete Streets/Drainage Improvements
along Beech Street

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 77

Install Backflow Preventers

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated
with the Project
This project would reduce risk to approximately 20 assets throughout the
Community by minimizing interference with existing stormwater systems and
limiting the potential for the stormwater conveyance system to be clogged
by sand or other debris. Further spatial analysis is required to finalize the list
of locations most in need of improvement. When the analysis is complete,
more precise quantification of the reduction of risk to assets would be
possible.
Floodwater and stormwater backflow into buildings creates health hazards
for building occupants. Residents would benefit from reduced exposure to
these hazards and from reduced flooding risk associated with backflow.

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
The project useful life would be limited to the effective life of backflow
prevention devices, which is projected to be 30 years. Maintenance and
replacement of individual components, as needed, would be required to keep
backflow prevention systems operating. The useful life can be extended
indefinitely through maintenance and ongoing replacement of individual
valves and devices. If the project is not implemented, the Community would
remain vulnerable to backflow inundation during and after acute storm and
flooding events. Because the project would confer significant benefits to the
Community and reduce risk to a large number of physical assets, the
Committee supports the anticipated expenditure of $360,000 to install
backflow prevention devices.

Backflow Preventer at Ohio Avenue, City of Long Beach
Source: Building Plans Examiner

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: Regulatory requirements are the
applicable Town of Hempstead and Nassau County building permits and the
New York State Department of Health Guidelines for Designing Backflow
Prevention Assembly Installations and Cross-Connection Control Program.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The project services the
Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach.
Jurisdiction over the project includes the Village of Atlantic Beach and the
Town of Hempstead, both in Nassau County.

General time frame for implementing actions: This project would take
approximately six months to complete.

Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page 78

Assess Feasibility and Economic
Impact of Perimeter Dune System

VAB ABE EAB

Conduct a Study to Determine the Feasibility
of a Dune Perimeter System
Project description: During the 1990s, the Community opted out of the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers feasibility studies related to potential dune
construction and flood mitigation, citing unwillingness to compromise
resident-only beach access. The Village of Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic
Beach also both determined at that time that the economic cost associated
with limiting beach views was too great to compensate for the risk
reduction benefits associated with dune construction. In particular, owners
of the Community’s beach clubs, which are the primary Community
economic assets, expressed concern that dune construction would
undermine the viability of their business model.
The widespread damage associated with Superstorm Sandy prompted the
Committee to reexamine the earlier positions. Although Public
Engagement Event attendees joined the Committee in expressing that
resident-only beach access must not be compromised, the Community
stated a desire to re-examine the issue of dune construction.
The Assess Feasibility and Economic Impact of Perimeter Dune System
project entails a feasibility study to evaluate the impacts of a perimeter
dune system on the economic viability of the oceanfront beach clubs.
More specifically, the study would examine the economic and
infrastructural impacts of a development scenario that includes the
re-establishment of a dune system and envisions the gradual closure of
beach clubs and their replacement with single-family homes.

The technical feasibility and economic impact study would consider the
economic and environmental impacts of the perimeter dune system. The study
would also consider impacts on traffic patterns and demand for public
infrastructure and utilities. Although the technical feasibility of new dune
construction is generally understood, this study could play a significant role in
inspiring a long-range planning and development framework better oriented to
the long-term sustainability and prosperity of the Community.

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$500,000

6 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 79

Assess Feasibility and Economic Impact of Perimeter Dune System

Short description: Study the cost-effectiveness and technical feasibility of
a dune perimeter system on beach clubs including benefits and risks.

barrier to storm surge, reducing potential flooding and overflow that could
result in contamination from buildings and stormwater runoff.

Project Cost $500,000

In the nearer term, the study would describe the environmental impacts
associated with the redevelopment scenario described here.

Benefit or Co-Benefits to be Derived from the Project
Economic: A primary result of the study would be quantification of
economic impacts of a dune system on oceanfront the beach club. The study
would calculate the direct benefits and costs in the form of anticipated
property tax receipts. The study would also examine the impacts on demand
for services and the direct and indirect impacts of privately financed dune
construction to individual beach clubs whose owners may choose to pursue
this option in lieu of selling their property for residential redevelopment.
Regionally, a dune perimeter system addresses a key strategy in the 2013
Long Island Strategic Economic Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk
Counties55 “to harden our infrastructure, businesses and homes against the
next major storm.
Environmental: A perimeter dune system would have obvious
environmental benefits, including protection of habitat and open space and
the potential to minimize harm to the piping plover and important or
protected vegetation. The perimeter dune system would also serve as a

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated
with the Project
The study itself would not reduce risk to physical assets or to the population.
An eventual perimeter dune system would, however, substantially reduce
risk during future storm events, particularly severe storm surges. All
Community assets would experience reduction in vulnerability and risk scores
and especially the assets on the oceanfront of the Barrier Island that are
exposed to storm surge and wave action. Residential structures and key
facilities including the Tennis Center and the Troy Beach House in East
Atlantic Beach would be among the primary beneficiaries of a perimeter dune
system.

Assets: Economic development, infrastructure, natural and cultural resources
Population: 4,000+ (entire Community)

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 Beach Clubs



Begin consultation with the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers





Form a committee to initiate the study

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

None

Page 80

Assess Feasibility and Economic Impact of Perimeter Dune System

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
The study would address and provide answers to many planning questions
raised by the Committee and members of the public during the planning
process. The project expenditure of $500,000 is justifiable in this light,
particularly if it identifies viable means of protecting community character
and resident-only beach access while moving toward completion of a barrier
island-wide perimeter dune system. The project expenditure is particularly
worthwhile in view of the benefits that neighboring communities would
derive from dune construction in Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.

General time frame for implementing actions: A feasibility and
economic impact study of this magnitude would take approximately six
months to complete.
Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: No permits are required for a
feasibility study. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers would be consulted.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The project services the
Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach.
Jurisdiction over the project includes the Village of Atlantic Beach and the
Town of Hempstead, both in Nassau County.

Coastal dune stabilized by beachgrass
Source: Creative Commons Flickr

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Dune grass plantings along the oceanfront of the Community
Source: Kate Murray, Town of Hempstead Supervisor

Page 81

Atlantic Beach Village Hall

VAB

Modify Atlantic Beach Village Hall for Continuity
of Operations during and after Storm Events
Project description: Superstorm Sandy and the response operations
that followed the storm placed considerable strain on Atlantic Beach
Village Hall. As described above, the building was fortunate to avoid major
damage thanks to extensive sandbagging by the Department of Public
Works personnel. Such labor-intensive protection methods are an
inefficient means of protecting vital records and ensuring continuity of
Village operations after future disasters. From the outset of the planning
process, the Committee identified durable protection of Village Hall as a
key infrastructure need. The Committee’s strategy to identify and
implement site-specific upgrades to protect key infrastructure was drafted
with Village Hall in mind. Following the storm, Village staff identified
targeted improvements that could be made to the Village Hall building to
safeguard it against future storms and disaster events.
The project entails structural upgrades and modifications to Village Hall to
maintain continuity of operations and to protect vital records during and
after major storms. These improvements include installation of solar
panels, communication systems, and a generator.
Short description: Provide upgrades and protection to Atlantic Beach
Village Hall to maintain continuity of operations and protect vital records
during and after storm events.
Cost Estimate

Timeline

$400,000

3 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 82

Atlantic Beach Village Hall

Project cost: $400,000

Benefit or Co-Benefits to Be Derived from the Project
Health and Social: Hardening Village Hall would provide continuity of
government operations during and after acute hazard events. All Village
residents would benefit from the availability of essential services and
provisions and from the building’s reinforced capacity to serve as a hub for
response operations and information diffusion. Project beneficiaries include
individuals with disabilities, senior citizens, and individuals with low or
moderate income.
Economic: Hardening this key piece of infrastructure would protect
government operations and allow the Village to recover more swiftly from
storm events. By limiting time spent in re-establishing government functions,
disaster recovery efforts can be directed more efficiently toward the
community immediately after a storm event.
Environmental: Hardening Village Hall could reduce contamination from
potential building flooding and minimize associated overflow of stormwater
runoff.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated with the
Project
This project would result in a reduction of risk to one critical asset, Village
Hall. Village Hall’s vulnerability would decrease considerably as a result of
implementation of redundant power systems and elevation of vital records.

The project would indirectly reduce risk to all Village assets by providing
continuity of government services during and after storm events.

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
The project’s useful life matches the useful life of the building structure.
Associated maintenance costs would be minimal and would limit the need for
urgent or major repair or remediation work following disasters.
The project expenditure of $400,000 is justified given that the project would
allow the Village to comply more faithfully with the requirements of New
York State records management regulations. The project would also ensure
more efficient delivery of services in the aftermath of disasters. The greater
efficiency of response and recovery options would more than repay the
upfront costs associated with this project.
General time frame for implementing actions: This project should be
implementable in approximately three months from inception.
Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: No permits are required for Village
projects on Village property.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The project is located in the
Village of Atlantic Beach in Nassau County.

Assets: Infrastructure, health and social services
Population:1,900 (Village of Atlantic Beach)

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 Village Hall





Microgrid Power System



Village of Atlantic Beach Community
Assistance Center

Obtain applicable permits

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 83

Atlantic Beach Village Hall

Village Hall, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: VAB Building Plans Examiner

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Rooftop solar panels
Source: Creative Commons Flick

Page 84

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Featured Projects
Featured Projects are innovative projects in which an initial study or discrete
first phase of a project is proposed for CDBG-DR or other identified funding
or regulatory reforms or other programs that do not involve capital
expenditures. The Committee developed and selected six Featured Projects
based on input from residents during multiple Public Engagement Events and
comments received through the NYRCR Program website. The Featured
Projects are presented as follows:


Microgrid power system



Cell phone tower resiliency



Underground utilities feasibility study



Stormwater system improvements



Emergency preparedness guidebook



Identification of vulnerable and special-needs populations

Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles

The project criteria symbols are categorized under the following recovery
support functions:

Page 85

Microgrid Power System

VAB ABE EAB

Study and Implement a Power Microgrid System
Project description: Following Superstorm Sandy, the Community was
left without power for more than a week, creating a dangerous situation in
the Community and further delaying the ability of residents, business
owners, and employees to safely return to the Community.
The Microgrid Power System project consists of a feasibility study, design
and implementation of a micro grid power system that would provide
backup energy service at key community assets. A microgrid utilizes
power generation from a localized and smaller electricity grid to maintain
power if the utility grid becomes de-energized in a storm event. Natural
gas and hydrogen fuel cells would be used to power key Community
assets with local generators.
The project would make the Community more energy independent and
self-sustaining during emergencies. The project would provide alternative
power sources, including hydrogen fuel cell units at key community assets,
which may include two rescue stations, Atlantic Beach Village Hall, the
wastewater treatment plant, a proposed Community Assistance Center at
the Atlantic Beach Tennis Club in the Village of Atlantic Beach, and a
proposed Community Assistance Center in East Atlantic Beach. It was
assumed that each asset would have an average demand of 40 to 80K at
anticipated peak load and that the standard fuel cell would be a maximum
size of 400kw. The location of the fuel cell and generators would be
determined during the study and design phases of the project.

Microgrid installation
Source: Creative Commons Flickr

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$19,215,000

TBD

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 86

Microgrid Power System

Short description: Conduct a feasibility study and implement a power
microgrid system throughout the Community.
Project cost: $19,215,000

Benefit or Co-benefits to Be Derived from the Project
Health and Social: The Community as a whole, including individuals with
disabilities, senior citizens, and individuals considered low/moderate income,
would benefit from a backup power source during emergencies. The
microgrid would allow for greater security in providing continuity of health
and social services. Maintaining power to assets the provide emergency
services, such as the Atlantic Beach Rescue, Rescue Station 2, and Village of
Atlantic Beach Hall would help ensure continuity of operation to these
essential services during emergencies, which would reduce risk to all
populations in the community. When backup power is already provided to
facilities, this project would add an additional layer of redundancy.
Economic: Power outages during Superstorm Sandy were severe; by
investing in a more reliable power grid, the existing 80 businesses in the
Community may be able to return to normal operations more quickly, which
would reduce lost productivity and revenue from having a business closed.
Investments to the Community’s power grid would establish its commitment
to improving infrastructure and emergency preparedness. Potential jobs
could be created through maintenance and construction of a microgrid power
system and the provision of backup power sources could affect the potential
of businesses and residents to locate to or remain in the Community as a
result of increased public facilities.

Environmental: In the long term, a sustainable power source such as a
microgrid system could have a positive impact on the power and
infrastructure grid, including minimizing energy costs and pollution. A
microgrid power system would reduce the carbon footprint for the
Community.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated with the
Project
This project would result in a reduction to risk for the entire Community,
which includes direct risk reductions to six critical assets and a cumulative
risk reduction to the Community, which includes 1,900 homes and 80
businesses. Maintaining power supply to the wastewater treatment plant
would help ensure continuity of operation of these services to the entire
community during an emergency and reduce the potential for discharge of
raw or partially treated sewage or other operational failure during hazard
events. These improvements would reduce the risk of contamination from
wastewater flowing into floodwaters or Reynolds Channel.

Assets: Atlantic Beach Rescue, Rescue Station 2, Atlantic Beach Tennis
Center, Village of Atlantic Beach Hall, and Wastewater Treatment Plant
Population: 4,000+ (entire Community)

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 Community-wide



Obtain applicable building and zoning permits.



Solar-Powered Street Lights



Identify stakeholders



Underground Utilities Feasibility Study

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 87

Cell Phone Tower Resiliency

VAB ABE EAB

Provide Cell Phone Tower Resiliency
Project description: Following Superstorm Sandy, the Community was
left without reliable cell service for over two weeks. The compromised
communication system hampered the ability of residents, business
owners, and employees to return safely to the Community. The Cell Phone
Tower Resiliency project proposes to provide additional cell phone towers
that could be deployed during emergency situations to supplement the
existing cellular networks that serve the community and are either
damaged by a storm event or overwhelmed by an increase in demand
after an emergency. The project would improve communication during
emergencies through cell phone tower resiliency.
Short description: Improve cell phone tower resiliency during
emergencies.
Project cost: $1,600,000

Mobile cell phone tower (Sprint)
Source: Creative Commons Flickr

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$1,600,000

12 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 88

Cell Phone Tower Resiliency

Benefit or Co-Benefits to Be Derived from the Project
Health and Social: After Superstorm Sandy, there was unreliable or no cell
service available in the Community as a result of downed power systems and
cell phone towers. This created serious problems for individuals who were
isolated in their homes and needed to reach authorities, hindered
communication between family members, and made it difficult for residents
to obtain assistance of any kind.
This project would improve communications and allow residents to use
mobile devices to contact essential health and social services such as medical
needs, fire and rescue, and other facilities during emergencies.
Economic: Power outages during Superstorm Sandy were severe and the
community experienced isolation due to a lack of communication caused by
downed power and cell phone towers. The existing 80 businesses in the
Community would benefit by being able to return to normal operations more
quickly with the availability a reliable communication system. This would
reduce lost revenue from having a business closed. Directly, jobs could be
created through maintenance and construction of a cell phone tower
resiliency project. Indirectly, improving infrastructure can help retain
businesses as a result of infrastructure improvements. Long-term costs
associated with bolstering public facilities services would be minimal because
only maintenance would be required.
Regionally, the project addresses a key strategy in the 2013 Long Island

Strategic Economic Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties56 “to
harden our infrastructure, businesses and homes against the next major
storm.”

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated
with the Project
This project would result in a reduction to risk for the entire Community,
which includes 40 assets, 1,900 homes, and 80 businesses by providing
critical communication needs during outages to all residents and businesses,
improving the continuity of operations to emergency services, and helping to
provide access to resources.

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
Cell phone tower resiliency would have a long useful life with sustained
benefits before, during, and after events that may disrupt use and operation
of existing cell phone towers. Upfront costs are high but the overall
opportunity cost outweighs this initial investment.
General time frame for implementing actions: This project should be
implementable within approximately 12 months from inception.
Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: Regulatory requirements that would
need to be addressed are the applicable Village of Atlantic Beach, the Town
of Hempstead, and Nassau County zoning and building permits. The Federal
Communications Commission regulates cell towers, and requires all cell
towers to have a backup power source.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The project services the
Community and the Town of Hempstead in Nassau County. Jurisdiction over
the project includes the Village of Atlantic Beach and the Town of
Hempstead, and local utility companies.
Assets: Economic development, health and social services, and infrastructure
Population: 4,000+ (entire Community)

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 Community-wide





Obtain building and zoning permits and
compliance with FCC regulatory requirements

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

None

Page 89

Underground Utilities Feasibility Study

ABE EAB

Determine the Potential for Underground Utilities
Project description: Following Superstorm Sandy, the Community was
left without power for over a week. The lack of power created a
dangerous situation and delayed the ability of residents, business owners,
and employees to safely return to the Community. It also delayed clean
up and repair measures in the Community.
The Underground Utilities Feasibility Study project consists of a feasibility
study to determine the potential for underground utilities in areas,
specifically East Atlantic Beach.
Short description: Conduct a feasibility study to determine the potential
for underground utilities in areas, specifically East Atlantic Beach, that are
at risk of flooding.
Project cost: $100,000

Underground utilities installation
Source: Creative Commons Flickr

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$100,000

6 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 90

Underground Utilities Feasibility Study

Benefit or Co-Benefits to Be Derived from the Project
Health and social: This project would reduce live-wire contact injuries and
potentially improve pedestrian mobility by reducing the number of power
poles and other structures within the public right-of-way.
In addition, maintaining power to assets that provide emergency services
would help ensure continuity of operation to essential services during
emergencies, which would reduce risk to all populations in the community.
Economic: Placing utilities underground can reduce power outages, downed
power lines, and failed utilities that result from flooding. Reducing
management and cleanup efforts associated with downed power lines would
save the utility companies money from repairs and lost revenue during
outages that result in a reduction of day-to-day lost electrical sales.
If the study determines the project is feasible, and it is implemented, jobs
can be provided during construction and through future maintenance.
Regionally, The CGLI Plan57 from April 2013 supports improvements in flood
prevention; green infrastructure associated with the project would contribute
to this broader regional plan as described in the CGLI.
Environmental: This project would remove the need for the power
company to trim trees near power lines, which would increase the tree
canopy in East Atlantic Beach. In addition, this project can reduce
infrastructure damage and future environmental indirect impacts from
replacement. Maintaining power supply to the sewer substations and the
wastewater treatment plant would help ensure continuity of operation of
these services to the entire Community during an emergency and reduce the
potential for discharge of raw or partially treated sewage or other
operational failure during hazard events. These improvements would reduce

the risk of contamination from wastewater flowing into floodwaters or
Reynolds Channel.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated
with the Project
This project would result in a reduction of risk to two assets located in East
Atlantic Beach—a commercial property and beach club. Most importantly,
approximately 900 homes would directly benefit from the improved
infrastructure and the associated lower risk of long-term power outages. The
cumulative risk reduction would help reduce impacts to infrastructure and
power outages during flood instances.

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
Underground utilities would have a long useful life with sustained benefits
before, during, and after potential storm events by increasing the ability of
residents and businesses to maintain normal operations or return to normal
operations more quickly after a storm due to a more reliable power supply
that would be less likely to be damaged and offline from major storm events.
In addition, underground utilities typically have lower storm restoration
costs.58 Upfront costs are high but the overall opportunity cost outweighs
this initial investment. Residents in East Atlantic Beach would benefit from
this project.
Assets: Blue Point and Town of Hempstead Beach House
Population: 2,000 (approximately)

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 East Atlantic Beach





Begin scoping the feasibility study

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Microgrid Power System

Page 91

Underground Utilities Feasibility Study

General time frame for implementing actions: This project should take
approximately six months to complete.

Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The Town of Hempstead, in
Nassau County.

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: No permits are required for a
feasibility study.

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 92

Stormwater System Improvements

VAB ABE EAB

Adapt Existing Open Spaces
for Floodwater Catch Basins
Project description: Superstorm Sandy caused significant flooding in
the Community. The purpose of the Stormwater System Improvements
project is to reduce floodwater levels in the community during future
storm events. Stormwater catch basins can reduce flooding by increasing
capacity and capturing the stormwater and retaining it until it infiltrates
the soil or is released slowly over time. The methods decrease the
likelihood of flooding.
This project would evaluate the adaption of existing open spaces and
parks for storm floodwater catch basins.
Short description: Study adaption of existing open spaces for
floodwater catch basins.
Project cost: $10,000

Stormwater catch basin
Source: Creative Commons Flickr

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$10,000

6 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 93

Stormwater System Improvements

Benefit or Co-Benefits to Be Derived from the Project
Health and social: If implemented, the project would reduce or potentially
prevent flooding for assets, residents, and businesses located in flood-prone
areas. Health and social service facilities would be more accessible due to a
reduction of flooding in the community that includes flooding impacts to
homes, health and social facilities, and the roadways that are used to access
these points of interest during and after flooding events as a result of the
project.
Economic: Creating floodwater catch basins would help prevent stormwater
point source discharges into coastal water and reduce flood potential of vital
community economic assets. Investing in preventative measures for flooding
and stormwater management would benefit fisherman, the beach clubs, and
other businesses that depend on the water and natural ecosystem.
Regionally, The CGLI Plan from April 2013 recommends transportation
strategies related to improved flood prevention, green infrastructure
associated with the project would contribute to this broader regional plan as
described in the CGLI. 59

Channel. Green infrastructure would allow for a reduction of impermeable
surfaces, increasing natural groundwater recharge.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated
with the Project
This project would result in a reduction of risk to assets that are located in
areas prone to flooding. In particular, during Superstorm Sandy, floodwaters
either damaged or threatened to damage the wastewater treatment plant,
sewer substations, the Village of Atlantic Beach Hall, and other economic
development, health and social services, and infrastructure assets. In
addition, floodwaters affected 961 residences. The cumulative risk reduction
would help reduce the impacts to flooding through adapting existing open
spaces and parks as significant storm floodwater catch basins.

Assets: Economic development, health and social services, infrastructure
Population: 4,000+ (entire Community)

Environmental: This project would provide improved coastal water quality
and reduce point-source discharges, particularly runoff into nearby Reynolds
Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 Community-wide



Hire a consulting firm to begin feasibility study





Identify existing open spaces or parks for
potential floodwater catch basins

Complete Streets/Drainage Improvements
along Beech Street



Install Backflow Preventers



Assess Feasibility and Economic Impact of
Perimeter Dune System

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 94

Stormwater System Improvements

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
Bolstering open space to include stormwater catch basins would provide a
long useful life and provide sustained benefits before, during, and after
potential flooding events. Minimal maintenance costs are associated with
stormwater catch basins but include periodic cleaning. No known negative
externalities or opportunity costs.

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: No permits are required for a
feasibility study.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The project services the
Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach.
Jurisdiction over the project includes the Village of Atlantic Beach and the
Town of Hempstead, both in Nassau County.

General time frame for implementing actions: This project would be
implementable within six months.

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 95

Emergency Preparedness Guidebook

VAB ABE EAB

Draft and Disseminate an Emergency
Preparedness Guidebook
Project description: During preparations for Superstorm Sandy and
immediately following, it became apparent that many residents and
businesses were not properly prepared for an emergency. Many residents
did not evacuate prior to Superstorm Sandy.
The Emergency Preparedness Guidebook project would help residents and
businesses gather resources such as tools, supplies, and medications in a
central location and develop plans for communication and evacuation. This
project should be coordinated with the Town of Hempstead and Nassau
County to draft and disseminate an emergency preparedness guidebook to
all residents.
Short description: Draft and disseminate an emergency preparedness
guidebook in coordination with Nassau County, Town of Hempstead, and
the City of Long Beach for distribution to all residents.
Project cost: $100,000

Nassau County, NY hazard mitigation plan
Source: Nassau County, NY

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$100,000

6 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 96

Emergency Preparedness Guidebook

Benefit or Co-Benefits to Be Derived from the Project
Health and social: This project would provide information on vital services
during and after storm events to all residents but may be most relevant to
vulnerable populations with special needs, mobility limitation, and financial
restraints that may make evacuations less plausible. Given this, the project
would educate and inform those in need of shelters and other emergencyrelated services that may be available to them.
Economic: This project would help businesses plan and be prepared to
handle disasters and other emergencies. Through planning for these events,
businesses would likely be able to reduce the number of days they are closed
and may reduce their losses due to disaster situations.
Environmental: Not applicable.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk associated with the
Project
This project would result in a reduction to risk for the entire Community,
including risk reductions to the 40 critical assets identified by the Community
and the Committee.

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

1 Community-wide



Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
Additional emergency preparedness would provide strong benefits past the
useful life of this project, sustaining benefits. Establishing capacity to
maintain follow-through of the guidebook would ultimately be imperative to
the overall success of the project.
General time frame for implementing actions: This project should be
implementable within six months.
Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: No permits are required.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: The project would service the
Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach.
Jurisdiction over the project includes the Village of Atlantic Beach and the
Town of Hempstead, both in Nassau County.

Assets: Economic development, health and social services
Population: 4,000+ (entire community)

Related Projects:

Identify applicable stakeholders

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 97

Identification of Vulnerable
and Special-Needs Populations

VAB ABE EAB

Identify Vulnerable and Special-Needs Populations
Project description: Following Superstorm Sandy, emergency service
providers and health and social service providers were not able to easily
identify vulnerable and special-needs populations within the Community.
Identification of vulnerable and special-needs populations is critical in
providing them with the services they may require or be able to check on
individuals by stopping by their residences and calling them. The
Identification of Vulnerable and Special-Needs Populations project would
set up special-needs registration so that vulnerable people can identify
themselves and emergency and social service providers can appropriately
reach out to the populations that are in need of services during
emergencies. This project would be coordinated with Nassau County.
Short description: Identify vulnerable and special-needs populations
through a special-needs registration.

The New Nautilus Hotel, Village of Atlantic Beach
Source: LiRo

Project cost: $8,000

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$8,000

6 months

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 98

Identification of Vulnerable and Special Needs Populations

Benefit or Co-Benefits to be Derived from the Project
Health and social: This project would directly benefit individuals with
disabilities, senior citizens, and individuals considered low/moderate income
living in the Community. During Superstorm Sandy, these populations were
not recognized and this project would provide continuity of health and social
services once individuals are identified. Through U.S. Census data collection,
the number and percentage of individuals in the Community with disabilities,
senior citizens, and individuals considered low/moderate income are known,
but their location and health and social needs are not documented.
Establishing a registration so vulnerable persons can identify themselves and
receive needed services during emergencies is the focus of the project.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk Associated with the
Project
This project would help reduce risk to vulnerable and special-needs
populations within the Community.

Cost-Benefit Analysis of Undertaking the Project
Identifying vulnerable and special-needs populations would provide benefits
beyond the useful life of this project. No known negative externalities or
opportunity costs.
General time frame for implementing actions: This project is expected
to be implemented over six months.
Local, State, and Federal government regulatory requirements
related to the project, if applicable: No permits are required.
Entity with jurisdiction over the project: Nassau County Office of
Emergency Management is identifying vulnerable populations to ensure that
assistance in the event of emergency is provided
Assets: The New Nautilus Hotel
Population: Unknown

Key Project Locations:

Early Action Items:

Related Projects:

1 Community-wide





Identify applicable stakeholders

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

None

Page 99

Section V:
Additional Materials

Section V:
Additional Materials
A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Additional Resiliency Recommendations are resiliency projects and actions the Committee would like to highlight but are not categorized as Proposed or Featured
Projects. The Additional Resiliency Recommendations are listed in Table V-1 and are categorized by strategy, project name, project description, and whether the
project has a regional focus.
Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Strategy
Protect critical Infrastructure to create
community resilience and sustainability to
ensure continuing services needed before,
during, and after disasters

Increase the Community’s capacity to
facilitate and foster actions that lead to
greater resiliency, emergency
preparedness, and sustainability

Project Name

Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Beach Club Utility
Improvements

Assist beach clubs in improving infrastructure and support
owners' applications for funding assistance offered through
loan or grant programs for utility improvements including
solar thermal and photovoltaic systems.

$50K

N

Evaluate the use of
Permeable Pavement

Consider installing permeable pavement in future road paving
projects and parking lots; consider whether permeable
paving is an option to replace existing pavement.

$40K

N

Protect and Enhance
Jetties

Assess the condition of jetties.

$75K

Y

Zoning Code Amendments

Revise zoning codes to encourage conformity in new building
heights; including heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning
(HVAC) placement, hardening, and requirements for new
construction to meet necessary elevation standards. Update
zoning codes to reflect current best practices in stormwater
management and hazard mitigation; design standards for
features such as surface parking lots for both
aesthetic/environmental benefits that may enhance property
values and preserve community character; and assess the
potential use of the EPA’s national menu of stormwater best
management practices, which aim to improve stormwater
management while improving coastal water quality.

$15K

Y

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 101

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-1 (Continued)
Strategy

Implement measures to make the
Community’s economic drivers more
resilient

Protect critical Community health and social
services assets and increase the capacity to
provide needed emergency and community
services before, during, and after disasters

Section V: Additional Materials

Project Name

Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Review Underground
Stormwater Detention
Regulations

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic
Beach. Review underground stormwater detention
regulations and determine whether they can be strengthened
to reduce surface water runoff and associated flooding with
new development/redeveloped parcels (if feasible throughout
the Community).

$100K

N

Urban Park and Plaza

Develop an urban plaza, park, or garden within the NYRCR
Community to support economic vitality of the Community;
incorporate active and passive recreational elements
including a playground, basketball courts, tables, benches,
space for entertainment, landscaping, and walkways with
activity stations.

$75K

Y

Business Continuity Plans

Assist the private beach clubs and small businesses with
preparing business continuity plans for power outages and
other emergencies.

$100K

N

Coordination with
Community-Based and
Bon-Governmental
Organizations

Coordinate community-based, non-governmental entities to
receive funding for approved projects.

$8K

Y

Disaster Recovery Service
Vendors

Prepare a list of disaster recovery service vendors for the
Community and enter into Memoranda of Understanding.

$8K

Y

Targeted Housing
Mitigation Measures for
Near-Term
Implementation

Explore and support additional mitigation measures for
housing.

$150K

Y

Page 102

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Master Table of Projects
The Proposed Project, Featured Projects, and Additional Resiliency Recommendations identified throughout the NYRCR Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach
Estates/East Atlantic Beach Community Reconstruction Plan are reflected in Table V-2. These projects are categorized according to strategy, project name, project
description, reconstruction strategies, estimated cost, and whether the project has a regional focus.
Table V-2: Proposed, Featured, and Additional Resiliency Recommendations

Strategy
Protect critical infrastructure to create
community resilience and
sustainability to ensure continuing
services needed before, during, and
after disasters

Increase the Community’s capacity to
facilitate and foster actions that lead
to greater resiliency, emergency
preparedness, and sustainability

Section V: Additional Materials

Project Name

Short Project Description

Project
Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Harden Water
Reclamation Plant

Provide resiliency to the existing Water Reclamation
Plant and three pump stations to maintain
functionality during rain and hazard events.

Proposed

$720K

N

Emergency Medical
Services

Protect and fortify the existing Atlantic Beach
Rescue Building through improved infrastructure
and communication systems.

Proposed

$460K

Y

Complete
Streets/Drainage
Improvements along
Beech Street

Use Complete Streets to provide phased drainage
and street improvements along emergency
evacuation routes through stormwater best
management practices, infrastructure
improvements, and traffic safety and management
measures.

Proposed

$5.5M

N

Solar-Powered Street
Lights

Provide light-emitting diode (LED) street lighting
that is solar-powered to prevent loss of lighting in
the event of power outages.

Proposed

$1.3M

Y

Village of Atlantic
Beach Community
Assistance Center

Retrofit the Tennis Center in the Village of Atlantic
Beach to be used as a Community Assistance
Center, including improvements to drainage and the
incorporation of active and passive recreational
elements.

Proposed

$2M

N

East Atlantic Beach
Community Assistance
Center Feasibility
Study

Evaluate and identify a location for a Community
Assistance Center in East Atlantic Beach for Atlantic
Beach Estates and East Atlantic Beach.

Proposed

$50K

N

Page 103

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 (Continued)

Strategy

Project Name

Short Project Description

Project
Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Protect critical infrastructure to create
community resilience and
sustainability to ensure continuing
services needed before, during, and
after disasters

Install Backflow
Preventers

Install backflow preventers and storm drain covers
throughout the Community to mitigate flooding and
prevent debris from entering drains.

Proposed

$360K

Y

Restore and enhance natural
resources for both resiliency and
recreation purposes while also
protecting important cultural
resources

Assess Feasibility and
Economic Impact of
Perimeter Dune
System

Study the cost effectiveness and technical feasibility
of a dune perimeter system, including benefits and
risks to beach clubs.

Proposed

$500K

Y

Increase the Community’s capacity to
facilitate and foster actions that lead
to greater resiliency, emergency
preparedness, and sustainability

Atlantic Beach Village
Hall

Provide upgrades and protection to Atlantic Beach
Village Hall to maintain continuity of operations and
protect vital records during and after storm events.

Proposed

$400K

N

Protect critical infrastructure to create
community resilience and
sustainability to ensure continuing
services needed before, during, and
after disasters

Microgrid Power
System

Conduct a feasibility study and implement a power
microgrid system throughout the Community.

Featured

$19.2M

Y

Implement measures to make the
Community’s economic drivers more
resilient

Cell Phone Tower
Resiliency

Improve cell phone tower resiliency during
emergencies.

Featured

$1.6M

Y

Protect critical infrastructure to create
community resilience and
sustainability to ensure continuing
services needed before, during, and
after disasters

Underground Utilities
Feasibility Study

Conduct a feasibility study to determine the
potential for underground utilities in areas,
specifically East Atlantic Beach, that are at risk of
flooding.

Featured

$100K

N

Stormwater System
Improvements

Study adaption of existing open spaces for
floodwater catch basins.

Featured

$10K

N

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 104

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 (Continued)

Strategy
Increase the Community’s capacity to
facilitate and foster actions that lead
to greater resiliency, emergency
preparedness, and sustainability

Protect critical Infrastructure to
create community resilience and
sustainability to ensure continuing
services needed before, during, and
after disasters

Increase the Community’s capacity to
facilitate and foster actions that lead
to greater resiliency, emergency
preparedness, and sustainability

Section V: Additional Materials

Project Name

Short Project Description

Project
Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Emergency
Preparedness
Guidebook

Draft and disseminate an emergency preparedness
guidebook in coordination with Nassau County,
Town of Hempstead, and the City of Long Beach for
distribution to all residents.

Featured

$100K

Y

Identification of
Vulnerable and
Special-Needs
Populations

Identify vulnerable and special-needs populations
through a special-needs registration.

Featured

$8K

Y

Beach Club Utility
Improvements

Assist beach clubs in improving infrastructure and
support owners' applications for funding assistance.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$50K

N

Evaluate the use of
Permeable Pavement

Consider installing permeable pavement in future
road paving projects and parking lots.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$40K

N

Protect and Enhance
Jetties

Assess the condition of jetties.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$75K

Y

Zoning Code
Amendments

Revise zoning codes to encourage conformity in
building heights, construction standards, and best
practices in stormwater management and hazard
mitigation.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$15K

Y

Review Underground
Stormwater Detention
Regulations

Review underground stormwater detention
regulations and determine if they can be
strengthened to reduce surface water runoff and
associated flooding.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$100K

N

Page 105

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 (Continued)

Strategy
Implement measures to make the
Community’s economic drivers more
resilient

Protect critical Community health and
social services assets and increase
the capacity to provide needed
emergency and community services
before, during, and after disasters

Section V: Additional Materials

Project Name

Short Project Description

Project
Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Urban Park and Plaza

Develop an urban plaza, park, or garden to support
economic vitality and recreation in the Community.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$75K

Y

Business Continuity
Plans

Assist the private beach clubs and small businesses
with preparing business continuity plans.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$100K

N

Coordination with
Community-Based and
Non-Governmental
Organizations

Coordinate community-based, non-governmental
entities to receive funding for approved projects.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$8K

Y

Disaster Recovery
Service Vendors

Prepare a list of disaster recovery service vendors
for the Community and enter into Memoranda of
Understanding.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$8K

Y

Targeted Housing
Mitigation Measures
for Near-term
Implementation

Explore and support additional mitigation measures
for housing.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$150K

Y

Page 106

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

C. Public Engagement Process
To ensure the success of the NYRCR Community Plan, a broad-reaching
Public Engagement Strategy was established and implemented including
collaborative work in coordination with the Committee. The citizens of the
Community were provided extensive opportunities for collaboration in three
Public Engagement Events between September 2013 and March 2014.
NYRCR Planning Committee process
The Committee held 13 meetings between September 18, 2013, and March
26, 2014. The Committee discussed local issues, opportunities, and
communication strategies; and offered the public opportunities to provide
comments at the conclusion of each Planning Committee Meeting.
The series of the first five Committee meetings focused on reviewing the
NYRCR Plan process, including identifying key elements and goals for
developing a community vision and conducting public outreach. The
Committee was encouraged to think broadly about community planning,
economic vitality, and quality of life issues. The Committee identified assets
and examined risk areas to create the first series of conceptual resiliency
strategies for the Community to be presented during the first Public
Engagement Event.
After the first and second Public Engagement Events and during the
subsequent Committee meeting, the community vision was finalized along
with the review of the Community assets and strategies. The review of the
Draft Conceptual Plan by the Committee focused primarily on the key
strategies and the actions to implement the strategies such as prioritizing
strategies and potential key projects to increase resiliency. After public input
from the second Public Engagement Event, the Committee identified seven
Proposed Projects. The Committee discussed the projects and strategies in
terms of the anticipated community benefit and in terms of the Proposed
Projects that responded to Community needs that were posed or
exacerbated by Superstorm Sandy.

input on the evaluation of vulnerability for affected assets and finalized the
risk assessment analysis. The Committee focused on reaching consensus on
the Proposed Projects and reviewing the results of a qualitative analysis that
considered feasibility, cost, and funding for the projects.
The projects were categorized into three categories: Proposed Projects,
Featured Projects, and Additional Resiliency Recommendations. During this
phase, the third Public Engagement Event served to obtain public feedback
and input on the Proposed and Featured Projects for the final plan. The
Committee then voted on both Proposed and Featured Projects and reviewed
the final Plan.
Public Engagement Events
The Public Engagement Events were designed to solicit feedback from the
Community on the NYRCR planning process and deliverables and on
conducting outreach through a variety of mediums and methods.
Meeting notices for Public Engagement Events were posted as follows:


Website: http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr/contact/village-atlanticbeach-and-east-atlantic-beach



Nassau Herald (local community newspaper)



Various locations accessible for public viewing



Twitter: @NYStormRecovery



Facebook: NYStormRecovery

Information, door hangers, and flyers were distributed both manually and
electronically to the Committee members, who subsequently distributed
flyers within their residential neighborhoods. Flyers and electronic notices
were distributed to the businesses and beach clubs in the Community.

The final Committee Meetings included preparing the risk assessment and
cost benefit analysis for the preliminary project reporting, which involved
placing scores on each project based upon six criteria: feasibility, cost, risk
reduction, co-benefits, funding, and public support. The Committee provided

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 107

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Distribution of third Public Engagement Meeting materials

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 108

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

First Public Engagement Event
The first Public Engagement Event was held on October 16, 2013, at the
Sands Beach Club in the Village of Atlantic Beach and had approximately 100
attendees. The event was designed to provide an overview of the NYRCR
Program while engaging community members in a small group forum in a
discussion about a community vision, community assets, vulnerabilities, and
strategies for becoming more resilient. The Committee co-chairs opened the
meeting with welcoming remarks and an overview of the planning process.
The State gave a short presentation on the NYRCR Program. During an
interactive workshop, the Consultant Team facilitated small group
discussions about planning for resiliency with the attendees.

support functions. The second activity involved ranking seven Proposed
Projects. The third activity was a facilitated mapping exercise that identified
flooding problem areas and stormwater management. The public identified
locations of flooding events, along with examples of the top strategies
recommended by the public.

Second Public Engagement Meeting, February 12, 2014
Source: URS

Third Public Engagement Event

First Public Engagement Meeting, October 16, 2013
Source: Sustainable Long Island

Second Public Engagement Event
The second Public Engagement Event was held on November 13, 2013, at
the Sands Beach Club in the Village of Atlantic Beach and had approximately
95 attendees. A small group discussion format was used to conduct three
interactive sessions addressing priority strategies to increase resiliency;
prioritize potential key projects; and to conduct a mapping exercise of
stormwater infrastructure and flooding problems. The first activity addressed
potential strategies and projects in the Conceptual Plan for all six recovery

Section V: Additional Materials

The Third Public Engagement Event was held on February 12, 2014, at the
Sands Beach Club in Club in the Village of Atlantic Beach and had
approximately 70 attendees. An Open House format provided ten project
stations that included project boards, and were staffed by the Consultant
Team and Committee members to answer questions from the participants.
The project boards contained pictures, criteria rankings, maps, and prompts
for the public to identify support and comments. Participants were handed a
Project Evaluation Guide that listed all the projects and allowed for the public
to provide feedback. Forty-eight of the guides were collected at the end of
the night and the information was tallied and results were presented to the
Committee.

Page 109

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Fourth Public Engagement Event
The date of the fourth Public Engagement Event is to be determined.
Completed plans will be presented to the public.

Third Public Engagement
Event, February 12, 2014
Source: URS

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 110

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

D. Community Asset Inventory
The Community Asset Inventory identifies assets that have been affected by
coastal hazards, including assets that have potential to be at risk from
hazard events. Assets whose loss of impairment would compromise essential
cultural, social, economic, or environmental functions of the community are
also included. This asset inventory was presented to the Committee during a
series of Committee meeting on the basis of Community input during Public

Section V: Additional Materials

Engagement Events. The assets are categorized according to asset name,
risk area, asset class, whether the asset is a critical facility, the community
value, landscape attributes, and risk assessment scores. To interpret risk
scores, see Figure V-2. For description of risk assessment methods, see
Section II, Assessment of Risk and Needs.

Page 111

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment Scores
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Risk Assessment

Risk
Area

Asset
Class

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate(1)

Beach
Width(2)

Shore
Defenses(3)

Protective
Vegetation(4)

Dunes or
Bluffs(5)

Soils(6)

Landscape
Attribute Score(7)

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

High

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

High

Natural and
Cultural Resources

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Blue Point

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

5

60

Boardwalk

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Catalina Beach Club

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Chair House

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Clearwater Beach Club

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Dutchess Chair House

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Eldorado Chair House

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Electric Substation C

High

Infrastructure Systems

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Inwood Beach Club

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

1

12

Jefferson Chair House

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

High

Natural and
Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Lawrence Beach Club

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Montgomery Chair House

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

New Nautilus Hotel

Extreme

Housing

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Ocean Club

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

2

24

Police Booth

Moderate

Health and Social
Services

Yes, FEMA

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2

3

23

High

Health and Social
Services

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Putnam Chair House

Extreme

Economic

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Rescue Squad

Moderate

Health and
Social Services

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2

2

15

Rescue Station 2

High

Health and
Social Services

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

2

18

Sewer Substation A

High

Infrastructure Systems

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Sewer Substation B

High

Infrastructure Systems

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Asset
99 The Plaza
Atlantic Beach Club
Atlantic Beach
Tennis Center

Jewish Center – Atlantic
Beach

Post Office

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 112

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-3 (Continued)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Risk Assessment

Risk
Area

Asset
Class

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate(1)

Beach
Width(2)

Shore
Defenses(3)

Protective
Vegetation(4)

Dunes or
Bluffs(5)

Soils(6)

Landscape
Attribute Score(7)

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Sewer Substation C

High

Infrastructure Systems

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Silver Point Beach Club

High

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Single Family Residences

High

Housing

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Sun & Surf Beach Club

High

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Sunny Atlantic
Beach Club

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

The New Plaza Beach Club

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

The Plaza Chair House

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

The Sands Atlantic Beach Club

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

The Shores-Main Beach Club

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

The Shores-West Beach Club

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Town of Hempstead Atlantic
Beach, Beach Club

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

1

12

Troy Beach House

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural Resources

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Vernon Chair House

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

5

60

High

Health and
Social Services

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Wastewater Treatment Plant

Moderate

Infrastructure Systems

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2

4

30

Wastewater Treatment Plant

High

Infrastructure Systems

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

5

45

Asset

Atlantic Beach Village Hall

(1) Erosion rate: Long-term average erosion rate ≥1 foot per year or unknown
(2) Beach width: Waterline frequently at shore defense or upland vegetation
(3) Shore defenses: Absent, not constructed to anticipated conditions, or deteriorating
(4) Protective vegetation: Dense, healthy vegetation, wetlands between asset and flood source absent
(5) Dunes or bluffs: Dunes absent, below BFE, discontinuous, eroding; Bluff slope unstable, little vegetation
(6) Soils: Asset on coastal barrier island or filled wetland
(7) Landscape attribute score: “Yes” = +0.5

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 113

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure V-2: Risk Score Interpretation
100-year event
(Hazard score = 3)
5

15

30

45

60

75

4.5

13

27

40.5

54

67.5

4

12

24

36

48

60

10.5

21

31.5

42

52.5

9

18

27

36

45

7.5

15

22.5

30

37.5

6

12

18

24

30

4.5

9

13.5

18

22.5

3

6

9

12

15

1.5

3

4.5

6

7.5

1

2

3

4

5

3.5
Exposure

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

Vulnerability

Risk
Category

100-year Event
Risk Score

500-year Event
Risk Score

>53

>70

Risk scores in this category occur only if one of the two factors, exposure or vulnerability, is rated 5, and the other is 4 or higher; this could represent
that the asset is in a dangerous situation. Both exposure and vulnerability should be reduced, if possible. Consider relocation a priority option for
these assets.

High

24 – 53

32 – 70

Risk scores in this category are indicative of conditions that could lead to significant negative outcomes from a storm. Using the risk scoring system, a
total of 24 (or 32 for the 500-year event) can only be achieved if the vulnerability is 4 and exposure is 2, or vice versa. A vulnerability of 4 indicates
the likely loss of service of an asset for an extended period of time. For many assets this may be unacceptable. Actions should be taken to reduce
vulnerability, such as elevating or floodproofing the asset, to help avoid a long-term loss of function. A score of 4 for exposure indicates most of the
local landscape attributes that help reduce storm damages are absent. Actions to restore landscape attributes may be appropriate. All other risk
scores higher than 24 (or 32 for the 500-year event) indicate either the exposure or the vulnerability, or both, are higher than the conditions
discussed above, lending more weight to the need to take actions that reduce risk. Relocation may be necessary in the future if other means of
adaptation or management actions are not effective.

Moderate

6 – 23

8 –31

Residual

<6

<8

Severe

Section V: Additional Materials

Comment

Risk scores in this category pose moderate to serious consequences, but adaptation may be of lower priority due to one factor, exposure or
vulnerability, remaining relatively low. Use a combination of measures to reduce exposure and/or vulnerability.
Risk scores in this category occur when both exposure and vulnerability are relatively low. This situation suggests floods would pose minor or
infrequent consequences. However, a vulnerability score of 3 may not be acceptable for critical facilities or high community value assets, because the
community cannot afford to be without these services, event on an infrequent basis. Note that risk is never completely eliminated. Some residual risk
still remains even after management measures have been implemented. Monitor conditions and adapt as necessary.

Page 114

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-4: Risk Assessment Scores
Risk Assessment
Asset

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

99 The Plaza

3

3

4

36

Atlantic Beach Club

3

4

3

36

Atlantic Beach Tennis Center

3

3

4

36

Beach House

3

4

3

36

Blue Point

3

4

5

60

Boardwalk

3

4

4

48

Catalina Beach Club

3

4

3

36

Chair House

3

4

4

48

Clearwater Beach Club

3

4

4

48

Dutchess Chair House

3

4

4

48

Eldorado Chair House

3

4

4

48

Electric Substation C

3

3

4

36

Inwood Beach Club

3

4

1

12

Jefferson Chair House

3

4

4

48

Jewish Center – Atlantic Beach

3

3

4

36

Lawrence Beach Club

3

4

3

36

Montgomery Chair House

3

4

4

48

New Nautilus Hotel

3

4

4

48

Ocean Club

3

4

2

24

Police Booth

3

2.5

3

23

Post Office

3

3

4

36

Putnam Chair House

3

4

4

48

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 115

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-4 (Continued)
Risk Assessment
Asset

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

Rescue Squad

3

2.5

2

15

Rescue Station 2

3

3

2

18

Sewer Substation A

3

3

4

36

Sewer Substation B

3

3

4

36

Sewer Substation C

3

3

4

36

Silver Point Beach Club

3

3

4

36

Sun & Surf Beach Club

3

3

3

27

Sunny Atlantic Beach Club

3

4

4

48

The New Plaza Beach Club

3

4

4

48

The Plaza Chair House

3

4

4

48

The Sands Atlantic Beach

3

4

4

48

The Shores-Main Beach Club

3

4

3

36

The Shores-West Beach Club

3

4

3

36

Town of Hempstead Atlantic Beach, Beach Club

3

4

1

12

Vernon Chair House

3

4

5

60

Atlantic Beach Village Hall

3

3

3

27

Wastewater Treatment Plant

3

2.5

4

30

Wastewater Treatment Plant (Main)

3

3

5

45

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 116

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

E. Endnotes

14

“Hurricane Irene one year later: Storm cost $15.8 in damage from Florida to New
York to the Caribbean,” New York Daily News, 27 Aug. 2012, March 2014,
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/hurricane-irene-year-storm-cost-15-8damage-florida-new-york-caribbean-article-1.1145302?pgno=2.

15

Federal Emergency Management Agency, “New York—Hurricane Irene: FMA40230-DR (2011), 4 April 2014 <http://www.fema.gov/pdf/news/pda/4020.pdf>.

16

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Deaths Associated with Hurricane
Sandy,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (May 24, 2013), Oct. 2013
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/ mmwrhtml/mm6220a1.htm>.

17

National Hurricane Center,

18

State of New York, “State of New York Action Plan for Community Development
Block Grant Program Disaster Recovery” (New York Homes and Community
Renewal Office of Community Renewal). Federal Register Docket No. FR-5696-N01.

19

EQECAT, “Post-Landfall Loss Estimates for Superstorm Sandy,” 1 Nov. 2012, Oct.
2013, <http://www.eqecat.com/catwatch/post-landfall-loss-estimatessuperstorm-sandy-released-2012-11-01>.

20

T. Kaplan and R. Hernandez, “Cuomo Cites Broad Reach of Hurricane Sandy in Aid
Appeal” (The New York Times, 26 Nov. 2012), Oct. 2013,
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/27/nyregion/governor-cuomo-says-hurricanesandy-was-worse-than-katrina.html>.

21

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, “Sandy Damage Estimates
by Block Group,” n.d., Oct. 2013 <http://www.huduser.org
/maps/map_sandy_blockgroup.html>.

22

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

23

FEMA, Hurricane Sandy in New Jersey and New York – Building Performance
Observations, Recommendations, and Technical Guidance (FEMA Mitigation
Assessment Team Report, 2013), Feb. 2014, <http://www.fema.gov/ medialibrary-data/1386850803857-025eb299df32c6782fdcbb6f69b35b13/
Combined_Sandy_MAT_Report_508post.pdf>.

Section I
1

2

Walecia Konrad, “Back for the Memories at Atlantic Beach,” The New York Times,
20 June 2003, Oct. 2013 <http://www.nytimes.com/ 2003/06 /20/travel/havensback-for-the-memories-at-atlantic-beach.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm>.
John Rather, “If You’re Thinking of Living In/Atlantic Beach, N.Y.; Village That
Doubles as Resort,” The New York Times, 26 October 26, 2003, 4 Apr 2014
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/10/26/realestate/if-you-re-thinking-of-living-inatlantic-beach-ny-village-that-doubles-as-resort.html>.

3

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hurricane Sandy Limited Reevaluation Report,
Volume 1. Main Report and Environmental Assessment (U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, New York District, February 2014).

4

Rather.

5

U.S. Census Bureau, “On The Map: Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics,
Center for Economic Studies,” n.d., 4 April 2014,
<http://onthemap.ces.census.gov/>.

6

U.S. Census Bureau, “On The Map: Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics,
Center for Economic Studies.

7

U.S. Census Bureau, “On The Map: Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics,
Center for Economic Studies.

8

U.S. Census Bureau, “On The Map: Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics,
Center for Economic Studies.

9

U.S. Census Bureau, “On The Map: Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics,
Center for Economic Studies.

10

U.S. Census Bureau, “On The Map: Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics,
Center for Economic Studies.

11

U.S. Census Bureau, “On The Map: Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics,
Center for Economic Studies.

12

National Hurricane Center, “Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Sandy 22-29,” 12
Feb. 2013, Oct. 2013 <http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Sandy.pdf>.

24

Town of Hempstead, NY, Building Zone Ordinance, n.d., Sept. 2013
<http://ecode360.com/14495699>.

13

Lixio A. Avila and John Cangialosi, John, “Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Irene
(AL092011) 21-28 August 2011” (National Hurricane Center, 14 Dec. 2011) 4 April
2014 < http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL092011_Irene.pdf>..

25

Village of Atlantic Beach, Nassau County, NY, Building Zone Ordinance, n.d., Sept.
2013 <http://ecode360.com/ AT1401?needHash=true.

26

Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve, Long Island South Shore Estuary
Reserve Comprehensive Management Plan (2001), Sept. 2013
http://www.lisser.us/background-pages/cmp.htm.

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 117

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

27

Nassau County, NY, Nassau County Hazard Mitigation Plan, n.d., Sept. 2013
http://www.nassaucountyny.gov/ agencies/oem/hazmit/hazmitNHMP.html.

38

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics, Table DP04 for Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.”

28

Long Island Regional Planning Council, NY, Sustainable Strategies for Long Island
2035 (n.d.) Jan. 2014 <http://www.lirpc.org/3.2010-1202_LI2035StrategiesReport.pdf>.

39

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics, Table DP04 for Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.”

40

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics, Table DP04 for Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.”

41

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics, Table DP04 for Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.”

42

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics, Table DP04 for Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.”

29

Long Island Federation of Labor. Strong Island –The Story of a Region’s Recovery

and Resurgence: The Strategic Economic Development Plan for Nassau and
Suffolk (n.d.), Jan. 2014 <http://longislandfed.org/sites/longislandfed.org/files/li2013-pr.pdf>.
30

Cleaner Greener Communities. Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional
Sustainability Plan (Cleaner Greener Long Island, 2013), Jan. 2014
<http://www.nyserda.ny.gov/Statewide-Initiatives/Cleaner-GreenerCommunities/Creating-Regional-Sustainability-Plans/Regional-PlanningTeams.aspx>.

Section IV
43

Section II

New York Rising Community Reconstruction Program, NYRCR Program Guidance
to Firms, Project Evaluation (NYRCR Program, 30 Dec. 2013), p.3.

44

Long Island Federation of Labor.

31

45

These costs could relate to reduced emergency and recovery expenditures in the
future, less implementation costs for the life of the project.

46

Climate Central, “Sewage Overflows from Hurricane Sandy,” 2013), March 2014
<http://www.climatecentral.org/pdfs/Sewage.pdf>.

47

Long Island Federation of Labor.

48

New York State Department of Health. (November 2008). Drinking Water
Infrastructure Needs of New York State. New York State Department of Health.
Retrieved from: http://www.health.ny.gov/environmental/water/
drinking/docs/infrastructure_needs.pdf Accessed April 2014.

49

NY Department of Transportation, NYS Complete Streets Act (NY Department of
Transportation, 2011), March 2014 <https://www.dot.ny.
gov/programs/completestreets>.

50

Cleaner Greener Communities.

51

Nassau County, Community Health Assessment (Nassau County Department of
Health, n.d.) Jan. 2014 <https://www.nassaucountyny.
gov/agencies/health/Docs/PDF/ PedestrianWeb1203.pdf>.

52

City of Long Beach, NY, Coastal Protection Study (City of Long Beach, NY, 2009),
Jan. 2014 <http://www.longbeachny.gov/vertical/sites/%7BC3C1054A-3D3A41B3-8896-814D00B86D2A%7D/uploads/%7BF71538B3-3066-402E-B6A1E8C2FA816227%7D.PDF>.

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics for Village of Atlantic
Beach and East Atlantic Beach,” 2012, 27 March 2014
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces
/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?pid=ACS_12_5YR_DP04&prodType=t
able.

32

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics, Table DP04 for Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach” (American Community Survey, 20082012), 27 March 2014 http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf
/pages/productview.xhtml?pid=ACS_12_5YR_DP04&prodType=table.

33

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics, Table DP04 for Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.”.

34

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics, Table DP04 for Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.”.

35

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics, Table DP04 for Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.”.

36

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics, Table DP04 for Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.”.

37

U.S. Census Bureau, “Selected Housing Characteristics, Table DP04 for Village of
Atlantic Beach and East Atlantic Beach.”

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 118

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

53

Cleaner Greener Communities.

54

Long Island Federation of Labor.

55

Long Island Federation of Labor.

56

Long Island Federation of Labor.

57

Cleaner Greener Communities.

Section V: Additional Materials

58

Underground 2020, The Power to Change the Face of America: Converting
Overhead Utilities to Underground (Underground 2010, 2009)
<http://www.underground2020.org/documents/Advantages%20of%20Undergrou
nding%20Utilities%20White%20Paper%2005-09.pdf>.

59

Cleaner Greener Communities.

Page 119

Village of Atlantic Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

F. Glossary
ABE

Atlantic Beach Estates

LBBA

Long Beach Barrier Island

ABR

Atlantic Beach Rescue

LIPA

Long Island Power Authority

BFE

base flood elevation

LIREDC

Long Island Regional Economic Development Council

CBA

cost-benefit analysis

MAT

(FEMA) Mitigation Assessment Team

CDBG-DR

Community Development Block Grant – Disaster
Recovery

NYRCR Program

New York Rising Community Reconstruction Program

CMP

Comprehensive Management Plan

NYS

New York State

NYS DEC

Committee

NYRCR Planning Committee for Village of Atlantic
Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach

New York Department of Environmental
Conservation

NYS HCR

New York State Homes and Community Renewal

Community

NYRCR Community of Village of Atlantic
Beach/Atlantic Beach Estates/East Atlantic Beach

NYS DOS

New York State Department of State

EAB

East Atlantic Beach

PSEG

Public Service Electric and Gas Company

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency

SART

State Agency Review Team

GIS

Geographic Information System

SBA

U.S. Small Business Administration

GABWRD

Greater Atlantic Beach Water Reclamation District

Town

Town of Hempstead

GOSR

Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery

URS

URS Corporation

HMP

Hazard Mitigation Plan

USACE

U.S. Army Corps of Engineer

HVAC

heating, ventilation, and air conditioning

VAB

Village of Atlantic Beach

LED

light-emitting diode

Village

Village of Atlantic Beach

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 120

www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr

