Barnum Island/Oceanside/
the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

March 2014

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Members of the NYRCR Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of
Island Park/Harbor Isle Planning Committee:
•

Tommy Asher, Co-Chair

•

Anthony D’Esposito, Co-Chair

•

Ray Pagano, Co-Chair

•

Chris Fabris

•

Nina Hargrove

•

Chris Horvath

•

Ellen Cutler Igoe

•

Felicia Nicholas

•

Dan Ramos

•

Terry Reichel

•

Ed Scharfberg

•

Michael Scully

Municipal liaisons:
•

James Ruzicka, Village of Island Park

•

Representative from Nassau County Department of Public
Works

This document was developed by the Barnum Island/Oceanside/
the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle Planning Committee as part of
the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program within
the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is
supported by NYS Homes and Community Renewal, NYS Department
of State, and NYS Department of Transportation.  
Assistance was provided by the following consulting firms:
URS Corporation
The LiRo Group
Sustainable Long Island
Planning4Places LLC
AIM Development
Two Twelve WorldStudio
Cover image: Town of Hempstead Marine Study Area      Source: URS

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Foreword
Introduction
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in
August 2011, the State of New York experienced three
extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene, Tropical
Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc
on the lives of New Yorkers and their communities.
These tragic disasters signaled that New Yorkers are
living in a new reality defined by rising sea levels and
extreme weather events that will occur with increased
frequency and power. They also signaled that we need
to rebuild our communities in a way that will mitigate
against future risks and build increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew
M. Cuomo led the charge to develop an innovative,
community-driven planning program on a scale
unprecedented and with resources unparalleled.
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Program empowers the State’s most impacted
communities with the technical expertise needed to
develop thorough and implementable reconstruction
plans to build physically, socially, and economically
resilient and sustainable communities.

Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor
Cuomo in April of 2013, is a more than $650 million
planning and implementation process established
to provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to
communities severely damaged by Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy. Drawing
on lessons learned from past recovery efforts, the
NYRCR Program is a unique combination of bottom-up
community participation and State-provided technical
expertise. This powerful combination recognizes not
only that community members are best positioned
to assess the needs and opportunities of the places
where they live and work, but also that decisions
are best made when they are grounded in rigorous
analysis and informed by the latest innovative
solutions.

One hundred and two storm-affected localities across
the State were originally designated to participate
in the NYRCR Program. The State has allocated
each locality between $3 million and $25 million to
implement eligible projects identified in the NYRCR
Plan. The funding for these projects is provided
through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) Community Development Block
Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program.1
Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising
one or more of the 102 localities, were created and
led by a NYRCR Planning Committee composed
of local residents, business owners, and civic
leaders. Members of the Planning Committees were
identified in consultation with established local
leaders, community organizations, and in some
cases municipalities. The NYRCR Program sets a new
standard for community participation in recovery
and resiliency planning, with community members
leading the planning process. Across the State, more
than 500 New Yorkers represent their communities
by serving on Planning Committees. More than 400
Planning Committee Meetings have been held, during
which Planning Committee members worked with the
State’s NYRCR Program team to develop community
reconstruction plans and identify opportunities to
make their communities more resilient. All meetings
were open to the public. An additional 125-plus
Public Engagement Events attracted thousands of
community members, who provided feedback on the
NYRCR planning process and proposals. The NYRCR
Program’s outreach has included communities that
are traditionally underrepresented, such as immigrant
populations and students. All planning materials
are posted on the NYRCR Program’s website (www.
stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several ways
for community members and the public to submit
feedback on materials in progress.

Foreword

i

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Throughout the planning process, Planning
Committees were supported by staff from the
Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR), planners
from New York State (NYS) Department of State
(DOS) and NYS Department of Transportation (DOT),
and consultants from world-class planning firms that
specialize in engineering, flood mitigation solutions,
green infrastructure, and more.
With the January 2014 announcement of the NYRCR
Program’s expansion to include 22 new localities, the
program comprises over 2.7 million New Yorkers and
covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent
to 14% of the overall State population and 12% of
the State’s overall geography.
The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR
Plan. Governor Cuomo has allocated over $650 million
of funding to the program for implementing projects
identified in the NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Communities
are also eligible for additional funds through the
program’s NY Rising to the Top Competition,
which evaluates NYRCR Communities across eight
categories, including best use of technology in the
planning process, best approach to resilient economic
growth, and best use of green infrastructure to bolster
resilience. The winning NYRCR Community in each
category will be allocated an additional $3 million
of implementation funding. The NYRCR Program is
also working with both private and public institutions
to identify existing funding sources and create new
funding opportunities where none existed before.
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated
with State and Federal agencies to help guide the
development of feasible projects. The program has
leveraged the Regional Economic Development
Council’s State Agency Review Teams (SARTs),
comprised of representatives from dozens of State
agencies and authorities, for feedback on projects
proposed by NYRCR Communities. The SARTs review
projects with an eye toward regulatory and permitting
needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency
funding sources. The NYRCR Program is continuing

ii

Foreword

to work with the SARTs to streamline the permitting
process and ensure shovels are in the ground as
quickly as possible.
On the pages that follow, you will see the results
of months of thoughtful, diligent work by NYRCR
Planning Committees, passionately committed to
realizing brighter, more resilient futures for their
communities.

The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward
rebuilding a more resilient community. Each NYRCR
Planning Committee began the planning process by
defining the scope of its planning area, assessing
storm damage, and identifying critical issues. Next,
the Planning Committee inventoried critical assets in
the community and assessed the assets’ exposure
to risk. On the basis of this work, the Planning
Committee described recovery and resiliency
needs and identified opportunities. The Planning
Committee then developed a series of comprehensive
reconstruction and resiliency strategies, and identified
projects and implementation actions to help fulfill
those strategies.
The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan
are divided into three categories. The order in which
the projects and actions are listed in this NYRCR Plan
does not necessarily indicate the NYRCR Community’s
prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed
Projects are projects proposed for funding through a
NYRCR Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding.
Featured Projects are projects and actions that
the Planning Committee has identified as important
resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in
depth, but has not proposed for funding through
the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee would like to highlight and that
are not categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured
Projects. The Proposed Projects and Featured Projects

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

found in this NYRCR Plan were voted for inclusion by
official voting members of the Planning Committee.
Those voting members with conflicts of interest
recused themselves from voting on any affected
projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics Handbook
and Code of Conduct.
NYRCR Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of
Island Park/Harbor is eligible for up to $36.6 million in
CDBG-DR implementation funds.2

be implemented. The Governor’s Office of Storm
Recovery will actively seek to match projects with
funding sources.
In the months and years to follow, many of the
projects and actions outlined in this NYRCR Plan will
become a reality helping New York not only to rebuild,
but also to build back better.

While developing projects for inclusion in this NYRCR
Plan, Planning Committees took into account cost
estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the effectiveness
of each project in reducing risk to populations and
critical assets, feasibility, and community support.
Planning Committees also considered the potential
likelihood that a project or action would be eligible for
CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented
with this source of Federal funding must fall into
a Federally-designated eligible activity category,
fulfill a national objective (meeting an urgent need,
removing slums and blight, or benefiting low to
moderate income individuals), and have a tie to the
natural disaster to which the funding is linked. These
are among the factors that the Governor’s Office of
Storm Recovery will consider, in consultation with
local municipalities and nonprofit organizations, when
determining which projects and actions are best
positioned for implementation.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR
Plan exceeds the NYRCR Community’s CDBG-DR
allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed
Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental
review, HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other
factors. Implementation of the projects and actions
found in this NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations,
including the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan
does not guarantee that a particular project or action
will be eligible for CDBG-DR funding or that it will

Foreword

iii

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 1: NYRCR Communities

Note: Map includes those NYRCR Communities funded through the CDBG-DR program, including the NYRCR Communities announced in January 2014.

Source: NYS DOS

iv

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table of Contents
Executive Summary

1

Section I: Community overview

9

A. Geographic scope and community profile
B. Description of storm damages
C. Critical issues
D. Community vision
E. Relationship to regional plans

10
20
26
29
30

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

33

A. Description of community assets and assessment of risk
B. Assessment of needs and opportunities

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies
A. Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

34
58

71
72

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

82

Proposed projects
Critical facility resiliency and emergency response
resources
Critical facility resiliency and emergency response
resources
Tidal backflow prevention

Tidal backflow prevention

The Village of Island Park

88

Oceanside

92

Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle
Oceanside

96

100
104

Drainage improvements

Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle
Oceanside

Perimeter flood safeguards - California Place Canal and
Wreck Lead: Phase 1

Barnum Island and the
Village of Island Park

112

Drainage improvements

108

v

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Perimeter flood safeguards

Oceanside

116

Destination revitalization and transit-oriented
development
Tidal protection at street ends and at Landgraf Park

The Village of Island Park

120
124

Shoreline and open space preservation

Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle
Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle
Oceanside

Marsh restoration: Phase 1

Barnum Island

136

Emergency transportation lifeline safety plan and initial
implementation

Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle

140

Shoreline and beach restoration and environmental
enhancements

128

132

Featured projects
Emergency transportation lifeline safety plan and initial
implementation

Oceanside

144

Marsh restoration: Phase 2

Barnum Island and Harbor
Isle
Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle
Barnum Island and the
Village of Island Park

148

Critical facility resiliency - Island Park Village Hall
reconstruction
Oceanside industrial waterfront revitalization

The Village of Island Park

160

Oceanside

164

Critical facility resiliency: Oceanside Fire Station

Oceanside

168

Emergency staging area feasibility study and
implementation
Perimeter flood safeguards - California Place Canal:
Phase 2

Section V: Additional materials
A.  Additional resiliency recommendations
B.  Master table of projects
C. Public engagement process
D. Community asset inventory
E. Endnotes
F. Glossary

vi

152

156

172
173
175
180
184
200
203

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

List of tables
Table 1: Table of projects

8

Table 2: Land use

16

Table 3:   New York State Department of State Risk Areas

34

Table 4: Recovery support functions

36

Table 5: Community asset inventory

39

Table 6: Asset groups

50

Table 7:   Community asset risk scores

52

Table 8: Risk assessment results for systems asset groups

56

Table 9: Projects that implement the strategy to enhance emergency planning, response, and
communications

73

Table 10: Projects that implement the strategy to reduce risk of flooding to critical facilities

75

Table 11: Projects that implement the strategy to leverage the economic potential of the area

76

Table 12: Projects that implement the strategy to restore, enhance, and improve natural areas

77

Table 13: Projects that implement the strategy to employ progressive stormwater management
systems and infrastructure upgrades

79

Table 14: Projects that implement the strategy to protect shoreline areas from tidal surge

80

Table 15: Projects that implement the strategy to expand housing stock

81

Table 18: Interpreting risk scores

184

Table 19: Risk scores by asset group

186

Table 20: Community asset risk scores

187

Table 21: Risk to systems

191

Table 22: Risk assessment tool

192

List of figures
Figure 1: NYRCR Communities

iv

Figure 2: Geographic scope

3

Figure 3: Geographic scope

11

Figure 4: Regional context

12

Figure 5: Land use

17

Figure 6:   Superstorm Sandy storm surge extent

22

Figure 7:   Hurricane Irene peak storm tide elevation

25

Figure 8: Elevation and topography

27

Figure 9: New York coastal inundation risk assessment

35

Figure 10: Community assets

38

Figure 11: Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle asset map detail

43

vii

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 12: East Oceanside asset map detail

44

Figure 13: West Oceanside asset map detail

45

Figure 14: North Oceanside asset map detail

46

Figure 15: Community asset risk scores

51

Figure 16: Community economic development areas

62

Figure 17: The Village of Island Park “bowl”

66

Figure 18: Vulnerable shorelines

67

Figure 19: Community roadways

68

Figure 20: Tidal backflow prevention

79

Figure 21: Guide for understanding proposed and featured project profiles

85

Figure 22: Potential improvements to critical facilities

89

Figure 23: Potential improvements to Oceanside schools

93

Figure 24: Stormwater outfall locations, Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park, Harbor Isle

97

Figure 25: Stormwater outfall locations, Oceanside

101

Figure 26: Drainage improvements in Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle

105

Figure 27: “Complete street” improvements along Long Beach Road

109

Figure 28: Vulnerable shorelines along California Place Canal and Wreck Lead

113

Figure 29: Vulnerable shorelines along Powell Creek, Grand Canal, Domar Canal, and Bedell Creek

117

Figure 30: The Village of Island Park downtown and waterfront revitalization area

121

Figure 31: Street ends to evaluate for protection

125

Figure 32: Living shoreline/beach replenishment and revitalization

129

Figure 33: Shoreline restoration for Oceanside Park

133

Figure 34: Potential improvements to Oceanside Park

135

Figure 35: Garrett Marsh at California Place Canal

137

Figure 36: Austin Boulevard: The main evacuation route from Barnum Island, the Village of Island
Park, and Harbor Isle

141

Figure 37: Proposed lifeline network for Oceanside

145

Figure 38: Garrett and Simmons Hassock marshes

149

Figure 39: Potential emergency staging area locations

153

Figure 40: Vulnerable shorelines along California Place Canal

157

Figure 41: Downtown Village of Island Park and Village Hall

161

Figure 42: Waterfront revitalization study area

165

Figure 43: Potential location of new Oceanside Fire Station

169

viii

Source: URS

Executive summary

1

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Executive summary
Barnum Island, Oceanside, the Village of Island Park,
and Harbor Isle are neighboring communities in the
southern portion of the Town of Hempstead, Nassau
County, New York. Island Park is an incorporated
village with its own elected government, and Barnum
Island, Oceanside, and Harbor Isle are unincorporated
hamlets of the Town of Hempstead. Together, they
make up the NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of
Island Park/Harbor Isle Community (Community).
The Planning Area encompasses the CensusDesignated Place (CDP) boundaries of Barnum Island,
Oceanside, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle. The Community is a less-than-50-minute train
ride from New York City on the Long Beach Branch of
the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR). The Community is
bounded by Rockville Centre on the north, Freeport
and Baldwin Harbor on the east, the City of Long
Beach and a barrier island to the south, and Bay Park
and East Rockaway on the west.
The Community is eligible for up to $36.6 million
in Community Development Block Grant – Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding through the NYRCR
Program. The eligible funds consist of $4 million for
Barnum Island, $22.2 million for Oceanside, $7.4
million for the Village of Island Park, and $3 million for
Harbor Isle.

Storm impacts
The landfall of Superstorm Sandy on October 29,
2012, devastated the Community. The storm’s tidal
surge flooded nearly all of Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor Isle, which together
occupy the southernmost portion of the Community,
and flooded nearly two-thirds of the land area of
Oceanside.
The storm hit during a full-moon (i.e. most extreme)
high tide. The combination of high tide and storm
surge pushed into Reynolds Channel, forcing its
way across the Hog Island Channel and Wreck Lead
waterfronts and up California Place Canal, Bedell

2

Executive summary

Creek, Grand Canal, Powell Creek, and other inland
waterways. Some of the Community’s most severe
flooding occurred in inland areas as a result of the
tidal surge’s overbanking of interior waterways.
In Oceanside, the areas south of Waukena Avenue
along Hog Island Channel and Parsonage, Bedell,
and Powell Creeks were inundated with as much as
four-feet of water. Oceanside’s Long Beach Road
commercial corridor and Lawson Boulevard were
under four to six feet of water. Homes and businesses
in neighborhoods near Grand Canal and Bedell Creek
experienced up to six feet of water as tidal surge
worked its way into these inland communities.
In Barnum Island, the worst flooding occurred near
the California Place Canal and along Wreck Lead,
with six- to eight-feet of water flooding homes and
waterfront businesses.
In the Village of Island Park, tidal waters came
from the Hog Island Channel (across Little Beach),
Wreck Lead, California Place Canal, and Island Park
Channel. Almost all areas of the Village received
more than two-feet of water, destroying personal
belongings, mechanical systems, flooring and walls.
The area between Long Beach Road and Nassau Lane
experienced six- to eight-feet of floodwater.
In Harbor Isle, water reached up to two-feet in height
throughout the community, with the most flooding at
the Wreck Lead and Hog Island Channel shorelines,
which experience six- to eight-feet of water.
In addition to flooded homes and businesses, the
Community experienced major breakdowns in
critical transportation systems, power, and sewer
infrastructure.
During the storm, the Austin Boulevard, Lawson
Boulevard, and Long Beach Road evacuation routes –
together with other major streets – were impassable.
These closures blocked late evacuation of the
Community and Long Beach, preventing escape and
complicating emergency response.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 2: Geographic scope

Executive summary

3

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

A nine-foot wall of water washed over the Bay Park
Sewage Treatment Plant, knocking out power and
causing more than 100 million gallons of raw sewage
to flow into adjacent waterways and to back up into
the basements of homes in the Community. The plant
went offline at approximately 10:00p.m. on October
29, 2012 and remained so for approximately 58 hours.
After the implementation of an emergency recovery
effort, power was restored and service reestablished at
approximately 6:00a.m. on November 1, 2012.
Approximately 8,100 homes in the Community lost
power, and it took more than four weeks for service
to be fully restored. A break in a natural gas main
cut off gas supply, and reestablishing service took up
to three weeks. Thus, Community residents suffered
through much of November without heat or electricity.
Communications systems also failed after the storm,

leaving people in the dark, cold, and without a way to
communicate their needs.
Firehouses and emergency service facilities were also
heavily damaged. The Oceanside Fire Department
Hose Company No. 1 and the South Side Hose
Company No. 2 were flooded. The Village of Island
Park Firehouse flooded, damaging the structure and
destroying equipment and five emergency response
vehicles.
In Oceanside, Schools 4, 8, 9E, and 9M were flooded.
Classes for School 8 were moved to School 6 for
several months while repairs were made. Francis X.
Hegarty Elementary School in the Village of Island
Park was flooded and forced to close for repairs for the
remainder of the school year. The Island Park Library
flooded and was closed for repairs until July 2013.

Damage to Barnum Island open space and marinas due to Superstorm Sandy
Source: Jim Mooney, East Rockaway, NY

4

Executive summary

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Critical issues
The effects of Superstorm Sandy highlighted a
number of ways that the Community can bolster its
resilience for future storm events. The NYRCR Barnum
Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor
Isle Planning Committee (Committee) identified
improved emergency response capabilities, access to
power, and protection from flooding as some of the
major needs.
The following critical issues were identified in the
planning process:
•

Vulnerable public facilities, including schools,
municipal buildings, and firehouses. These
facilities were hit hard by Superstorm Sandy,
and they remain vulnerable to future storm
events.

•

Limited emergency transportation routes.
Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park,
and Harbor Isle are all on an island. During a
flood, Austin Boulevard and Long Beach Road
are the only routes to safety from the island.
Oceanside also has limited routes to safety
in an emergency, and two of its major egress
routes, Lawson Boulevard and Long Beach
Road, are subject to flooding.

•

Access to power during and after an
emergency. Power and natural gas outages
were widespread and long lasting during and
after Superstorm Sandy.

•

The inability of stormwater to drain.
Stormwater systems have been damaged
in major storms, and about 100 stormwater
outfalls are situated below the high-tide line.
Tidal water blocks drainage and backs up
into the stormwater system, causing flooding
during normal rainfall and high-tide events
and catastrophic system failures during major
storm events.

•

Constant threat of flooding due to low
elevation. Bay and creek-front shorelines
and interior “bowls” that are lower than
the surrounding land area are particularly
susceptible to flooding during high tides and
even ordinary storm events.

•

Threatened marshland. The marshes
surrounding the Community have been
significantly reduced and degraded by
development and environmental contamination
over the last century. Superstorm Sandy
inflicted new damage on these marshes. The
remaining marshes and shoreline areas need
protection and enhancement to restore their
storm buffer capacity and other environmental
functions.

Working together to rebuild
stronger, smarter, and safer
The NYRCR Plan was developed through a public
process that built a shared vision for the Community
and reflects the residents’ and the Committee’s
respect for local diversity, pride in the unique location,
appreciation of natural assets, and commitment to
home-grown businesses. The ultimate goal of the Plan
is to rebuild in a manner that increases resilience,
sustainability, and offers greater prosperity to ensure
the area’s long-term success. The Committee, with
input from the public, developed the following vision
statement:
Enhance the quality of life and chart a course
towards the future by creating solutions to rebuild
and revitalize two communities that are enriched by
the diversity of their residents. Facilitate positive,
innovative change that will provide an environment
that is SAFE and an infrastructure that is RESILIENT,
so that each community can thrive, sustain itself in
the face of adversity and preserve its uniqueness and
charm.
The Community’s vision statement and the
NYRCR Plan were shaped in a public engagement
process that consisted of nine Planning Committee
meetings, three Public Engagement Events, regular
subcommittee meetings, and a Community survey.
All nine Planning Committee meetings were open to
the public and attended by as many as 40 members
of the public.

Executive summary

5

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Due to the large geographic area of the Community,
the Committee split into two geographic-based
subcommittees to address project details. One
subcommittee represented the areas of Barnum
Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle;
the other subcommittee represented Oceanside. Six
subcommittee meetings were held during the course
of the planning process to facilitate open dialogue
about Community-specific needs, risks, strategies, and
projects.
Three Public Engagement Events were held to share
the work of the Committee with the public and solicit
the public’s feedback. A fourth Public Engagement
Event is scheduled for after the release of the NYRCR
Plan to present the Plan to the public.
The first Public Engagement Event, held in October
2013, was a project open house attended by more
than 75 residents, who shared their knowledge,
experience, and recommendations to help shape the
Plan’s emerging vision and strategies.
The second Public Engagement Event was held in
November 2013 and was attended by more than 180
people. The meeting used small-group facilitated
breakout sessions to gain insights into how the
Community experienced Superstorm Sandy and
provide feedback on the strategies that the Committee
had proposed to help the Community become more
resilient.

2nd Public Engagement Event
Source: Sustainable Long Island

The third Public Engagement Event was held in March
2014 to review the projects and recommendations
under consideration for the Plan. Display boards
illustrated potential projects, and participants
completed project feedback forms so that public input
could inform the Committee as the list of projects
became further refined.
A public information meeting will be held in Spring
2014 to share the work of the Committee and the
NYRCR Plan with the public.
In addition to meetings, the public engagement
process included a survey that was available at the
Oceanside and Island Park libraries and online at the
Community Reconstruction Program website from
October 2013 through February 2014.

6

Executive summary

3rd Public Engagement Event
Source: Sustainable Long Island

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Blueprint for implementation
The Community suffered severe damage during
Superstorm Sandy, and to a lesser extent Hurricane
Irene, and many parts of the Community experience
flooding during both regular high tide and storm
events. The planning process identified a set of
strategies to reduce the risk of future flooding to
enable the Community to rebuild stronger, smarter,
and safer. The NYRCR Plan recommends sustainable
and resilient approaches to support existing residents
and businesses and attract new visitors, residents,
and businesses to enjoy the Community’s considerable
assets. These strategies will be implemented by a set
of projects with a goal of reducing the risks of future
tidal and storm flooding and address the needs that
the Community identified to become more resilient.
The NYRCR Plan includes three categories of projects
to address critical Community needs: Proposed
Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional resiliency
recommendation.

•

Proposed Projects: Proposed Projects
are designed to be fully funded through
the NYRCR Program using the Community’s
allocation of CDBG-DR funding.

•

Featured Projects: Featured Projects are
innovative projects in which an initial study or
discrete first phase of the project is proposed
for CDBG-DR funding or other identified
funding, and regulatory reforms that do not
involve capital expenditures.

•

Additional resiliency recommendations:
Additional resiliency recommendation are
projects and actions that the Committee
would like to highlight, would be funded from
sources other than CDBG-DR funding, and
are not categorized as Proposed or Featured
Projects.

All of the projects included in the NYRCR Plan are
important to the Community. The following is a list
of Proposed and Featured Projects and Additional
resiliency recommendation, organized by strategy.
The order of appearance is not a reflection of project
priority or ranking.

Long Beach Road and Lower Lincoln Avenue
Source: LiRo Group

Executive summary

7

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 1: Table of projects
Strategy

Project name

Project
category

Reduce the risk of flooding to
critical facilities and emergency
service facilities, such as police
and fire departments, schools,
and other facilities that serve
vulnerable populations

Construct resiliency improvements to schools and emergency response
facilities, and expand emergency response resources

Proposed

Construct a new Village of Island Park Village Hall

Featured

Implement progressive
stormwater management
systems and infrastructure
upgrades to decrease flooding
in areas that consistently flood
during storm events and high
tides

Install tidal backflow prevention devices

Proposed

Complete a stormwater drainage system analysis and implement identified
high-priority improvements

Proposed

Install a first phase of perimeter flood safeguards along Grand Canal, Bedell
Creek, Powell Creek, Wreck Lead, and California Place Canal

Proposed

Install tidal barriers at public street ends and Landgraf Park in the Village of
Island Park

Proposed

Construct a second phase of perimeter flood safeguards and raise the roadways
adjacent to California Place Canal

Featured

Develop a plan to create a waterfront destination revitalization and transitoriented development zone for downtown Island Park and the Wreck Lead
waterfront

Proposed

Prepare a plan to revitalize the Oceanside industrial waterfront

Featured

Restore Little Beach, Masone Beach, and Harbor Isle Beach

Proposed

Improve Oceanside Park and its shoreline

Proposed

Conduct a marsh restoration study and implement a restoration pilot project for
Garrett Marsh east of Barnum Island

Proposed

Conduct a marsh restoration study for Simmons Hassock Marsh,  and complete
restoration of Garrett Marsh and Simmons Hassock Marsh

Featured

Create and begin implementation of an emergency transportation lifeline safety
plan for Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle

Proposed

Create and begin implementation of an emergency transportation lifeline safety
plan for Oceanside

Featured

Construct an emergency staging area for Barnum Island, the Village of Island
Park, and Harbor Isle

Featured

Protect shoreline areas from tidal
surge through a combination
of structural, nonstructural and
hybrid shoreline stabilization
techniques

Leverage the economic potential
of the area’s waterfront location
and proximity to New York City

Restore, enhance, and improve
natural areas, including local
beaches, marshes, parks, and
other open spaces, to provide
recreation opportunities and
enhance the natural environment

Implement an emergency
response system that engages in
emergency planning, response,
and communications at the
Community level

8

Executive summary

Source: URS

Section I:
Community overview

9

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

I.

Community overview

Barnum Island, Oceanside, the Village of Island Park,
and Harbor Isle are neighboring communities located
in the middle of the southern portion of the Town of
Hempstead, Nassau County, New York. Island Park
is an incorporated village, and the three adjacent
communities are unincorporated hamlets of the Town
of Hempstead. Together, they make up the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction Barnum Island/Oceanside/
the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle Community
(Community).
Located immediately north of the barrier island on the
south side of Long Island, 11 miles due east of John F.
Kennedy International Airport, the Community is less
than a 50 minute ride from Penn Station along the
Long Island Rail Road’s (LIRR) Long Beach branch.
Oceanside has a total land area of 5.4 square miles,
while collectively, Barnum Island, the Village of Island
Park, and Harbor Isle, have an area of 1.9 square
miles.

A. Geographic scope and
community profile
Planning area
The NYRCR Planning Area encompasses the CensusDesignated Place (CDP) boundaries of Barnum Island
(which includes undeveloped marshlands), Oceanside,
the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle (Figure
3). Barnum Island, Oceanside, and Harbor Isle are
hamlets of the Town of Hempstead; the Village of
Island Park is an incorporated village with its own
government administration. The Community is
bounded by Rockville Centre on the north, Bay Park
and East Rockaway on the west, Freeport and Baldwin
Harbor on the east, and the City of Long Beach and
the barrier island to the south.

Development history
Home to a combined 44,072 residents,3 these long-established suburbs are densely populated and highly
developed. The area now known as Oceanside was
originally known as South Bay. It was established by
the English government in 1674. Oyster fishing drove
the local economy, and Mott’s Landing, at the foot of
Mott Street, was a favorite place to buy oysters. The
name was changed to “Oceanville” in 1864 to reflect
its water-based economy and to “Oceanside” in 1918.
The Oceanside Fire Department was established in
1902. Columbia Engine Company No. 1, an old firehouse, still exists, and is located at the southwest corner of the triangle where Lincoln Avenue meets Long
Beach Road.4

10

Section I: Community overview

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 3: Geographic scope

Section I: Community overview

11

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 4: Regional context

Oceanside grew rapidly following World War II.
Between 1945 and 1950, the population doubled and
grew from approximately 10,000 to about 20,000
residents. Demand was so great that houses were
built on garden plots, in back yards, and in other
untraditional places. Eventually, modern building
codes and new fill techniques made it feasible to build
on marshland. Channels were dredged, and marshes
were filled to accommodate new development,
resulting in the largely built-out hamlet of today.5
Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle were originally settled by the Rockaway Native
Peoples, who used it for farming and to raise pigs and

12

Section I: Community overview

cattle. Native Americans also fished and clammed in
the surrounding marshlands and waters. During the
colonial period, English settlers used the land to raise
hogs, and the island was named Hog Island, a name
that was used until about 1874.6
Between 1851 and 1870, a New York clothier named
Peter C. Barnum obtained ownership of Hog Island. In
1870, the LIRR laid a single track through the island
to serve tourists travelling to popular summer vacation
areas in Long Beach. Access to the island by railroad
set the stage for future development, and Hog Island
was renamed Barnum Island. Plans to develop the
island soon followed but were interrupted by World

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

War I. In 1921, the land was purchased by the Island
Park-Long Beach Corporation to be developed as a
resort and the island was renamed “Island Park.”7
In order to provide soil to fill the low-lying
marshlands, the Corporation dredged the Island
Park Canal and the Island Park Bay. Between 1922
and 1926, a major building boom occurred at the
southern end of the island, and the LIRR station was
relocated from the northern end of the island to its
present southern site. In 1926, Island Park became
an incorporated Village but did not include present
day Barnum Island and Harbor Isle because of limited
residential activity in those areas. At the time of
incorporation, there were fewer than 1,000 property
owners, most of whom used their properties only
during the summer months.8
The Village of Island Park continued to develop
with additional summer bungalows and year-round
homes. Long Beach Road, near the railroad station,
developed into a small business district. A volunteer
fire department, a small school, and a site for religious
observations were erected to serve the growing
number of year-round residents.9
As the area transitioned to year-round use,
development expanded in Barnum Island and
Harbor Isle. Barnum Island saw the development
of commercial and industrial uses along Austin
Boulevard, and residential and maritime uses along
its eastern shoreline. Harbor Isle’s more isolated
location across the Island Park Channel meant that
it developed largely as a waterfront residential
community, with a few maritime uses including
marinas and a now vacant waterfront petroleum
terminal at its southern tip.

Governance and public services
Barnum Island, Oceanside, and Harbor Isle are
unincorporated hamlets located in the 4th District of
the Town of Hempstead. The Town is headed by an
elected Supervisor, and each District is represented
by a Town Council Member. The Town provides
municipal services, managing planning and economic
development, building and zoning permits, public
safety, sanitation, parks, and conservation programs.
With the exception of County roads, it owns, operates,
and maintains the local road network and stormwater
system.

The Village of Island Park has its own elected
government. The Village is headed by an elected
Mayor and Deputy Mayor. Three Village Trustees also
represent residents. The Village owns and operates
Village parks. A building department oversees zoning
and building permits; and a public works department
operates the road network, stormwater system, and
sanitation services. The Village Court enforces all
Village ordinances, local laws, zoning ordinances, and
New York State traffic regulations.
Oceanside students are served by the Oceanside
School District, which provides education from
pre-kindergarten through 12th grade in 10 school
facilities spread throughout Oceanside. The Island
Park School District serves the children of Barnum
Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle
from kindergarten through 8th grade in two schools,
Francis X. Hegarty Elementary and Lincoln Orens
Middle School. High school students have the option
of attending school in the West Hempstead School
District or in the neighboring Long Beach Public
Schools.
The Oceanside Fire Department provides fire
protection and emergency response services for
Oceanside. Island Park has its own Fire Department,
which provides fire protection and emergency services
for the Village of Island Park and Harbor Isle, and
emergency services for Barnum Island. Barnum
Island has its own fire district and contracts with the
Village of Island Park Fire Department for emergency
services.
The Water Authority of Western Nassau County
provides water for the entire Community. Sewer
service is provided by Nassau County through its
Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant, which is located
adjacent to the Community in Bay Park, just across
the Hog Island Channel from Oceanside.

Population and income10
The Community’s 2010 population was 44,072, and
the median age was 43.2. The population is expected
to have a small net decline (1.2%) by 2020.11
However, there is a significant projected decline of
almost 18% for individuals between the ages of 45
and 54 years, and a 31% increase in individuals 65
to 74 years old. These large shifts in the age of the

Section I: Community overview

13

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

population will have an impact on the demand for and
types of housing and social services needed. Seniors,
for example, may decide to relocate outside of the
Community, downsize to smaller homes, or live in
assisted living communities or nursing homes. Some
seniors may also want or need supportive services in
order to age in place.
In addition to seniors, other vulnerable populations
include veterans, the disabled, limited English
speakers, and low-income families. More than 2,330
civilian veterans live in the Community. The disabled
account for almost 9% of the population (3,985); with
45% of the disabled population aged 65 years and
older.
Nearly 7,200 Community residents speak a language
other than English at home. Close to 44% are
Spanish-language speakers, 41% speak another
Indo-European language, and 9% speak Asian and
Pacific Island languages. More than 35% of foreignlanguage speakers reported that they spoke English
“less than very well.” Access to housing resources and
information, especially as related to disaster planning

Housing awaiting repairs in the Village of Island Park
Source: URS

14

Section I: Community overview

and evacuation, are particularly challenging for these
vulnerable populations.
Median 2012 household income was $91,201, and
is above the Nassau County median income of
$81,300.12 However, nearly 41% of households have
incomes at or below $74,999, including 1,758 (12%
of all households) with incomes of $24,999 or less.
This has implications on housing demand, supply, and
affordability, which is discussed in the next section.

Housing summary13
In 2012, the Community contained a total of 15,840
housing units; 95% were occupied and 5% were
vacant. The homeowner vacancy rate was less than
2%, while the rental vacancy rate was slightly more
than 6%. Of occupied units, 86% were owneroccupied, and the remaining 14% were rental
units. Housing units were primarily in single-family
detached homes (77%), two-family homes (10%),
and structures with 20 or more units (5%). Four
percent of units were single-family attached homes,
2% of units were in structures of 10-19 units, 1% of

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

units in 5-9 unit structures, and another 1% in 3-4
family homes. In addition, 61 mobile homes, boats,
and recreational vehicles are part of the Community’s
housing stock.
Most housing units were built between 1940 and 1969
(62%), and a significant percentage (22%) were
built in 1939 or earlier. The age of the housing stock
indicates that most homes were built under building
codes that did not likely include resiliency measures,
which puts a majority of homes at higher risk of
storm-related damages.
The average home value of an owner-occupied home
in the Community was $467,633 in 2012. Of the
12,925 owner-occupied units in the Community, 55%
have values of $300,000 to $499,999, 35% have
values of $500,000 to $999,000, 6% have values
between $200,000-$299,999, and 1% have values of
$1,000,000 and above. About two-thirds of owneroccupied units had mortgages in 2012. The median
mortgage amount was $3,076 per month.

Approximately 43% of owners who occupy their units
and have mortgages have housing costs that are
more than 35% of their incomes. These households
have housing expenses above the generally accepted
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(U.S. HUD) definition of housing affordability, which
states that households should pay no more of 30%
of income for housing. Twenty-nine percent of the
owners who do not have mortgages, also pay more
than 35% of household income for housing, indicating
that these owners also have a housing cost burden as
defined by U.S. HUD.
High housing expenditures as a percentage of income
(cost burden) is problematic for a numerous reasons;
including the fact that cost burdened households
have less income to pay for other critical needs,
such as health care and food. Owners who have to
dedicate large portions of their incomes to paying
basic housing costs often do not have funds available
for repairs and upgrades that can impact the basic
conditions and resiliency of their homes. Nearly 85%
of the Community’s housing stock was built before
1960 and is now more than 50 years old. Resiliency

Housing along Bedell Creek, Oceanside
Source: URS

Section I: Community overview

15

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

requirements that may require raising homes will be a
particular challenge for cost burdened homeowners.
As of 2012, the Community had 2,061 occupied rental
units. The median rent was $1,433; however, more
than 42% of units have rents above $1,500; and an
estimated 45% of renters (929) have housing costs
that are more than 35% of their incomes. These
households may also be forced to forego other basic
needs and or live in crowded or substandard housing.

Land use and economic development
The Community is highly developed, with nearly
95% of land already developed. Future development
will come from infill of scattered vacant parcels and
redevelopment of underutilized properties. Land use
in the Community is primarily residential (57%).
Nearly 12% of the land is dedicated to industrial
uses, and 7% is used for commercial development.
Commercial recreation and entertainment uses (golf
courses, marinas, and other for-profit recreation
venues) make up approximately 7% of the land area.
Publicly-owned land accounts for almost 10% of land
use, as shown in Table 2. Parks and open space make
up a 3.5% of the total land area, and less than 2% of
land is vacant (without any structures).

The Community’s economy is driven by its industrial
and commercial corridors, which encompass a
little more than 20% of its land area. Nearly 1,400
businesses operate in the various commercial and
industrial areas, and they employ more than 13,000
workers with an annual payroll of close to $575 million
in 2011.14 Water-dependent and water-enhanced uses
include an industrial area located on the Hog Island
Channel in Oceanside that takes advantage of deep
water access provided by the Channel, five marinas
spread throughout the Community’s shoreline, and
restaurants located along the Wreck Lead waterfront.
All were damaged in Superstorm Sandy, and of the
waterfront restaurants, only Pop’s Seafood Shack and
Grill operates today.
In Oceanside, Long Beach Road is the main
commercial corridor, lined with retail and offices
uses at the north end and transitioning to largerscale shopping centers towards the south end. The
former Oceanside landfill and Long Island Power
Authority/Public Service Electric and Gas (LIPA/
PSEG) Long Island substation property sit at the foot
of Long Beach Road as it passes into Island Park.
Lawson Boulevard is another important corridor in
Oceanside. It includes a mix of commercial and light
industrial uses and the Oceanside LIRR Station. Other
Oceanside commercial corridors include Atlantic

Table 2: Land use
Land use

Total acres

Percent of total

Residential

1,845

57.4%

Industrial

384

11.9%

Community service/publicly owned

315

9.8%

Commercial

223

6.9%

Commercial recreation and entertainment

214

6.7%

Public parks and wildlife conservation

112

3.5%

Other

70

2.2%

Vacant

50

1.6%

TOTAL

3,213

100%

Source: Nassau County GIS, NYS DOS
*Note that overlapping of parcel data could result in an over count of total land area.

16

Section I: Community overview

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 5: Land use

Section I: Community overview

17

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Avenue, Merrick Road, Mott Street, and Brower
Avenue between Davison Avenue and Foxhurst Road.
Austin Boulevard is Barnum Island’s economic corridor.
The northern end includes a mix of light industrial
and commercial uses including auto and construction
related businesses, wholesalers, specialty and some
food related uses, motels, and small-scale retail.
Further south Austin Boulevard includes a mix of retail
strip malls with small businesses. The commercial
corridor is anchored by the King Kullen shopping
center on Austin Boulevard where Long Beach Road
merges with it before crossing the Long Beach Bridge.
The Village of Island Park’s commercial uses are
concentrated along Long Beach Road after it turns
north-south, meeting the LIRR tracks near the
Island Park Station. A small downtown commercial
district sits near the intersection of Long Beach and
Warwick Roads, anchored by the Village Hall, Island
Park Library, small restaurants, shops, and offices.
Light industrial uses and an indoor tennis facility
sit between downtown Island Park and the Wreck
Lead waterfront, which includes a marina and Pop’s
Seafood Shack. Harbor Isle commercial uses include
two marinas and a boat repair shop.

Island Park Canal, the Village of Island Park
Source: URS

18

Section I: Community overview

Transportation access
The Community enjoys excellent regional transit
access via the LIRR Long Beach Line, with stations
in Oceanside at Lawson Boulevard and West Windsor
Parkway and the Village of Island Park at Long Beach
and Warwick Roads. Local bus service is provided by
the Nassau Inter-County Express (NICE), with the
Number 15 bus linking the Community to Rockville
Centre and Garden City to the north and the Long
Beach LIRR Station to the south.
Roadway access to the larger south shore Long
Island region is limited, which complicated evacuation
efforts during Superstorm Sandy. As the northernmost
community, Oceanside enjoys the best roadway
access to points north, east, and west. Major north/
south egress and entry routes include Long Beach
Road, Lawson Boulevard, Oceanside Road, and
Lincoln Avenue. Atlantic Avenue and Foxhurst Road
provide east/west egress and entry.
Because they are located on an island, Barnum Island,
the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle have only
one access point to the north and one to the south.
On the north end, Long Beach Road crosses onto the
island from Oceanside, splitting into Austin Boulevard
in Barnum Island and Long Beach Road in Island Park.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The island is connected to the City of Long Beach
and the barrier island by the Long Beach Bridge as it
crosses the Wreck Lead Channel.
Harbor Isle is the most isolated and secluded of the
four communities. Harbor Isle is west of the Village
of Island Park, and separated from it by Island Park
Channel. It can only be accessed through the Village
of Island Park on either Warwick Road or Island
Parkway North.

Parks and open space
The Community is served by two large parks, a 52acre nature preserve, three community beaches, and
several small parks. Despite the overall high level of
development in the Community, Oceanside’s eastern
waterfront is largely undeveloped, with a golf course,
marine nature study area, park, a single-family
residential neighborhood, and former landfill making
up the land uses there.
The Town of Hempstead Oceanside Park encompasses
42-acres along West Bay and Bedell Creek at the
south east corner of Oceanside. This waterfront park
includes play equipment, playing fields, swimming
and wading pools, basketball courts, a roller hockey
rink, tennis courts, and a trail network. It served as
an emergency supply distribution center for Oceanside
after Superstorm Sandy.
On the other side of Bedell Creek, the Town of
Hempstead Marine Nature Study area is a 52-acre
preserve devoted to environmental education and
natural history. The area has seven designated
observation and study sites that are accessed by
elevated boardwalks. Study sites provide information
on salt marsh ecology, marine conservation practices,
earth science, marine biology, and nature study.
The Town of Hempstead Shell Creek Park is located
on the eastern shore of Barnum Island, just north
of California Place Canal. The park’s 12-acres are
regularly used by the residents of Barnum Island, the
Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle. It includes
playgrounds, playing fields, trails, basketball and
tennis courts, and a fishing pier.
Three beaches provide water access. Little Beach
and Masone Beach are located on the western shore
of Island Park. Little Beach is badly eroded, and the

Oceanside Park athletic fields
Source: URS

Village of Island Park has been working with the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers to restore it. Masone Beach
is larger than Little Beach and includes picnic and
recreational facilities. In the summer, it hosts movie
nights and the Village’s 4th of July fireworks show.
Harbor Isle Beach is located in Harbor Isle, just across
the Island Park Channel from Little Beach. It includes
a gazebo, benches, and tables. Harbor Isle Beach was
significantly eroded during Superstorm Sandy.
Other recreation facilities in the Community include
Landgraf Park, just above Masone Beach in the Village
of Island Park. This waterfront park offers playground
equipment and views of beautiful sunsets. Wrights
Field at the north end of Bedell Creek in Oceanside
includes two playing fields that are regularly used by
youth sports organizations.
Finally, the seven-acre former CIBRO petroleum
terminal is a significant piece of vacant land in the
Community. It is listed in the New York State 2019
Open Space Conservation Plan for possible acquisition
and remediation.

Section I: Community overview

19

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Description of storm damages
Superstorm Sandy
Superstorm Sandy struck Long Island on October
29, 2012, with tropical storm force winds. It created
a storm surge of 9-to 12-feet above tide levels from
Kings Point on the western end of Long Island Sound
to the Battery on the southern tip of Manhattan.
Superstorm Sandy’s effect was devastating, causing
widespread damage to lives, homes, businesses, core
infrastructure, government property, and an economy
just beginning to recover from the Great Recession
of 2008. In New York State, the storm caused 53
fatalities,15 destroyed an estimated 305,000 homes,16
affected more than 2,000 miles of roads, produced
catastrophic flooding in subways and tunnels,
and damaged major power transmission systems.
Fourteen counties, including Nassau County, were

declared Federal disaster areas.17 Economic losses
in New York as a result of Superstorm Sandy were
estimated to be between $30 and $50 billion, with an
estimated $10 to $20 billion in insured losses.18 New
York Governor Andrew M. Cuomo stated that storm
damage would cost the State nearly $42 billion, with
the vast majority of damage centered on New York
City and Long Island.19
On October 28, 2012, Nassau County Executive
Edward P. Mangano signed an evacuation order
effective for 2:00p.m. on that day, requiring a
mandatory evacuation of all residents living in a flood
or storm surge zone. The evacuation area was defined
as south of Sunrise Highway, from the Queens line
to Rockville Centre and South of Merrick Road, from
Rockville Centre to the Nassau-Suffolk border.20
Despite the evacuation order, many residents chose
to shelter in place. They evaluated expected flood
elevations based on their experience with Hurricane

Damage to buildings in the Village of Island Park due to Superstorm Sandy
Source: Jim Mooney, East Rockaway, NY

20

Section I: Community overview

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Irene in August 2011. Except in the Village of Island
Park, Hurricane Irene flooding was not nearly as
widespread as in Superstorm Sandy, creating a false
sense of security for those who chose not to evacuate.
When evacuation routes flooded during the storm
people who failed to evacuate were trapped until
water receded. During this time, many were without
electricity, gas, and sewer service. Communications
were limited, and emergency responders were unable
to reach wide swaths of the Community.
The Community was severely damaged by Superstorm
Sandy’s storm surge. Nearly all of Barnum Island,
Island Park, and Harbor Isle and approximately twothirds of Oceanside were flooded (Figure 6).
Part of what made Superstorm Sandy so damaging
for the Community, and all of Long Island, was the
timing of its landfall. The eye of the storm struck
Long Island at high tide. On top of that, the moon
was full, leading to a higher than normal “moon tide,”
with the storm surge riding on top of this extra high
tide. The extraordinary combination of high tide and
storm surge swept across beaches, topped bulkheads,
and pushed into Reynolds Channel, forcing its way up
California Canal, Bedell Creek, Grand Canal, Powell
Creek, and other inland waterways. Some of the
Community’s most severe flooding occurred in inland
areas as a result of tidal surge overbanking inland
waterways.
Superstorm Sandy devastated all four Community
subareas, though the experience in each was unique
to the source of tidal flooding and the topography of
the area.
In Oceanside, the areas south of Waukena Avenue
and along Hog Island Channel and Parsonage, Bedell,
and Powell creeks were inundated with as much as
four-feet of water. Oceanside’s Long Beach Road
commercial corridor and Lawson Boulevard were
under four-to six-feet of water. Homes and businesses
in neighborhoods near Grand Canal and Bedell Creek
experienced up to six-feet of water as tidal surge
worked its way into these inland communities.
In Barnum Island, the worst flooding occurred near
the California Place Canal and along Wreck Lead
with up to eight-feet of water entering homes and
businesses. Homes and businesses along the three
inlets above California Place Canal also received six-to

eight-feet of water. Wreck Lead waterfront restaurants
in Barnum Island and the Village of Island Park were
destroyed. The Austin Boulevard commercial corridor
saw four-to six-feet of water entering its businesses,
destroying equipment and merchandise and damaging
structures. Boats were ripped from their moorings
in local marinas and sank or were carried away,
sometimes miles from their starting point.
Tidal waters inundated all of the Village of Island
Park, coming from Wreck Lead, California Place Canal,
Island Park Channel, and across Little Beach from the
Hog Island Channel. Almost all of Island Park between
Long Beach Road and Nassau Lance were inundated
by six to eight feet of water. The Village of Island Park
downtown and Long Beach Road commercial district
were submerged under six-to eight-feet of water.
Flood victims in the Village of Island Park took shelter
on the second floor of the Island Park Firehouse,
which was itself flooded. During the peak of the storm
firefighters were unable to respond to a house fire on
Marina Road, which was inaccessible due to flooding.
By morning, the Island Park Fire Department had
received 300 emergency calls that it was unable to
respond to until conditions improved enough to make
a safe response possible.
In Harbor Isle, the worst flooding was limited to the
Wreck Lead and Hog Island Channel shorelines, with
six-to eight-feet of water, though the water reached
up to two-feet throughout Harbor Isle. As in Barnum
Island and Island Park, marinas were hit hard with
boats were ripped from their moorings.
In homes and businesses, flooding destroyed personal
belongings, merchandise, electrical and mechanical
systems, flooring, and walls. The tidal surge was
slow to recede, trapping water in streets, homes,
and businesses for up to two days. During this time
water infiltrated walls and the insulation behind them,
increasing the damage to structures and the cost to
restore them.
As of June 2013, there were more than 7,700 Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Individuals
and Households Program (IHP) registrations for
disaster relief by homeowners in the Community
with reported damages of $132 million. More than
2,500 renters registered with FEMA.21 In total, more
than 50% of the housing stock in Barnum Island,

Section I: Community overview

21

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 6: Superstorm Sandy storm surge extent

22

Section I: Community overview

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle suffered
substantial flood damage, meaning that the cost to
restore the building to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of its market value before
the damage occurred.
As of December 2013, the U.S. Small Business
Administration (SBA) had received a total of 408
applications from businesses within the Community
employing more than 2,000 people. Of those seeking
U.S. SBA funding for repairs, 42% have been
approved, covering only $18.6 million of the $44.2
million in reported damages.22
In addition to flooded homes and businesses, the
Community experienced a major breakdown of critical
transportation systems, power, stormwater drainage,
and sanitary sewer infrastructure.
Tidal surge smashed into Community beaches and
shoreline parks, eroding Little Beach in Island Park,
Harbor Isle Beach in Harbor Isle, and the Oceanside
Park shoreline. In Island Park, Masone Beach’s seawall
provided some protection, but the tide still washed
away sand and fixtures.
The surge from Superstorm Sandy caused the
Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant to go offline at

10:00p.m. on October 29, 2012. A nine-foot wall of
water washed over the plant, knocking out power and
causing more than 100 million gallons of raw sewage
to flow into waterways directly west of the Community
and to back up into basements of homes in the
Oceanside, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle.
As Nassau County worked to repair damages, another
2.2 billion gallons of partially treated sewage was
released into Reynolds Channel. The plant remained
off-line for approximately 58 hours until service was
restored at 6:00 a.m. on November 1, 2012.23
Approximately 8,100 homes in the Community lost
power. It took more than four weeks for service to
be fully restored. According to Community residents
an uprooted tree in the Village of Island Park led
to a major natural gas main break that cut off gas
supply to homes that took up to three weeks to repair.
Community residents suffered through much of a
chilly November without heat or electricity.
Communications systems failed due to down lines
and power outages that cut off electricity to cellular
towers, leaving people in the dark, cold, and without
a way to communicate their needs. Fed up with the
situation, the Oceanside community came together
to rally for the restoration of power service 12 days
after the storm, when the failure of LIPA’s E.F. Bartlett
Power Station continued to leave many homes dark
and powerless.24
Lawson Boulevard, Austin Boulevard, and Long
Beach Road, which are Nassau County-designated
evacuation routes, and other major streets were
impassable during the storm as were local streets
that feed into the evacuation routes. These closures
blocked late evacuation for Community and Long
Beach residents, preventing escape and complicating
emergency response.

Flooding at the Island Park Long Island Rail Road
Station during Hurricane Irene, August 29,2011
Source: MTA

Firehouses and emergency service facilities were
heavily damaged during the storm. The Oceanside
Fire Department Hose Company No. 1 and South
Side Hose Company No. 2 were flooded. The Island
Park Firehouse flooded, destroying compressed air
equipment and five emergency response vehicles,
including an engine, ambulance, two chiefs’ vehicles,
and a heavy rescue vehicle, with a replacement

Section I: Community overview

23

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

cost of up to $1.5 million. The firehouse sustained
$500,000 in damage to electrical and mechanical
systems and may also have suffered structural
damage. A structural assessment of the building is
pending. Island Park Village Hall was destroyed, and
it is operating from temporary trailers while awaiting
reconstruction. The Island Park Library was flooded
and closed until July 29, 2013.25
Several schools sat directly in Superstorm Sandy’s
path and suffered major damage. In Oceanside,
Schools 4, 8, 9E, and 9M were damaged. Classes
for School 8 were moved to School 6 while repairs
were made. Oceanside School District damages are
estimated at $5 million. Francis X. Hegarty Elementary
School in the Village Island Park had four- to six-feet
of water, forcing it to close.26 The Island Park School
District consolidated all of its classes in the middle
school while repairs were completed, and Hegarty
School did not reopen until the next school year in
September 2013. Just south of the Community, Long
Beach Hospital was seriously damaged and remains
closed. Although not located in the Community, it
is the nearest hospital for many residents, and the
Community relied on it for medical services.
Superstorm Sandy created untold amounts of debris,

Superstorm Sandy damage to Barnum Island businesses
Source: Jim Mooney, East Rockaway, NY

24

Section I: Community overview

including large items such as boats, cars, heating
fuel tanks, and building materials that were removed
by herculean efforts of volunteers and emergency
responders in the weeks after the storm, and are still
being removed from area waterways and marshes
today by public agencies and volunteer groups. More
insidious even than this large debris has been the
sand and other small debris that made its way into
stormwater systems, impeding their function. This
has increased nuisance flooding during high tides and
small storms that have occurred since Superstorm
Sandy.

Hurricane Irene
The eye of Hurricane Irene crossed Long Island
on August 28, 2011, and caused flooding to the
Community, although not to nearly the same extent as
Superstorm Sandy. A National Weather Service report
states that a storm surge of three-to six-feet caused
hundreds of millions of dollars in property damage
in New York City and Long Island.27 Figure 7 shows
the approximate flood inundation extent of Hurricane
Irene.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 7: Hurricane Irene peak storm tide elevation

Section I: Community overview

25

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

In Oceanside, Lawson Boulevard was submerged by
up to three-feet of water. Reed Channel overflowed its
banks, flooding the residential neighborhood located
on its western shore. Bedell Creek also flooded though
to a far lesser extent than in Superstorm Sandy. The
streets and homes just north of Oceanside Park also
flooded.
About 25% of the land area in Barnum Island flooded
during Hurricane Irene. As in Superstorm Sandy, the
Wreck Lead waterfront and California Place Canal
were the most severely flooded.
About 75% of Island Park was flooded, with water
coming from Wreck Lead, Island Park Channel, and
Hog Island Channel. Downtown Island Park streets,
businesses, and the Island Park LIRR Station were
inundated. The Island Park Firehouse and Village Hall
were damaged.
Much of Harbor Isle escaped flooding during
Hurricane Irene, though homes and businesses along
the shoreline south of Brighton Boulevard received up
to two-feet of water.

C. Critical issues
Superstorm Sandy highlighted a number of areas
where the Community can bolster its resilience
to future storm events. The NYRCR planning
process included an asset inventory and needs and
opportunities analysis (detailed in Section II) designed
to help identify ways to make the Community more
resilient. Results of the inventory and analysis were
validated by the Committee in its meetings as well the
public at two subsequent Public Engagement Events.
Resident safety, emergency response capabilities,
access to power, and protection from flooding were
identified as the greatest Community needs.
Since Superstorm Sandy, fire departments and
emergency responders throughout the Community
have been working to rebuild and expand emergency
response facilities and to increase their capacity
to respond effectively to future emergencies. This
has included reconstructing Fire Headquarters in
Oceanside, increasing resiliency of other emergency
response facilities, expanding communication systems,
and planning for future needs. There is an opportunity
to build on those planning efforts by constructing
resilient emergency response facilities and facilities
to serve out-of-area emergency responders and by
purchasing generators, cellular towers and other
communications equipment, and rescue vehicles.
Access to power during and after an emergency was
identified as a critical Community issue. Power and
natural gas outages were widespread during and after
Superstorm Sandy. Residents and businesses went as
long as four weeks without electricity and three weeks
without natural gas. Even those with generators could
not power them because gas to run the generators
was not available, either because gas stations did
not have power to pump it or because of delivery
interruptions.
The area’s low elevation makes flooding a constant
concern. As is shown on Figure 8, nearly all of the
Community is below eight feet in elevation. Lowerlying bay and creek front shorelines and interior
“bowls” that are lower than surrounding land area are

Second Public Engagement Event
Source: Sustainable Long Island

26

Section I: Community overview

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 8: Elevation and topography

Section I: Community overview

27

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

particularly susceptible to flooding during high tides
and even ordinary rain and snow events.
Superstorm Sandy had a severe impact on Community
businesses. Based on U.S. SBA data, business losses
amounted to more than $44 million, although total
approved loans only covered 42% of these losses.28
This indicates that businesses affected by flooding
may still be struggling to recover from Superstorm
Sandy.
Public facilities, including schools, municipal buildings,
and firehouses were hard hit by Superstorm Sandy
and remain vulnerable to future storm events. A
majority of the schools, municipal buildings, and
firehouses in the Community serve many purposes. In
the aftermath of Superstorm Sandy, many were used
as feeding and supply distribution stations. Since the
storm, representatives from the Oceanside School
District and Fire Department have been planning to
formalize the role of Oceanside schools as staging
areas, emergency supply distribution centers, and
feeding stations in emergency recovery efforts.
The Community includes eight senior facilities,
including housing, nursing homes, and residential
rehabilitation facilities. While these facilities are
evacuated prior to storm events, each needs to be
made more resilient to future storm events to speed
the return of vulnerable populations to their homes
and supportive services as soon as is safe following an
emergency.
The marshes surrounding the Community have
been significantly reduced and degraded by land
development, filling and dredging activities, and
environmental contamination over the last century.

28

Section I: Community overview

Superstorm Sandy swept over the marshland and
expedited the uprooting of many of the grasses
and decreasing the natural sponge-effect typical of
healthy marsh systems. Much of the existing shoreline
is made up of infill land built on the site of historic
marshes. The remaining marshes and shoreline
areas need protection and enhancement to restore
their storm buffer capacity and other environmental
functions.
The inability of stormwater to drain is a major issue
for the Community. The Community’s stormwater
systems have been damaged in major storm events,
including Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene.
Surge waters carried debris and sediment into the
system. It is suspected that the floodwaters damaged
tidal flow devices and undermined catch basins,
drainage culverts, and other infrastructure. The
system capacity appears to have decreased since
the two storms, as evidenced by increased nuisance
flooding during high tide and moderate storm events.
About 100 stormwater outfalls are located below the
high-tide line so that tidal water blocks drainage and
backs up into the stormwater system, resulting in
flooding during normal rainfalls and high-tide events
and causing catastrophic system failures during major
storm events. Municipal staff, Committee members,
and Community members cited instances of tidal
backflow into the system, with water coming out of
stormwater catch basins and flooding roadways during
high-tide events and surges. During Superstorm
Sandy, the combination of tidal surge and runoff
completely shut down the stormwater infrastructure,
causing widespread flooding.
Further discussion of these critical issues is provided
in the needs and opportunities in Section II.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

D. Community vision
This section describes the Committee’s vision
statement for the NYRCR Plan to rebuild stronger,
smarter, and safer. The Committee facilitated a
public process (detailed in Section V) that resulted
in a shared vision for the Community reflective of
residents’ respect for local diversity, pride in the
unique location, natural assets, and commitment
to home-grown businesses. The Committee, with
input from the public, developed the following vision
statement:
Enhance the quality of life and chart a course
towards the future by creating solutions to rebuild
and revitalize two communities that are enriched by
the diversity of their residents. Facilitate positive,
innovative change that will provide an environment
that is SAFE and an infrastructure that is RESILIENT,
so that each community can thrive, sustain itself in
the face of adversity and preserve its uniqueness and
charm.

Rebuild stronger, smarter, and safer
The ultimate goal for NYRCR Barnum Island/
Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle is
to rebuild in a manner that addresses resilience,
sustainability, and greater prosperity to ensure the
area’s long-term success. Overall the Community
seeks to:
•

Increase protection from both coastal and
stormwater flooding;

•

Increase housing resilience and expand housing
options;

•

Rebuild in a better, smarter manner using
sustainable and resilient approaches that
support and accommodate existing residents
and businesses while addressing affordable
housing and growing desirable new businesses;
and,

•

Address multiple needs at once when replacing
or redeveloping infrastructure, (e.g., combine
updating and modifying of underground utilities,
such as stormwater and sewer lines during road
construction).

In addition to Community-wide goals, the vision
also includes a series of site-specific strategies that
celebrate the many physical assets and focal points of
these places:
•

Implement a transit-oriented development
in the Village of Island Park to revitalize its
downtown and waterfront;

•

Invest in schools and senior centers to minimize
flood damage;

•

Revitalize the Oceanside waterfront industrial
area;

•

Protect and enhance Oceanside Park;

•

Construct a new building for the Island Park
Village Hall, built to withstand future weather
events;

•

Restore beloved beaches, including Little Beach,
Harbor Isle Beach, and Masone Beach; and,

•

Create new opportunities for recreational and
open space.

A comprehensive review of Community reconstruction
and resiliency strategies is available in Section III. A
detailed explanation of public engagement activities is
available in Section V.

Section I: Community overview

29

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

E. Relationship to regional
plans

•

Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant:
Improvements to the Bay Park Sewage
Treatment Plan to increase its resiliency and
consolidate with the Long Beach wastewater
treatment, is being considered. Mitigation
measures and additional changes, including
creating an ocean outfall to prevent future
contamination of Reynolds Channel, Hempstead
Bay, etc., are being discussed. On February
11, 2014, Governor Cuomo announced
the commitment of $810 million for the
comprehensive rehabilitation and mitigation of
the Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant, including
the construction of a protective 500-year storm
barrier around the plant (which will take into
account sea level rise), elevating and hardening
the electrical plant distribution system, and
elevating and/or hardening 57 pump stations
serving the plant.29

•

Reynolds Channel shoreline stabilization:
The regional plan discusses stabilizing the
Reynolds Channel shoreline to provide a
barrier to prevent tidal flooding. This effort is

This NYRCR Plan includes four subareas, Barnum
Island, Oceanside and Harbor Isle, which are
unincorporated hamlets in the Town of Hempstead,
and the Village of Island Park. The Community
recognizes the importance of reaching across
traditional community and jurisdictional boundaries
to solve local and shared problems; and recognizes
the importance of coordinating issues as a part of a
broader south shore and Long Island region.

Strong Island – The story of a region’s
recovery and resurgence
The Community is located within the planning area
of the Long Island Regional Economic Development
Council (LIREDC). The LIREDC has prepared plans
that address critical issues post-Superstorm Sandy,
including their 2013 update entitled: Strong Island
- The Story of a Region’s Recovery and Resurgence.
Key regional priorities relevant to the NYRCR Plan
include:

Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant
Source: URS

30

Section I: Community overview

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

considered a priority in order to reduce tidal
flooding from Reynolds Channel and Wreck
Lead.
•

Infrastructure to support additional rental
housing: Historically, rental vacancies have
been low on Long Island, and post-Sandy fewer
rental properties are available. Construction of
rental housing and associated infrastructure
(sewer, wastewater treatment plants, roads,
and transit lines) is encouraged. The community
is considering the addition of rental housing in
mixed-use redevelopment of the Wreck Lead
waterfront, downtown Island Park, and the
Oceanside industrial area.

Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional
Sustainability Plan
The Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional
Sustainability Plan from April 2013 also includes a
number of goals that are relevant to the NYRCR
planning process. Key regional priorities from this
sustainability plan include:
•

Advancing Superstorm Sandy recovery and
rebuilding by providing incentives for greener
and more resilient developments, encouraging
relocation locally outside the floodplain, and
encouraging rapid restoration of the electric
grid. The NYRCR Plan is proposing greener and
more resilient redevelopment options for the
Community.

•

Improving energy efficiency. The NYRCR Plan
recommends exploring alternative energy
generation and distribution systems for the
Community.

•

Improving transportation options. The NYRCR
Plan proposes transportation network safety
improvements and a “complete streets” pilot
project for Long Beach Road in Oceanside.

•

Increasing the development of green
infrastructure to control flooding and decrease
pollution from stormwater runoff. The NYRCR
Plan proposes green stormwater infrastructure
as a tool to improve stormwater drainage.

•

Encouraging regional coordination of
sustainability planning and its implementation.

Additionally, the Sustainability Plan includes
recommended strategies to address climate change,
such as updating comprehensive plans to address
sea level rise, flooding, and storm surges; updating
building codes; adopting protection and mitigation
measures to protect infrastructure; and updating
emergency management plans. The Community
is considering mitigation measures to protect key
facilities as part of the NYRCR process.
Many of the recommendations found in this NYRCR
Plan align with the strategies set forth in the
previously mentioned regional plans. Reconstruction
and Resiliency Strategies are detailed in Section III.

Regional perspectives
In addition to considering the elements from the
above plans, mitigating the risk of damage from
future storms to increase resiliency will require
regional as well as local actions. The Community
receives municipal services from the Town of
Hempstead and the Village of Island Park. It is
also dependent on other entities, including utility
companies (e.g., power and natural gas) and the
LIRR, for services. In some cases, it is also in the
Community’s best interest to collaborate with each
other and neighboring municipalities and jurisdictions
to develop projects and coordinate resources. Some
issues discussed in the NYRCR Plan cross political
jurisdictions and need to be coordinated regionally.
For this Community, the greater region to consider
includes the City of Long Beach and the entire barrier
island, Nassau County, as well as greater Long Island.
On December 5, 2013, representatives from the
NYRCR the Village of Atlantic Beach/East Atlantic
Beach, NYRCR City of Long Beach, NYRCR Lido
Beach/Point Lookout, and NYRCR Barnum Island/
Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
Communities assembled to discuss issues of regional
interest and concern. These issues included coastal
protection (both for the bayfront and oceanfront),
stormwater management, green infrastructure,
complete streets, water/wastewater, and microgrid
systems. The purpose of the workshop was to provide
an educational context for the NYRCR Communities
to discuss the benefits and applicability of different
resilient and protective measures and provide
examples of models that have worked well in other
areas.

Section I: Community overview

31

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Coordination with each other and the barrier island
communities may help provide economies of scale
to obtain necessary resources for regional projects
like larger regional storm barrier projects, improving
established evacuation routes, complete streets and
stormwater improvements, microgrids, a shoreline
improvement district to help deal with common
issues like need for bulkheading, emergency services,
transportation connectivity, and potential alternative
power generation. Intergovernmental disaster
response agreements with these communities may
also be beneficial.

businesses to better monitor energy usage and to
build a smart grid.

Coordination with other communities to promote
the development of green infrastructure including
permeable pavement, bioswales, rain gardens,
and gray water reclamation would be beneficial.
In addition, the Village of Island Park, the Town of
Hempstead, and Nassau County can coordinate on
issues like wastewater treatment, evacuation routes,
and restoring marsh and wetland areas already
affected by storms.

Communication systems warrant regional coordination
as well and should be coordinated with Nassau
County Office of Emergency management (OEM).
The Community should further discuss coordination
with cell phone carriers on implementing a plan to
ensure uninterrupted service and better response
when signals are lost during a storm or emergency.
The potential of developing a regional emergency
radio broadcast or crowdsourcing system to
facilitate communication with residents when
telecommunications and traditional media outlets are
unavailable should be explored in discussions with
Nassau County OEM.

Coordination with National Grid and LIPA/PSEG is
necessary to secure backup power sources and
protect transmission and distribution facilities that are
still vulnerable. In addition, the Community can work
with LIPA/PSEG to install smart meters on homes and

Oceanside LIRR station
Source: URS

32

Section I: Community overview

The LIRR is a vital link for residents to New York
City and the rest of Long Island. The Community
should coordinate with the LIRR to ensure that train
service remains operational. In addition, there is
an opportunity to protect the Oceanside and Island
Park LIRR stations, electric substation, and track. In
January 2014, the State announced that contracts
have been awarded to repair and elevate two of the
three damaged electrical substations along the LIRR
Long Beach Branch.30

Source: URS

Section II:
Assessment of risk
and needs
33

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

II. Assessment of risk and needs
This section describes the identification of community
assets and the risk assessment in the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Barnum Island/
Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
Community. The planning process used current
conditions and future goals and strategies, to assess
the impact of hazards on assets and performed a
risk analysis to understand the level of risk to each
asset. This process helped the Community document
methods to mitigate future risk situations. The NYS
Department of State (NYS DOS) prepared coastal and
riverine risk assessment maps with assistance from
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Coastal Services Center (NOAA-CSC) and the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). As
Superstorm Sandy demonstrated, areas well inland
can be affected, so risk assessment mapping included
sources such as the FEMA 0.2% annual risk (“500year”) flood zone and the National Hurricane Center’s
Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from Hurricanes
(SLOSH) zones. The mapping also assumes a threefoot rise in sea level by 2100. The risk assessment
map for the Community is shown in Figure 9.

A. Description of community
assets and assessment of risk
Description of community assets
The purpose of the Community Asset Inventory
is to highlight the types of classes of community
assets (including critical facilities) that, if impaired
as a result of hazard events, would compromise
the essential social, economic, or environmental
functions of the community. Critical facilities are
defined as facilities, such as shelters, fire and police
stations, health facilities, and vital infrastructure
assets that are crucial to emergency response
functions following natural disasters. Community
assets and systems are resources, such as individual
housing and transportation components, schools,
hospitals, treatment plants, parks, natural areas,
and commercial areas, as well as communitywide systems, such as transportation networks,
telecommunications, stormwater, and others,
as identified by the NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee).

Table 3: New York State Department of State Risk Areas
Extreme Risk Area

High Risk Area

Moderate Risk Area

FEMA Coastal V Zones

FEMA 1% annual-chance (100-year) flood
risk (FEMA Zone V and Zone A)

FEMA 0.2% annual-chance (500-year) flood
risk

National Weather Service advisory
thresholds for shallow coastal flooding

Areas within three feet of elevation of NWS
advisory thresholds for shallow coastal
flooding

Areas within three feet of elevation of FEMA
1% annual flood risk (base flood elevations)

Areas within three feet of elevation of
mean higher high water shoreline from
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
Areas prone to erosion
Source: New York State Department of State
FEMA = Federal Emergency Management Agency
NWS = National Weather Service
SLOSH = Sea, lake, and overland surge from hurricanes

34

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Area bounded by National Hurricane
Center’s SLOSH Category 3 hurricane storm
surge inundation zone

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 9: New York coastal inundation risk assessment

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

35

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

One component of the NYRCR planning process
is to ensure that both reconstructed assets and
newly constructed assets are more resilient in the
face of future storms. Communities have a variety
of assets such as housing, transportation, schools,
hospitals, treatment plants, parks, natural areas,
and commercial areas. The Committee identified
Community assets that are important to retain and
protect during storm events. Asset locations were
mapped using Geographic Information Systems (GIS).
The Committee then analyzed assets through the
filter of the six recovery support functions established
by President Barack Obama in 2011 throughout the
National Disaster Recovery Framework. They are:
Community Planning and Capacity Building; Economic
Development; Health and Social Services; Housing;
Infrastructure; and Natural and Cultural Resources.
A description of types of assets in each Recovery
Support Function is listed below in Table 4.

The Asset Inventory Map shows the locations of the
Community assets included in the inventory (Figure
10). The asset inventory is in Table 5. Figures 11
through 14 are close-up maps showing asset locations
in more detail.
The Community Asset Inventory was completed
based on Committee input and public feedback. The
initial asset inventory identified 136 assets through
assessment of existing conditions and issues identified
by the Committee. Following feedback from the
Committee and through the first Public Engagement
Event, that list was refined and narrowed to 112
assets, including system assets. The Committee
finalized the Community Asset Inventory following the
December 18, 2013, Planning Committee Meeting.
The following list summarizes Community and system
assets:
•

Economic: Major economic development
opportunities exist in the planning area in three
major categories: marinas, industrial areas, and
commercial business areas. Five marinas are
located along the edges of the NYRCR Planning
Area and provide opportunities for water-based

Table 4: Recovery support functions
Recovery support functions
Community Planning and Capacity Building: This strategy addresses how the community will restore or
enhance its ability to organize, plan, manage, and implement its recovery.
Economic Development: This strategy addresses how the community will restore economic and business
activities and develop new economic opportunities.
Health and Social Services: This strategy addresses how the community will restore and improve essential
health and social services, including vulnerable populations.
Housing: This strategy addresses how the community will meet the demand for affordable housing (and
promotion of affordable housing), address post-disaster housing needs, and encourage disaster-resistant
housing for all income groups.
Infrastructure: This strategy addresses how the community will restore, repair, and manage essential
infrastructure services.
Natural and Cultural Resources: This strategy addresses how the community will approach natural and
cultural resource management from a risk reduction and economic development context.
Source: Guidance for New York Rising Community Reconstruction Plans: A Planning Toolkit for NYRCR Planning Committees

36

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

recreation and business development. Major
industrial services are located along Lawson
Boulevard and Hampton Road in Oceanside
and along Austin Boulevard in Barnum Island.
Commercial storefronts and community
businesses are concentrated in the Long Beach
Road corridor through both Oceanside and
the Village of Island Park. Commercial land
use is also distributed throughout the Lawson
Boulevard corridor in Oceanside.
•

Health and social services: Twenty-eight
assets in the community were classified in this
category, including post offices, emergency
response resources, schools, public works
departments, and healthcare facilities. Many
of the critical services currently provided
by the four communities are carried out
through the facilities in this list, including fire
stations and the Village of Island Park Village
Hall (first responder coordination), schools
(central gathering locations), and public works
departments (disaster response and cleanup).

•

Housing: Multiple housing assets have been
identified throughout the Community for their
importance because of density of residential
population, senior living options, or because
they house other vulnerable populations.

•

Infrastructure: Infrastructure assets located
in the Community include the Long Island
Power Authority/Public Service Electric and
Gas Company (LIPA/PSEG) Long Island
Power Station, Long Island Rail Road (LIRR)
tracks, stations, and electrical substation, and
multiple gas stations. Each of these facilities
provides services that Community residents and
businesses depend on for normal operations.
Operation and functionality of these utilities
are critical to the health and well-being of
the community at all times. Gas stations were
highlighted by residents as assets that were
severely diminished during Superstorm Sandy.
Bulkheading can also be considered an asset for
the community due to the importance of flood
protection and the need to identify those areas

where deterioration and uneven protection
heights can lead to additional flooding. In
addition to these assets, the Bay Park Sewage
Treatment Plant, located in adjacent Bay Park,
is listed as an asset because of its overarching
impact on the resiliency of the Community.
•

Natural and cultural resources: Thirty-five
natural and cultural resources assets were
identified in the Community. These assets
include houses of worship, beaches, parks,
and community meeting houses. These assets
represent facilities and places that have cultural
significance to the community.

•

System assets: These groups of assets
include priority areas important to the entire
Community. They include single-family housing,
road systems, stormwater facilities, water
systems, and telecommunications.

Once the list of assets was finalized, detailed
information about each asset, landscape attributes
in the vicinity of the asset, and the vulnerability of
the asset to flood damage was collected for the
Community Asset Inventory. The risk areas defined by
NYS DOS and discussed above were then applied to
determine which risk area each individual or system
asset is located.
Assets were then prioritized based on factors such
as importance to the Committee, the probability of
being affected by flooding, and restoration time. The
Committee identified all the assets as having a high
community value as everything in the Community is
an asset worth protecting. The assets identified and
numbered in Table 5 are shown on the asset maps
listed by the reference numbers in Table 5.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

37

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 10: Community assets

38

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 5: Community asset inventory
Economic
Asset name

Location

Risk Area

Community value

1

Aero Marine

Harbor Isle

Extreme

High

2

Andy’s Marina

Harbor Isle

Extreme

High

3

Bridgeview Yacht Club

Barnum Island Extreme

High

Village of
Island Park
Village of
Island Park

4

Empire Point Marina

5

Island Park Business District

6

Island Park Industrial District

Barnum Island High

High

7

K&K Marina

Barnum Island Extreme

High

8

Oceanside Hampton Rd Industrial District

Oceanside

Extreme

High

9

Oceanside Lawson Blvd Economic Corridor

Oceanside

Extreme

High

10

Oceanside Lawson Blvd Industrial District

Oceanside

Extreme

High

11

Oceanside Long Beach Rd Economic Corridor

Oceanside

Extreme

High

Asset name

Location

Risk Area

Community value

12

Barnum Island Fire District

Barnum Island High

High

13

Oceanside Schools #9E and #9M

Oceanside

High

High

14

Florence Smith School #2

Oceanside

Moderate

High

15

Francis Hegarty Elementary School

Village of
Island Park

High

High

16

Fulton Avenue School #8

Oceanside

High

High

17

Island Park Fire Department (FD) Exempts Hall

Village of
Island Park

High

High

18

Island Park Fire Department Headquarters

High

High

19

Island Park Fire Department Training Facility

High

High

20

Island Park Village Hall

Extreme

High

+

Extreme

High

Extreme

High

Health and Social Services

Village of
Island Park
Village of
Island Park
Village of
Island Park

21

Lincoln Orens Middle School

Barnum Island High

High

22

North Oceanside School #5

Oceanside

High

23

Oaks School #3

Oceanside

Moderate

High

24

Oceanside Care Center Inc.

Oceanside

Moderate

High

25

Oceanside FD Engine 1

Oceanside

High

High

26

Oceanside FD Headquarters

Oceanside

Moderate

High

27

Oceanside FD Hose 1

Oceanside

Moderate

High

28

Oceanside FD Hose 2

Oceanside

High

High

29

Oceanside FD Hose 3

Oceanside

Moderate

High

Moderate

* Denotes system asset

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

39

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 5: Community asset inventory, continued

+

Health and Social Services
Asset name

30

Location

Risk Area

Community value

Oceanside FD Maintenance Bldg

Oceanside

High

High

31

Oceanside High School #7

Oceanside

Moderate

High

32

Oceanside High School Castleton #6

Oceanside

Moderate

High

33

South Nassau Communities Hospital

Oceanside

Moderate

High

34

South Nassau Dialysis Center

Oceanside

High

High

35

South Oceanside School #4

Oceanside

High

High

36

Town of Hempstead Sanitation District 7

Oceanside

High

High

37

U S Post Office Island Park

Village of
Island Park

Extreme

High

38

U S Post Office Oceanside

Oceanside

Moderate

High

Village of Island Park Department of Public Works

Village of
Island Park

High

High

Asset name

Location

Risk Area

Community value

40

Alhambra Condominiums

Oceanside

High

High

41

Bishop Kellenberg Garden Apts

Moderate

High

42

Island Park Senior Housing

High

High

43

Mill River Gardens Apartments

Oceanside
Village of
Island Park
Oceanside

High

High

44

Ocean Harbor Apartments

Oceanside

High

High

45

Oceanside Cove Co-ops

Oceanside

High

High

46

Oceanside Knolls Apartments

Oceanside

Moderate

High

High

High

Extreme

High

Moderate

High

39
18

Housing

Village of
Island Park
Village of
Island Park

47

PSCH Island House

48

Regency Apartments

49

Sherwood Townhouse Apartments

Oceanside

50*

Single-Family Housing Village of Island Park, Barnum Island,
Harbor Isle

Village of
Island Park,
Extreme
Barnum Island,
Harbor Isle

High

51*

Single-Family Housing Oceanside

Oceanside

High

High

52

South Point Plaza Nursing and Rehabilitation Center

Village of
Island Park

High

High

53

Summit Apartments

Oceanside

Moderate

High

54

The Glen Apartments

Oceanside

Moderate

High

55

The Yacht Club

Barnum Island Extreme

High

56

Theresa Gardens Apartments

Oceanside

Moderate

High

57

Valley Town House Apartments

Oceanside

Moderate

High

58

Woodcrest Apartments

Oceanside

High

High

* Denotes system asset

40

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 5: Community asset inventory, continued
Infrastructure
Asset name

Location

Risk Area

59

Austin Boulevard evacuation route

All

Extreme

60

Auto Spa

Barnum Island High

Community value
High
High

61

Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant and Pump Stations

All

Extreme

High

62

BP Gas Station

Oceanside

Moderate

High

63

Gulf Oceanside Gas Station

Oceanside

Moderate

High

64

Hess Gas Station

Oceanside

High

High

65

Hess Gas Station

Oceanside

Moderate

High

66

Kings Oceanside C Store Gas Station

Oceanside

High

High

67

LIPA/PSEG E.F. Barrett Power Station

Barnum Island,
Extreme
Oceanside

High

68

LIRR Island Park Station

Village of
Island Park

Extreme

High

69

LIRR Oceanside Station

Oceanside

Extreme

High

70

LIRR electric substation

Village of
Island Park,
Extreme
Barnum Island

High

71*

Multi-community roadways

All

High

72*

Sanitary sewage systems

All

Extreme

High

73*

Storm drainage systems

All

Extreme

High

High

74*

Telecommunications

All

Extreme

High

75

USA Gasoline Gas Station

Oceanside

Moderate

High

76

USA Gasoline Gas Station

Oceanside

Moderate

High

77

Valero Gas Station

Oceanside

Moderate

High

78*

Water systems

All

High

High

* Denotes system asset

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

41

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 5: Community asset inventory, continued
Natural and Cultural Resources
Asset name

Location

Risk Area

Community value

79

American Legion Post 1246

Oceanside

Extreme

High

80

First Methodist Church

Oceanside

Moderate

High

81

First Presbyterian Church

Oceanside

Moderate

High

82

Full Gospel Church

Barnum Island High

High

83

Harbor Isle Beach

Harbor Isle

Extreme

High

High

High

High

High

High

High

High

High

Village of
Island Park
Village of
Island Park
Village of
Island Park
Village of
Island Park

84

Island Park Greek Orthodox Church

85

Island Park Jewish Center / Soul Stirring Church

86

Island Park Library

87

Island Park United Methodist Church

88

Jewish Community Center (JCC)

Oceanside

High

High

89

Knights Of Columbus

Oceanside

Moderate

High

90

Little Beach

Village of
Island Park

Extreme

High

91

Margie Street Park

Oceanside

Extreme

High

92

Masone Beach

Village of
Island Park

Extreme

High

93

Mayor Landgraf Park

Village of
Island Park

Extreme

High

94

Oceanside Community Center

Oceanside

Moderate

High

95

Oceanside Jewish Center

Oceanside

Moderate

High

96

Oceanside Library

Oceanside

Moderate

High

97

Oceanside Lutheran Church

Oceanside

Moderate

High

98

Town of Hempstead Oceanside Marine Nature Study Area

Oceanside

Extreme

High

99

Town of Hempstead Oceanside Park

Oceanside

Extreme

High

100

Sacred Heart Parish Center

High

High

101

Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church & Rectory

High

High

Village of
Island Park
Village of
Island Park

102

Shell Creek Park

Barnum Island High

High

103

St Andrews Episcopal Church

Oceanside

Moderate

High

104

St Anthonys Church

Oceanside

Moderate

High

105

Temple Avodah

Oceanside

Moderate

High

106

VFW Post 5199

Oceanside

Extreme

High

107

Windsor Avenue Bible Church

Oceanside

Moderate

High

108

Wrights Field

Oceanside

Extreme

High

109

Young Israel of Oceanside

Oceanside

Extreme

High

110

Chabad Center of Oceanside

Oceanside

High

High

111

Shaar Hashamayin

Oceanside

High

High

112

Congregation Darchai Noam

Oceanside

Moderate

High

113

Arca de Salvación

Oceanside

High

High

* Denotes system asset

42

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 11: Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle asset map detail

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

43

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 12: East Oceanside asset map detail

44

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 13: West Oceanside asset map detail

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

45

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 14: North Oceanside asset map detail

46

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Assessment of risk to assets and systems
Assets identified by the Committee face a risk of
flooding not only from future storm events on the
scale of Superstorm Sandy, but from normal lunar
cycle moon tides and small rain events. Many
areas in Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park,
Harbor Isle, and southern Oceanside are near
sea level and the drainage systems in those areas
function below capacity during storm events. Any
additional inundation causes these systems to
fail and stormwater to rise through the streets,
neighborhoods, and business districts.
The drainage issues are a foundational component
of past impacts to assets; other exposure and
vulnerability issues combine to add layers to the
problem. The geographic orientation of the four
communities opens them up to storm surges and
flooding from three directions, but particularly from
the east to the west. California Place Canal directly
impacts central Barnum Island and the Village of
Island Park due to a funneling effect for high water
flows and failures of the stormwater system to protect
assets west of the canal. Grand Canal and Bedell
Creek directly affect Oceanside assets both inland
and along the shoreline. Tidal surge and storm runoff
are not able to drain with any regularity from inland
locations.
Many Community concerns dealt with the vulnerability
of the assets, namely the ability of the assets
to recover from normal storm events as well as
major storms. Community assets, such as schools,
emergency response facilities, and government
buildings, in addition to system assets, such as
business areas and telecommunications networks,
have failed structurally in past storm events from poor
floodproofing, an exposed location, and low elevation.
The NYS DOS risk areas defined in Table 3 were used
to evaluate risk to assets in the Community. The risk
assessment map (see Figure 9) shows that most of
Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park, Harbor Isle,
and areas south of Windsor Parkway in Oceanside are
in an extreme or high-risk flooding area. These risk
areas, identified through a partnership with the NOAACSC, are intended to illustrate the areas that are most
at risk for future storms.

A risk assessment to determine the potential impact
of hazards on Community assets was conducted. The
results helped to guide the selection of proposed
strategies, such as infrastructure improvements
and changes in the building environment. The risk
assessment helped the Community choose mitigation
options to reduce future risk. Input from the
Committee, with extensive input from the public on
areas with the highest risk of flooding, was used to
supplement the risk assessment map.

Risk assessment methods
Quantifying risk: To quantify risk to vulnerable
assets within the Community, a risk assessment
tool developed by NYS DOS was used to evaluate
risk based on construction of mitigation projects.
The three factors used to assess risk were hazards,
exposure, and vulnerability31.
Asset grouping: The Community has a large number
of assets, and many of the assets share functional
commonalities that put them into the same risk
categories. These categories have been identified
to obtain a good representation of risk and the
effectiveness of management measures based on a
subset of assets, rather than to show a very long list
of assets with comparable outcomes.
In the interest of efficiency and clarity, similar or
related components are grouped as a single asset
as much as possible because they experience the
same effects from storm events and have similar
vulnerabilities. For example, resources with similar
uses and geographic locations are grouped as a single
asset instead of listing each resource individually.
Calculating risk: Hazard scores were calculated by
evaluating risk from a range of storm events, from
frequent, low-intensity events to infrequent, highintensity events. Assets located within an extreme risk
area experience hazards more frequently and with
greater impact than if they were located in a high or
moderate risk area.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

47

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Exposure scores were calculated as an expression of
the local topographic and shoreline conditions that
tend to increase or decrease the effects of coastal
hazards on assets. More exposed assets suffer storm
effects to a greater degree than assets located at
a higher elevation. A series of landscape attributes
were used to calculate a total landscape attribute
score, which includes the following quantifiers of the
landscape for each asset:
•

Does the asset have an erosion rate greater
than or equal to one-foot per year or unknown?

•

Is the waterline frequently at shore defense or
upland vegetation?

•

Are shore defenses absent, not constructed to
anticipated conditions, or deteriorating?

•

Is protective vegetation between asset and
flood source absent?

•

Are dunes absent, below base flood elevation,
eroding; bluff slope unstable, little vegetation?

•

Is the asset on coastal barrier island or filled
wetland?

Vulnerability scores are an expression of the capacity
of an asset to return to service after a storm. Assets
that can quickly recover have a low vulnerability
score.
The risk assessment tool calculated a risk score using
the formula:

Hazard x Exposure x Vulnerability = Risk

The tool generated a risk score, which represents the
relative risk of Community assets to one another. The
scores can range from 1.5 (negligible) to 75 (severe).

48

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Risk assessment results
An initial risk assessment was completed on the atrisk assets identified during the asset inventory. Using
the risk assessment tool, risk scores were calculated
for each of the assets.
Table 6 (Asset Groups) and Figure 15 show the results
of the initial risk assessment.
Full details and all information, including address and
community, for the asset inventory are contained
in Section V. Table 6 identifies the asset groups
established to represent the 109 assets contained in
the inventory.
Table 7 shows asset risk scores. The total risk scores
for NYRCR Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of
Island Park/Harbor Isle range from 18 to 67.5. The
Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant, PSEG Long Island
Power Station, and all marinas received the highest
risk scores.
The majority of assets with the highest risk scores
are the assets that were most affected by Superstorm
Sandy because of their location within an extreme risk
area and high vulnerability. These assets include those
listed above plus the Village of Island Park Public
Works, parks and beaches, commercial and industrial
areas, Island Park Village Hall, Oceanside Schools 9E
and 9M, Francis X. Hegarty Elementary School, Lincoln
Orens Middle School, and the Long Island Rail Road
(LIRR) electrical substation.
Those assets with the highest risk scores, in the
severe category, are in the most jeopardy of damage
from future storm events. As projects were evaluated,
the impacts to assets by the individual projects were
gauged through the risk tool to evaluate the reduction
in risk and subsequent increase in resiliency as a
result of the project development. A summary of the

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

risk reduction findings for each project is included in
the project descriptions in Section IV.
The assets with the largest community impacts, in
terms of future risk, tend to fall in two key categories:
infrastructure and economic development districts.
Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant and the LIPA/
PSEG Long Island Power Station had the highest
risk scores for the Community, placing them in the
severe category. Other assets in the severe category
include the LIRR electrical substation, the Hampton
Road and Lawson Boulevard Industrial Districts, all
Community marinas, single-family housing in Barnum
Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle,
and system assets for sanitary sewer and stormwater
drainage systems. Many of these assets are FEMA
critical facilities and were the first to fail during
Superstorm Sandy. A combination of Bay Park Sewage
Treatment Plant, power plant, and sanitary sewer and
stormwater systems failures have been attributed by
local leaders to be the primary cause for subsequent
failures to other assets through surface flooding

(Island Park bowl and Grand Canal) and loss of power.
Many other assets had risk scores in the high
category, which ranges in risk score from 24 to 53.
Risk scores in this category are indicative of conditions
that could lead to significant negative outcomes
from a storm. Assets in the high category included
all beaches, business districts in Oceanside and the
Village of Island Park (Lawson Boulevard and Long
Beach Road), Village of Island Park government
services, libraries and post offices, community
facilities, emergency response facilities, multi-family
housing south of Windsor Parkway, all schools, all
parks and recreation facilities, Village of Island Park
Senior Housing, both LIRR stations, and system
assets for roadways, water systems, and single-family
housing in Oceanside. Out of a total 109 identified
assets, 73 were categorized as high or severe risk.

Long Beach Road, the Village of Island Park
Source: URS

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

49

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 6: Asset groups
Asset

Risk Area

Risk Score

Assisted living, PSCH Island House and South Point Plaza Nursing & Rehab

High

High

Beaches

Extreme

High

Economic / commercial districts – Island Park, Long Beach Rd, Lawson Blvd

Extreme

High

Economic / industrial districts – Hampton Rd, Lawson Blvd, Island Park

Extreme

Severe

Government / civic – Village Hall, IP FD Exempts Hall, libraries, post offices

Extreme

High

Community organizations – American Legion, community centers, Knights of Columbus, VFW 5199,
Sacred Heart Parish Center

Extreme

High

Emergency response - Island Park, Barnum Island, Harbor Isle – BI Fire, IP FDHQ, IP FD Training

High

High

Emergency response Oceanside – Maintenance, Engine 1, HQ, Hose 1-3

High

High

Fueling stations

High

Moderate

Healthcare – South Nassau Communities Hospital, Dialysis Center

Moderate

Moderate

Apartments & condominiums

Extreme

High

Marinas

Extreme

Severe

Schools

High

High

Sanitary sewer & stormwater drainage – Bay Park STP, TOH Sanitation D7, IP Public Works, systemwide sanitation and storm sewer

Extreme

Severe

System-wide telecommunications

Extreme

High

System-wide water systems

High

High

Power – LIPA/PSEG and LIRR  electrical substations

Extreme

Severe

Parks & recreation

Extreme

High

Religious organizations

High

Moderate

Senior housing

High

High

Senior services – Oceanside Care Center

Moderate

Moderate

Transportation system – Austin Blvd evacuation route, LIRR IP and Oceanside, system-wide
roadways

Extreme

High

Single-family housing Oceanside

High

High

Single-family housing Island Park, Barnum Island, Harbor Isle

Extreme

Severe

50

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 15: Community asset risk scores

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

51

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 7: Community asset risk scores
Economic
Asset name

Risk Area

Risk score

1

Aero Marine

Extreme

Severe

2

Andy’s Marina

Extreme

Severe

3

Bridgeview Yacht Club

Extreme

Severe

4

Empire Point Marina

Extreme

Severe

5

Island Park Business District

Extreme

High

6

Island Park Industrial District

High

High

7

K&K Marina

Extreme

Severe

8

Oceanside Hampton Rd industrial district

Extreme

Severe

9

Oceanside Lawson Blvd economic corridor

Extreme

High

10

Oceanside Lawson Blvd industrial district

Extreme

Severe

11

Oceanside Long Beach Rd economic corridor

Extreme

High

Asset name

Risk Area

Risk score

12

Barnum Island Fire District

High

High

13

Oceanside Schools #9E and #9M

High

High

14

Florence Smith School #2

Moderate

High

15

Francis Hegarty Elementary School

High

High

+

Health and Social Services

16

Fulton Avenue School #8

High

High

17

Island Park FD Exempts Hall

High

High

18

Island Park FD Headquarters

High

High

19

Island Park Fire Department Training Facility

High

High

20

Island Park Village Hall

Extreme

High

21

Lincoln Orens Middle School

High

High

22

North Oceanside School #5

Moderate

High

23

Oaks School #3

Moderate

High

24

Oceanside Care Center Inc.

Moderate

Moderate

25

Oceanside FD Engine 1

High

High

26

Oceanside FD Headquarters

Moderate

High

27

Oceanside FD Hose 1

Moderate

High

28

Oceanside FD Hose 2

High

High

29

Oceanside FD Hose 3

Moderate

High

30

Oceanside FD Maintenance Bldg

High

High

31

Oceanside High School #7

Moderate

High

* Denotes System Asset

52

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 7: Community asset risk scores, continued

+

Health and Social Services
Asset name

Risk Area

Risk score

32

Oceanside High School Castleton #6

Moderate

High

33

South Nassau Communities Hospital

Moderate

Moderate

34

South Nassau Dialysis Center

High

Moderate

35

South Oceanside School #4

High

High

36

TOH Sanitation District 7

High

High

37

U S Post Office Island Park

Extreme

High

38

U S Post Office Oceanside

Moderate

High

39

Village of Island Park Department of Public Works

High

High

Asset name

Risk Area

Risk score

40

Alhambra Condos

High

Moderate

41

Bishop Kellenberg Garden Apts

Moderate

Moderate

42

Island Park Senior Housing

High

High

43

Mill River Gardens Apartments

High

Moderate

44

Ocean Harbor Apartments

High

Moderate

45

Oceanside Cove Co-ops

High

Moderate

46

Oceanside Knolls Apartments

Moderate

Moderate

47

PSCH Island House

High

High

48

Regency Apartments

Extreme

High

49

Sherwood Townhouse Apartments

Moderate

Moderate

50*

Single-Family Housing Island Park, Barnum Island, Harbor
Isle

Extreme

Severe

51*

Single-Family Housing Oceanside

High

High

52

South Point Plaza Nursing and Rehabilitation Center

High

High

53

Summit Apartments

Moderate

High

54

The Glen Apartments

Moderate

High

55

The Yacht Club

Extreme

High

56

Theresa Gardens Apartments

Moderate

High

57

Valley Town House Apartments

Moderate

High

58

Woodcrest Apartments

High

High

18

Housing

* Denotes System Asset

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

53

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 7: Community asset risk scores, continued
Infrastructure Systems
Asset name

Risk Area

Risk score

59

Austin Boulevard evacuation route

Extreme

High

60

Auto Spa

High

High

61

Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant and pump stations

Extreme

Severe

62

BP Gas Station

Moderate

Moderate

63

Gulf Oceanside Gas Station

Moderate

Moderate

64

Hess Gas Station

High

Moderate

65

Hess Gas Station

Moderate

Moderate

66

Kings Oceanside C Store Gas Station

High

Moderate

67

LIPA/PSEG E.F. Barrett Power Station

Extreme

Severe

68

LIRR Island Park Station

Extreme

High

69

LIRR Oceanside Station

Extreme

High

70

LIRR electrical substation

Extreme

Severe

71*

Multi-community roadways

High

High

72*

Sanitary sewer systems

Extreme

Severe

73*

Storm sewer systems

Extreme

Severe

74*

Telecommunications

Extreme

Severe

75

USA Gasoline Gas Station

Moderate

Moderate

76

USA Gasoline Gas Station

Moderate

Moderate

77

Valero Gas Station

Moderate

Moderate

78*

Water systems

High

High

* Denotes System Asset

54

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 7: Community asset risk scores, continued

Natural and Cultural Resources
Asset name

Risk area

Risk score

79

American Legion Post 1246

Extreme

High

80

First Methodist Church

Moderate

Moderate

81

First Presbyterian Church

Moderate

Moderate

82

Full Gospel Church

High

Moderate

83

Harbor Isle Beach

Extreme

High

84

Island Park Greek Orthodox Church

High

Moderate

85

Island Park Jewish Center / Soul Stirring Church

High

Moderate

86

Island Park Library

High

High

87

Island Park United Methodist Church

High

Moderate

88

JCC

High

High

89

Knights Of Columbus

Moderate

High

90

Little Beach

Extreme

High

91

Margie Street Park

Extreme

High

92

Masone Beach

Extreme

High

93

Mayor Landgraf Park

Extreme

High

94

Oceanside Community Center

Moderate

High

95

Oceanside Jewish Center

Moderate

Moderate

96

Oceanside Library

Moderate

High

97

Oceanside Lutheran Church

Moderate

Moderate

98

Oceanside Marine Nature Study Area

Extreme

High

99

Oceanside Park

Extreme

High

100

Sacred Heart Parish Center

High

High

101

Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church & Rectory

High

Moderate

102

Shell Creek Park

High

High

103

St Andrews Episcopal Church

Moderate

Moderate

104

St Anthonys Church

Moderate

Moderate

105

Temple Avodah

Moderate

Moderate

106

VFW Post 5199

Extreme

High

107

Windsor Avenue Bible Church

Moderate

Moderate

108

Wrights Field

Extreme

High

109

Young Israel of Oceanside

Extreme

High

* Denotes System Asset

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

55

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Assessment of risk to systems
NYRCR Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island
Park/Harbor Isle system assets have been identified
as individual assets. Refer to the risk assessment
results section above and Figure 13, the map of asset
risk scores, for context on how the system assets fit
into the overall Community.

sea level rise and extreme weather events.
Until improvements are made the Community
remains vulnerable at this time as facilities are
below grade and cannot be discharged when
they are below the tide.
•

Telecommunications: The risk score for this
system, which is located both within and outside
the Community boundaries, is high. This system
comprises telephone lines, poles, cellular towers
and antennas, specialized emergency services
communications radios, and other associated
infrastructure. The telecommunications systems
in the Community did not perform at a desired
level during and after Superstorm Sandy as they
are located in extreme risk areas and the lack of
a coordinated effort between the communities
to maintain a viable line of communication. Until
improvements are made, telecommunications
assets along major roadways, the LIRR, and in
low-lying areas, are at risk for extended outages
without adequate equipment, training, and
personnel.

•

Water systems: The risk score for this system,
which is located both within and outside the
Community boundaries, is high. This system
comprises pipes, pumps, and other associated

Systems assets are shown in Table 8 and summarized
below.
•

Sanitary sewer and stormwater drainage:
The risk score for this system, which is located
both within and outside the Community
boundaries, is severe. As discussed in the asset
risk section, the Community is low-lying and
assets, such as the Bay Park Sewage Treatment
Plant, sanitation areas, and public works
departments, are prone to extreme risk in the
event of a high-magnitude storm. The sanitary
sewer and stormwater drainage systems in
all four communities include catch basins,
pipes, inlets, outfalls, pumps, and associated
infrastructure. The identification of this system
as at severe risk recognizes the need for an
assessment to determine capital improvements
needed to restore the system to pre-Irene
conditions and improve its capacity to address

Table 8: Risk assessment results for systems asset groups
System Name

Risk Area Asset Type

Risk Score

Sanitary sewer & stormwater drainage – Bay Park STP, TOH Sanitation D7, IP
Public Works, system-wide stormwater drainage

Extreme

Wastewater

Severe

System-wide telecommunications

Extreme

Telecommunications

High

System-wide water systems

High

Water Supply

High

Transportation system – Austin Blvd evacuation route, LIRR IP and Oceanside,
system-wide roadways

Extreme

Transportation

High

Single-family housing Oceanside

High

Single-Family Residence

High

Single-family housing Island Park, Barnum Island, Harbor Isle

Extreme

Single-Family Residence

Severe

56

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

infrastructure related to delivery of water. Water
systems in the Community are comparable to
stormwater systems with respect to potential
risk and similar coverage area through each of
the four communities. Locations for the water
infrastructure, while at high risk, are not in risk
areas as severe as stormwater facilities and the
functional capabilities of these systems are not
affected as much by storm events.  
•

Transportation: The risk score for this
system, which is located both within and
outside the Community boundaries, is high.
This system comprises roadways, rail roads,
buses, water-based travel ways, bicycle and
pedestrian facilities, and associated open
space required for safe and efficient travel
through the Community. Transportation
systems play a critical role in the viability of
the Community, especially in Barnum Island,
the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle.
The main evacuation corridor for the region is
Austin Boulevard, which bisects the Community.
The vulnerability score is not as high as other
systems as transportation facilities tend to
recover faster as a result of their community
priority and connection to so many resources

and assets. The extreme risk areas of these
four communities have a number of important
roadways that are low-lying and prone to
flooding.
•

Single-family housing: Single-family
housing was defined as a high priority for this
Community and the Committee decided to
split the system into two sections—one that
includes Oceanside and one that includes the
three southern communities. The risk scores
for these two systems, which are located within
the Community boundaries, are high and
severe, respectively. The Oceanside system
has a number of vulnerable areas interspersed
with higher-elevation areas that have a lower
probability of storm damage. The southern
communities’ system is located primarily in a
bowl that has inadequate drainage, improper
access, and remains in poor condition after
both severe storm conditions and normal tidal
events.

Bay Park Yacht Harbor, Oceanside
Source: URS

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

57

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Assessment of needs and
opportunities
Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and previous
storm events highlighted a number of areas where
the Community can make improvements to bolster its
resiliency against future storm events.  
The primary focus of identifying these needs and
related opportunities is to make the Community
better prepared for future storm events. Opportunities
identified in this section emerged from the Committee
meetings and the public process (documented in
Section V of this plan) and were broadly supported by
both the Committee and the public.

Community planning and capacity
building
The Community Planning and Capacity Building
Recovery Support Function addresses the
Community’s ability to implement storm recovery
activities and to plan to mitigate the effects of future
storms.

Second Public Engagement Event
Source: Sustainable Long Island

58

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Community planning and capacity building
needs
Emergency response capabilities and access to power
are the Community’s greatest needs.

Emergency response
Effective emergency response, particularly in the first
96 hours following an emergency, has been identified
by the Committee as a critical need. The Island Park
Fire Department experienced many challenges to
achieving this emergency response effectiveness
following Superstorm Sandy, including a lack of
centralized communications, staging areas, and other
components of a coordinated response protocol. Key
elements of the need include a base of operations
for emergency personnel, centralized locations to
provide support and distribute emergency supplies
to residents, and a comprehensive radio and cellular
communications system.
Some Oceanside fire stations were not physically able
to withstand floodwaters during Superstorm Sandy.
Buildings flooded and equipment was damaged.
Volunteer emergency responders came from outside
the area to provide assistance, but Oceanside lacked

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

facilities to support their activities.
The Village of Island Park Firehouse sustained
substantial damage during Superstorm Sandy. The
building flooded, causing damage to the electrical and
mechanical systems and several vehicles were lost.
The foundation may have suffered structural damage,
although a structural analysis has not yet been
completed. There were 150 fire fighters from outside
the area that came to help in Island Park, and there
was not adequate space to house the volunteers.
Key resiliency needs for this facility include:
•

Conditions assessment and a structural analysis
to determine the serviceability of the building to
undergo upgrades or replacement;

•

Relocation of interior and exterior mechanical
and electrical equipment above projected flood
heights;

•

Installation of flood protection measures to
limit infiltration and protect the building and
equipment;

•

Installation of facilities to serve out-of-area

emergency responders; and,
•

Elevated staging areas near the firehouse for
firefighting and rescue vehicles.

Access to power and fuel
Continuous access to electrical power and natural
gas during and after an emergency is a critical issue.
Power outages were widespread during and after
Superstorm Sandy. Residents and businesses went
without electricity for up to four weeks and without
natural gas for up to three weeks. Even those with
generators went without power because fuel to run
the generators was not available, either because
gas stations did not have power to pump the fuel or
because of fuel delivery interruptions.

Resilient structures
Structures occupied by emergency response groups
throughout the Community are built at elevations
below the 100-year floodplain, also called the base
flood elevation, and are subject to frequent flooding.
Superstorm Sandy highlighted these deficiencies and
made residents aware of the need for better planning.
Zoning and building codes must require that new
construction and reconstruction of existing structures
be storm-resistant.
Community coordination
Superstorm Sandy demonstrated the need for
designated neighborhood community centers and
other facilities such as schools, fire stations, and
government centers to act as community assistance
centers for residents in times of crisis.
Communications
Continuous access to communications systems, such
as cellular networks and a community-wide wireless
network, are vital for Community residents during
emergencies.
Government coordination

The Village of Island Park former Village Hall
Source: URS

Bayfront protection, revitalization, and waterfront
usage is an important community planning issue
to help the Community rebuild better and stronger.
Future efforts will require coordination with the Town
of Hempstead.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

59

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Community planning and capacity building
opportunities
Emergency response
Fire departments and emergency responders
throughout the Community are rebuilding and
expanding emergency response facilities as well as
increasing their capacity to respond effectively to
future emergencies. Remaining gaps should be filled
by the construction of resilient emergency response
facilities; purchase of equipment, including generators;
development of communications infrastructure;
construction of facilities to serve out-of-area emergency
responders; and purchase of emergency response
vehicles.
The Community could utilize a current resource for
increasing awareness about emergency preparedness
at the household level. The Citizen Preparedness
Corps Training Program is a short training to provide
citizens with the tools and resources to prepare for
emergencies and disasters, respond accordingly,
and recover as quickly as possible. Governor Cuomo
attended a Citizen Corps training event in Nassau
County on February 22, 2014 that was attended by
more than 500 residents.32
Governor Cuomo also recently announced the launch of
a new website, NYS Prepare (www.prepare.ny.gov), to
serve as the digital home for the Citizen Preparedness
Corps community. The website will offer information
about additional trainings, disaster preparedness
tips, and ways to volunteer in the event of a disaster.
Another program to consider is the Nassau County
Community Emergency Response Team (CERT), which
is a federally funded, community-based program that
provides training and ongoing education to better
prepare communities and individuals to respond to
emergency situations. When an emergency or disaster
happens, CERT members can give critical support to
first responders and provide immediate assistance to
their community within a coordinated, collaborative,
and organized effort.

Power supply
When LIPA’s E.F. Barrett Power Station failed during
Superstorm Sandy, New York State recognized that the
management and operation of power utilities on Long
Island required reform. In response, the State reformed

60

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

LIPA/PSEG Long Island Terminal
Source: URS

LIPA, and shifted operations from the National Grid to
PSEG Long Island effective January 1, 2014.33
In October 2013, Governor Cuomo announced
$72 million in Federal funding to elevate electrical
substations on Long Island, including the E.F Barrett
Substation.34 In February 2014, Governor Cuomo
announced $1.4 billion in Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) funds for upgrades and
repairs to make Long Island’s electrical infrastructure
more resilient to future extreme weather events.
Roughly half of the FEMA funds, $705 million, will
go to repairing damage to the electrical grid. The
remaining $730 million will be used to protect the grid
from future storms.35
In addition to working with New York State and PSEG
Long Island to address power failures in the electric
grid, the Community supports exploring alternative
energy generation and distribution models to decrease
reliance on centralized power generation facilities
during emergencies. The former Oceanside Landfill
could be a potential location for alternative power
generation. The currently vacant former CIBRO

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

petroleum terminal in Harbor Isle may also present an
opportunity to support alternative power generation
as an interim use.

Access to fuel
To address access to gasoline, New York State passed
the Fuel NY Initiative in October 2013, requiring gas
stations within one-half mile of a highway exit or
hurricane evacuation route to deploy and install a
generator within 24 hours of losing power during an
emergency.36
To protect residents and businesses from future
storms, zoning and building codes for the Town of
Hempstead and the Village of Island Park could be
amended to support more resilient reconstruction
methods for residential, commercial, and public
structures, including gas stations and fuel storage
tanks. Techniques should include:
•

Elevating the structure above the base flood
elevation;

•

Designing the building foundation and any
portions subject to flooding to withstand flood
conditions and flood loads;

•

Using flood-damage-resistant materials for any
portions of the building below the base flood
elevation; and,

•

Floodproofing the structure to seal water out
or to allow water to flow through lower level(s)
without damaging the structure.

Economic development
The economy of Barnum Island, Oceanside, the
Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle is driven by
its numerous industrial and commercial corridors,
which encompass more than 20% of the land area
in this Community. Local businesses are a significant
economic driver, with nearly 1,400 establishments that
employ over 13,000 workers, with an annual payroll of
close to $575 million in 2011.37

Economic development needs
Recovery
Superstorm Sandy had a severe impact on local
businesses. Based on Small Business Administration
data, business losses amounted to more than $44

million in the Community, although total approved
loans only covered 42% of these losses.38 This may
mean that businesses affected by flooding are still
struggling to recover from Superstorm Sandy, and
many businesses throughout the Community were
destroyed and may not be rebuilt.
Continuity
Businesses need to develop backup power systems
and plans for continuing operations in the period
following major events where business is affected.
Connections
Developing a transit-oriented walkable neighborhood
focused around downtown Island Park, the LIRR
station, and Austin Boulevard would provide local
business with options for connecting to patrons and
create linkages between neighborhoods and that
waterfront that have been previously separated.

Economic development opportunities
New development
Opportunities for new development are numerous.
They include developing underutilized properties
zoned for business and industrial uses along major
corridors, as well as redeveloping several large parcels
in Oceanside and Island Park (Figure 16).
Reconstruction
Opportunities for reconstruction include protecting
of the Community’s economic assets and actively
supporting small businesses to reopen and grow.
As expressed by the Committee and local residents,
supporting economic development will require
improving infrastructure assets and systems to
protect them from flooding and rebuilding to resilient
standards.
Business growth
Improving the aesthetics and resiliency of commercial
corridors will support the local economy. Attracting
new businesses on vacant or underutilized parcels
that are currently zoned for business uses can support
existing businesses by creating more cohesive,
clustered business corridors and districts that attract
additional economic activity to the Community.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

61

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 16: Community economic development areas

62

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Specific opportunities identified by the Committee
include:
•

Expand water-dependent and water-related
industrial, commercial, residential, and mixeduse development in the Oceanside industrial
area along Lawson Boulevard and Hampton
Road.

•

Implement a Main Street Revitalization Program
along the Long Beach Road downtown corridor
in Island Park.

•

Develop water-dependent and water-related
residential, commercial, and mixed-use
development along Wreck Lead. Provide
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular connections to
downtown Island Park and the Island Park LIRR
station area to expand the economic health of
the Village of Island Park.  

Health and social services
Health and social services needs
Public facilities, including schools, municipal buildings,
and firehouses were hard hit by Superstorm Sandy
and remain vulnerable to future storm events.

Several schools in the Community, including Francis
X. Hegarty School and Oceanside Schools 4, 8, 9E
and 9M, were impacted by the flooding because of
their vicinity to open water and poorly functioning
stormwater drainage systems. Following Superstorm
Sandy, the Island Park Firehouse and Francis X.
Hegarty School were used for emergency staging. In
Oceanside, one school was a used as a feeding and
warming station and three firehouses were emergency
staging areas. The Community is formalizing the role
of its schools as feeding stations and emergency
supply distribution centers in emergency recovery
efforts.
Generators
Resources are needed to continue relocating
emergency generators to upper floors in critical
facilities to maintain power and functionality during
future hazard events.
Relocation
Storage and/or relocation of equipment and apparatus
above the level where flooding typically occurs, is
needed so the fire department can use its equipment
during emergency situations.

Francis X. Hegarty School, the Village of Island Park
Source: URS

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

63

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Resiliency
Superstorm Sandy rendered many emergency
response facilities inoperable. While emergency
responders performed admirably given the loss of
important facilities and equipment, it is clear that
additional resiliency efforts are needed to maintain
emergency response functions in future events.
The Community includes eight senior facilities,
including housing, nursing homes, and residential
rehabilitation facilities, including:
•

PSCH (Promoting Specialized Care and Health)
Island House;

•

South Point Plaza Nursing and Rehabilitation
Center;

•

Island Park senior housing;

•

Oceanside Knolls Apartments;

•

Mill River Gardens Apartments;

•

Bishop Kellenberg Garden Apartments;

•

Theresa Gardens Apartments; and,

•

Oceanside Care Center, Inc.

Oceanside Care Center, Oceanside
Source: LiRo Group

64

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

These facilities are typically evacuated prior to storm
events to protect vulnerable residents. Where needed,
these facilities should be made more resilient to
future storm events to speed the return of vulnerable
populations to their homes and supportive services as
soon as is safe following an emergency.

Health and social services opportunities
Rebuilding offers opportunities to protect critical
facilities so their functions can be maintained during
storm events.
Floodproofing
Community centers should be floodproofed and
protected from wind damage. Fire stations and Island
Park Village Hall should be floodproofed and protected
from wind damage to ensure that these facilities
remain operational during emergencies.
Special needs
Special needs registrations should be established so
that socially vulnerable populations (elderly, disabled,
and low-income residents) can identify themselves

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

and receive needed services during emergencies,
including assistance with evacuation, transportation
to inland hospitals if on a respirator, etc. Coordination
with special needs registration efforts could be
coordinated with Nassau County OEM.

Housing
Although housing conditions in the Community were
relatively strong prior to Superstorm Sandy, the
devastation created by the storm continues to have
an impact on residents, homeowners and renters
alike, and especially those in vulnerable populations,
including low- and moderate-income families, seniors,
and the disabled, who face additional challenges
during reconstruction.

Housing needs
According to the U.S. Census, there were a total of
15,840 housing units in the NYRCR Community in
2012. Of these 14,986 were occupied, 12,925 by
owners and 2,061 by renters.39 According to FEMA,
more than 7,700 housing units in the Community
were heavily damaged during Superstorm Sandy.40
These numbers imply that more than half of homes
throughout the Community were damaged.
Resiliency advice
Homeowners and renters need guidance on how
best to protect their homes from future damage and
maintain eligibility for financial assistance to rebuild.
Special needs
As housing is rehabilitated, it should be made more
accommodating to seniors and those with disabilities.

Housing opportunities
Opportunities include implementing resilient
construction methods, as identified in the Community
Planning and Capacity Building section, to increase
emergency response capacity and return residents to
their homes sooner after future flooding events.
Accessibility
Publicly funded reconstruction is required to comply
with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA), which means that the resulting projects
will increase the number of accessible housing units,
commercial buildings, and community facilities. Senior
and public housing developments should have flood
and wind protection so that residents can return as
quickly as possible to their homes when evacuations
are needed.
Financial resources
Identifying and creating access to as many housingrelated financial resources as possible and distributing
critical information to the public is an important goal.
Agency coordination
Coordination with State and Federal agencies could
occur to simplify the grant application process by
having a single application or a clearinghouse for all
government grant programs.
Sustainability
Building owners and homeowners should be
encouraged to seek opportunities to increase energy
efficiencies and sustainability as buildings and homes
are rebuilt.

Tax base
Where appropriate, additional housing types, including
multi-family and mixed-use options, should be
evaluated to help increase the tax base and attract
young professionals.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

65

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Infrastructure
Infrastructure needs
The Committee identified the most significant need as
protection from flooding, both tidal flooding caused
by tidal surges and storm flooding caused by storm
events. Repairs and improvements to the Bay Park
Sewage Treatment Plant and area roadways were also
identified as important to the long-term health and
resiliency of the Community.

Stormwater and tidal flooding
The inability of stormwater to drain is a major issue
for the Community. Many outfalls are located below
the high-tide line so that tidal water blocks drainage
and backs up into the stormwater system, resulting in
flooding during normal heavy rainfalls and high tide
events and catastrophic system failures during major
storm events.
The Community’s stormwater systems were damaged
during Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene.

Figure 17: The Village of Island Park “bowl”

The system’s capacity and structural integrity has
been compromised due to the volume of debris
and sediment remaining from floodwaters and the
potential undermining of drainage structures. Locations
throughout the systems where sand and debris
block drainage of runoff were identified during field
visits completed by the Consultant Team during the
planning process as well as through conversations with
municipal staff and community members.
Municipal staff, Committee Members, and Community
members cited instances of tidal backflow into the
system, with sea water coming up out of stormwater
catch basins during high-tide events, surges, and
flooding. During Superstorm Sandy, the combination
of tidal surge and a high volume of runoff completely
shut down the stormwater infrastructure, causing
widespread flooding.
The Village of Island Park has installed backflow
preventers on most village outfall pipes, but they
have not been installed in most of Barnum Island,
Oceanside, and Harbor Isle. Storm backflow preventers
are needed throughout the Community to prevent tidal
flooding of the stormwater system.
The central core of the Village of Island Park between
Austin Boulevard and Long Beach Road, identified in
Figure 17, is at a lower elevation than the surrounding
area. This has created what is locally described as a
“bowl” that regularly floods from high tides and normal
storm events. This area was inundated with six- to
eight-feet of sea water during Superstorm Sandy.
Tidal waters breach shorelines and back up into area
streams to cause flooding throughout the Community
during high tide events and moderate storms. Specific
trouble areas in the Community include the southern
tip of Harbor Isle, Bedell Creek, Grand Canal, California
Place Canal, Hog Island Channel, Wreck Lead, Shell
Harbor, and Island Park Canal (Figure 18).
Portions of the Community, Barnum Island, Island Park,
Harbor Isle, and Oceanside south of Windsor Parkway,
contain extended low-lying areas where no simple or
obvious solution to tidal flooding exists.

The Village of Island Park “bowl” area
prone to flooding

66

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Inadequate height and deteriorated condition of
bulkheads, as well as the naturally low elevations, was
demonstrated during Superstorm Sandy. Bulkheads
along the shore, especially on the western edge of
Harbor Isle and the eastern edge of Barnum Island,

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

are discontinuous and have variable elevations. New
bulkheads, bulkhead improvements, and similar types
of protection measures are needed on the hardened
shoreline.

Sanitary sewer
The Bay Park and Long Beach Sewage Treatment
Plants failed and were heavily damaged during
Superstorm Sandy. The Bay Park Sewage Treatment
Plant serves 40% of Nassau County,41 including the
Community, and is located adjacent to it in Bay Park.
The City of Long Beach’s Sewage Treatment Plant is
located on the bay shore across Reynolds Channel from
Harbor Isle.
Nassau County is planning sewage treatment
improvements in the region to improve service
operations and water quality. The proposed approach
includes combining the Bay Park and Long Beach
plants. Under the proposed improvements, the existing
Long Beach Plant would be used as a pump station
to transfer waste water to Bay Park, where it would
be treated. The Community is concerned about Bay
Park Sewage Treatment Plant deficiencies and how
vulnerable it is against future storms. During normal
operations, the plant discharges into Reynolds Channel,
degrading water quality and damaging marshland.

Island Park functions as the civic center for all three
communities, and Barnum Island contains many of
the communities’ schools and parks. However, Barnum
Island is cut off from its neighbors to the west by
Austin Boulevard and the Island Park LIRR tracks.
New multi-modal street connections and streetscape
enhancements are needed to improve east/west
access for all modes of transportation and to enhance
pedestrian and bicycle accessibility and safety.

Infrastructure opportunities
Stormwater and tidal flooding
The Community’s stormwater system failed during
Superstorm Sandy. A comprehensive stormwater
management plan is needed to identify solutions
specific to geographic areas of flooding and for the
Community as a whole. The plan will identify best
management practices to control runoff, identify
important tidal barriers, and integrate potential
solutions into a broader regional context that

Figure 18: Vulnerable shorelines

Road network
The Community has four north/south thoroughfares,
providing access and egress on a daily basis and
during emergencies; they include Long Beach Road,
Lawson Boulevard, Austin Boulevard, and Oceanside
Road. Each experiences flooding during even moderate
storm events (Figure 19). As mentioned for stormwater
systems, the drainage in these communities cannot
accommodate a Superstorm Sandy-equivalent event.
During Superstorm Sandy, the transportation network
failed as there was no place for the water to go except
the travel corridors. Important east/west streets
that experience flooding include Waukena Avenue in
Oceanside, Empire and Kingston Boulevards in Barnum
Island, and Warwick Road in the Village of Island Park
and Harbor Isle. Improved stormwater drainage on
these roadways is needed.
In addition to roadway drainage needs, Barnum Island,
the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle need an
improved internal east-to-west connection. Downtown

Vulnerable shorelines
NYRCR Community

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

67

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 19: Community roadways

68

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

considers the planned actions by Nassau County, the
Town of Hempstead, and adjacent communities.
Repairs and reconstruction after Superstorm Sandy
offer the opportunity for the Community to implement
stormwater best management practices and introduce
green infrastructure, such as bioswales, porous
paving, and rain gardens to assist with stormwater
management.
Periodic inspection of storm drains and outfalls,
bulkheads, and backflow prevention devices is an
opportunity to make sure the system remains fully
functional.

Wastewater
The Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant was
overwhelmed by Superstorm Sandy, was offline for
more than two days, and not yet fully recovered.
Discharges from the plant were released directly into
Hog Island Channel. There have been numerous
discussions on regional cooperation to find a better
solution to the sanitary sewer issue. Nassau County
received $810 million in FEMA funding to repair
Superstorm Sandy damage and fortify the Bay Park
Sewage Treatment Plant against future storms.43
The County has also applied for Federal funding to
reconfigure the Bay Park and Long Beach Sewage
Treatment Plants and to extend the outfall into the
Atlantic Ocean to improve bay water quality. This
project is expected to include installation of a force
main under Austin Boulevard, a project that could
be combined with drainage improvements along this
critical transportation and economic corridor.44

Road network
Austin Boulevard, a regional evacuation route,
plus many other key transportation corridors, were
impassable immediately following Superstorm
Sandy as a result of high water. Comprehensive
transportation options can be implemented through
coordination between agencies and by identifying
common approaches that will address drainage and
stormwater solutions. Nassau County is planning
streetscape, parking, and traffic management
improvements to Austin Boulevard. The planned
project does not include drainage improvements;

however, the project presents an opportunity to
combine local and Nassau County resources to
make upgrades to the stormwater system and other
roadway/utility improvements during reconstruction.  
Power supply
Opportunities to implement a smart grid infrastructure
and relocate utilities to enhance the resiliency of the
power grid should be explored.
Large-scale flood protection
Resources should be sought to conduct an in-depth
study of large-scale future flood protection measures,
such as a storm surge barrier system.

Natural and cultural resources
The Community was historically characterized by
the presence of marshlands and wetlands, but fill
for development and contamination from point and
non-point sources has significantly degraded many of
these assets.

Natural and cultural resources needs
Habitat protection and restoration
Shoreline and marsh habitats need restoration,
enhancement and protection. The marshes
surrounding the Community have been significantly
reduced and degraded by infilling for development,
dredging activities, and environmental contamination
due to point and non-point source discharges over
the last century. Superstorm Sandy compromised
area wetlands when tidal surge submerged nearby
marshland and expedited the uprooting of many of
the grasses, reducing the natural sponge effect typical
of a healthy wetland system. Much of the existing
shoreline is made up of erosion control structures
used to retain fill that has been placed to expand land
area for development. Existing area marshes and
natural shoreline areas need protection, restoration
and enhancement to restore their storm buffer
capacity and other natural environmental functions.
When the Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant failed
after Superstorm Sandy, discharge washed down Hog
Island Channel and inundated the marshlands in its
path with pollutants and further compromised the
marsh habitat.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

69

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Water quality
Due to storm surge and tidal inundation, water
associated with Superstorm Sandy was not able to
enter the stormwater system and instead washed
through streets, yards, and businesses, collecting
debris and detritus to deposit across the Community
and throughout the natural systems. Improved
stormwater treatment is needed throughout the
Community to protect water quality and marine
habitats. Stormwater runoff contains contaminants
picked up in streets, parking lots, and yards, including
trash, road salt, oil, grit, pet wastes, and other
contaminants. The current stormwater infrastructure
lacks treatment systems that remove debris and
pollutants from stormwater prior to its discharge.

Waterfront parks and beaches
Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene overwhelmed
many of the waterfront parks and beaches, washing
away many of the over-taxed structural protections
that have struggled to withstand normal tides and
regular flooding over the years. The elevation of Little
Beach in the Village of Island Park is very low; as a
result, the beach has been experiencing erosion both
as a result of the presence of bulkheads and also
because of their poor condition. Beachfront properties
and adjacent residential areas flood regularly as a
result. Wright’s Field in Oceanside is located on Bedell
Creek and also experiences frequent flooding.

Harbor Isle Beach, Harbor Isle
Source: URS

70

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Natural and cultural resources opportunities
Habitat protection and restoration
A shoreline and marsh protection plan would provide
the opportunity to address the stabilization, habitat
protection, and restoration needs of marine and coastal
areas surrounding the Community.

Water quality
Stormwater quality treatment systems should
be installed as a part of the overall stormwater
management upgrades. Also, as described in the
Infrastructure Needs section above, Nassau County has
applied for Federal funding to reconfigure the Bay Park
and Long Beach Sewage Treatment Plants to extend
the outfall into the Atlantic Ocean to improve bay water
quality.

Waterside parks and beaches
The Village of Island Park has been working with the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to develop a solution
for flooding at Little Beach. The Corps completed the
planning and design phases for a project to install
bulkheads and fill to raise the elevation of the shoreline
at Little Beach to improve recreational access and
reduce flooding of adjacent neighborhoods.

Source: URS

Section III:
Reconstruction and
resiliency strategies
71

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

III. Reconstruction and resiliency strategies
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Planning Committee (Committee) identified strategies
for inclusion in the NYRCR Barnum Island/Oceanside/
the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle Plan (NYRCR
Plan) using knowledge gained from a community
visioning process, data collected from the community
asset inventory, information gleaned through the
review of relevant plans and studies, Consultant Team
research, a needs and opportunities assessment,
and a risk assessment. The Committee, with input
from the greater Community, selected the strategies
according to agreed-upon metrics, such as cost,
timeframe, and others as identified through the
planning process.

The strategy descriptions are followed by a brief
summary of the projects that implement the strategy,
in Tables 9 through 15. Projects are categorized as
either Proposed or Featured Projects. Further detail
on Proposed and Featured Projects is provided in
Section IV. Each strategy description also mentions
if Additional Resiliency Recommendations have been
identified to support implementation of the strategy.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations are projects
and actions the Committee would like to highlight but
has not categorized as Proposed or Featured Projects.

A. Reconstruction and resiliency
strategies
Mitigating the risk of damage from future storms
to increase resilience of NYRCR Barnum Island/
Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
Community (Community) will require Federal, State,
regional, and local action. Development of the NYRCR
Plan included identifying local and regional issues and
further identifying local issues that could be addressed
more effectively on a regional level.
The strategies presented in this section are described
in terms of how they contribute to the Community’s
vision of building back better, how they fulfill one
or more of the recovery support functions (RSF),
address risks, meet needs, make the best use of
Community assets, capitalize on opportunities, resolve
critical issues, and, if applicable, address vulnerable
populations.

72

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Oceanside School 8, Oceanside
Source: URS

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Implement an emergency response
system that engages in emergency planning,
response, and communications at the
Community level.
The Community understands its vulnerability to
hazards and therefore has made it a priority to
enhance emergency management capabilities to be
ready for and respond to future disasters. In addition
to upgrades for equipment and infrastructure for fire
departments, response teams, and communication
dispatchers, this strategy also consists of making
improvements to the transportation network for preevent safe evacuations and post-event returns.
Superstorm Sandy highlighted the need
for coordinated emergency operations and
communication. Much of the area is low-lying,
limiting places to store and stage emergency vehicles
and store supplies. Oceanside used an informal

combination of schools and firehouses, a system the
Fire Department and School District have worked to
formalize since Superstorm Sandy. Barnum Island,
the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle have not
yet secured a central site to house an emergency
operations center and accommodate a staging area
for emergency vehicles, equipment, and supplies.
Improving emergency management response
capabilities to address risk and emergency
communication, preparedness, and response
operations would reduce the risk to all Community
residents in future disasters, including vulnerable
populations. This strategy fulfills the Infrastructure
RSF in addition to the Community Planning and
Capacity Building RSF.

Table 9: Projects that implement the strategy to enhance emergency planning,
response, and communications
Strategy: Implement an emergency response system that engages in emergency planning,
response, and communications at the Community level.
Project name

Short project description

Emergency transportation
“lifeline” safety plan &
initial implementation

Emergency staging
area feasibility study &
implementation

Estimated
cost

Proposed
or Featured
Project

Regional
project
(Y/N)

Prepare a public safety plan that identifies
$960,000
a “lifeline” road network and improvements
to help them function better before, during,
and after emergencies. Implement initial
improvements, including independently
powered streetlights and vehicle message
$1.44 million
signs.

Proposed in Barnum
Island, the Village
of Island Park, and
Harbor Isle

N

Identify a site for and construct an
emergency operations center and
storage location for emergency response
equipment and supplies before, during,
and after a crisis for Barnum Island, the
Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle.

Featured

$2.49 million

Featured in Oceanside

N

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

73

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Reduce the risk of flooding to critical
facilities and emergency service facilities,
such as police and fire departments, schools,
and other facilities that serve vulnerable
populations.
As described in the Sections I and II, public facilities
including schools, municipal buildings, and firehouses
were hard hit by Superstorm Sandy and remain
vulnerable to future storm events. This strategy
includes risk reduction to emergency service facilities
and critical facilities that serve vulnerable populations,
such as schools and senior facilities.
This strategy will increase resilience of emergency
facilities in order to support overall response
capabilities. Their ability to remain functional
during and after a disaster directly determines their
effectiveness in emergencies. Resilient reconstruction
of key facilities capitalizes on the opportunity to build
back stronger.
For instance, the Village of Island Park Firehouse
is in need of repairs, improvements, and new
equipment as it experienced extensive damage during
Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene. The firehouse
building had approximately six-feet of water, suffered
mechanical and electrical damage, and is suspected to
have suffered structural damage.
A structural assessment is needed to determine the
feasibility of making improvements to the structure.
The first phase of Village of Island Park critical
facilities resiliency project would conduct a structural
assessment of the Firehouse to determine needed
structural needs. A second phase would construct
structural and resiliency improvements to make the
building safe, more resilient to flood damage, and
enhance local emergency response capabilities.
The Village Hall was destroyed by Superstorm
Sandy and needs to be rebuilt with flood resilient
techniques, such as elevating utilities, floodproofing
the building envelope, and installing generators. This
is an important strategic facility that needs to be able
to function during an emergency. A Featured Project
would reconstruct Village Hall to create a facility that
is able to function during emergencies and effectively
serve Village residents during disaster recovery.

74

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Oceanside School 4, Oceanside
Source: URS

Oceanside needs a new fire station to replace Engine
No. 1 and Hose No. 1. Engine No. 1 is outdated
and Hose No. 1 flooded during Superstorm Sandy,
rendering it unusable during the emergency. A
Featured Project would identify and acquire a site for
a new fire station, and then design and construct the
fire station to include a community center and small
park.
In addition to improving emergency response
facilities, this strategy aims to provide critical lifesafety features where they are needed most, for
vulnerable populations located in schools, senior
housing facilities, nursing homes, and residential
rehabilitation facilities. The current rebuilding process
offers opportunities to protect these facilities and help
expedite the return of normalcy to the lives of these
vulnerable populations, by making their facilities more
flood resistant.
Many schools, including Francis X. Hegarty School
and Oceanside Schools 9E and 9M, were severely
damaged by the flooding from Superstorm Sandy.
School damage from Superstorm Sandy flooding
caused major long-term disruptions in the life of

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Community residents. Two Proposed Projects would
create more resilient school buildings (floodproofing
measures to building envelopes, installing generators,
elevating utilities, etc.) that will provide access to
evacuate children when there is a flooding incident,
reduce flood damage to schools, and enable them
to be used for storing and distributing emergency
supplies and other community functions as needed
during and after emergency events.
In addition to the Proposed and Featured Projects,
the NYRCR Plan includes an Additional Resiliency
Recommendation to install generators in senior
facilities and emergency response centers in the
Village of Island Park.

As these projects are implemented, the Community
needs to provide a clear message to residents and
business that the improvements to critical facilities
focus on enabling life-safety and emergency functions,
and offer limited protection. Stronger infrastructure
should not be permitted to create a false sense of
security. Residents and workers must evacuate when
instructed to do so.  
This strategy fulfills the Community Planning and
Capacity Building, Infrastructure, and Health and
Social Services RSFs by enhancing emergency
response capabilities and serving vulnerable
populations.

Table 10: Projects that implement the strategy to reduce risk of flooding to
critical facilities
Strategy: Reduce the risk of flooding to critical facilities and emergency service facilities, such
as police and fire departments, and schools and other facilities that serve vulnerable
populations.
Project name

Short project description

Estimated
cost

Proposed
or Featured
Project

Regional
project
(Y/N)

Expand Community
critical facility resiliency
and emergency response
resources

Reduce flood damage potential of critical
facilities, including firehouses and schools.
Improvements to buildings include
perimeter floodwalls, flood door protection
and generators. Purchase, install, and
construct emergency response equipment,
including communication towers, radios,
and rescue boats.

$11.39 million

Proposed

N

Critical facility resiliency:
Island Park Village Hall
reconstruction

Construct a new building for the Village
Hall in Island Park using resilient
techniques, such as elevating utilities,
floodproofing the building envelope, and
installing generators.

$1.43 million

Featured

N

Critical facility resiliency:
new Oceanside fire
station

Construct a new fire station to replace
Hose No. 1 and Engine No. 1. Project
includes a small community center and
park to serve an area that currently lacks
recreation facilities.

$20 million

Featured

N

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

75

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Leverage the economic potential of
the area’s waterfront location and proximity to
New York City.
This strategy is vital to preserving and further
developing the unique attributes of the Community
that make it a great place to live and work. Residents
want their Community to be attractive to residents,
businesses, and visitors alike.
Downtown Island Park consistently floods, and
many businesses along Long Beach Road were
severely damaged by Superstorm Sandy. To maintain
and increase economic viability, this NYRCR Plan
recommends the preparation of a downtown and
waterfront revitalization plan for the Village of Island
Park. The plan would identify necessary improvements
for the Village of Island Park business district and the
Wreck Lead waterfront; develop a strategy to create
transit-oriented development, including mixed-aged
housing and mixed-use (residential/retail/office)
development; retain a local disaster recovery manager
to manage programs, and pursue additional funding;
and, implement identified improvements to create
a walkable downtown and new connections to the
Wreck Lead waterfront, beaches, and Shell Creek
Park.

A Featured Project would prepare a revitalization
plan for the Oceanside industrial area along Lawson
Boulevard.  The plan would identify improvements
needed to support the industrial and related
commercial uses and evaluate opportunities to
establish new water-dependent and water-enhanced
businesses.  
This strategy fulfills the Economic Development RSF,
and the projects implementing this strategy also
address the Housing RSF by increasing mixed-use,
senior, and mixed-income housing options.
This strategy is further supported by Additional
Resiliency Recommendations described in Section
V, which include installation Harbor Isle gateway
signage on Warwick Road and Island Parkway Bridge;
landscaping of Harbor Isle streets to retain existing
and continue to attract new residents, and installation
of flood resistant measures for existing waterfront
economic assets, including marinas.

Table 11: Projects that implement the strategy to leverage the economic
potential of the area
Strategy: Leverage the economic potential of the area’s waterfront location and proximity to New
York City.
Project name

Short project description

Destination revitalization
and transit-oriented
development

Create and implement a mixed-use,
transit-oriented development plan to
revitalize Island Park’s downtown and the
Wreck Lead waterfront.

$250,000

Proposed

N

Oceanside waterfront
revitalization

Prepare a plan for the long-term
revitalization of the Oceanside waterfront
industrial area, considering economic
development opportunities to support
new water-dependent and waterenhanced business and mixed-use
development, including senior housing.

$150,000

Featured

N

76

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Estimated
cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional
project
(Y/N)

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Restore, enhance, and improve natural
areas, including local beaches, marshes, parks,
and other open spaces, to provide recreation
opportunities and enhance the natural
environment.
The Community greatly values the natural systems
located in and surrounding it. These natural systems
need improvements to support their diverse
recreational and community uses, and to provide
natural flood protection functions. This strategy
fulfills the Natural and Cultural Resources RSF, and
implementation of it entails a four-pronged approach
described below:
•

•

Restore local beaches, including Little Beach
and Masone Beach in the Village of Island Park
and Harbor Isle Beach in Harbor Isle, which
have been diminished by Hurricane Irene and
Superstorm Sandy. Restoration would protect
them from further erosion and protect adjacent
residential neighborhoods from flooding.
Replenish marshlands to support their functions
as a habitat, flood protection, tidal surge
barrier, and water quality enhancement. Marsh
restoration is included as a Proposed and
a Featured Project in this NYRCR Plan. The

Proposed Project includes a marsh restoration
study and pilot restoration project for Garrett
Marsh, adjacent to Barnum Island. The Featured
Project is a continuation of this work. It includes
a restoration study and restoration of Simmons
Hassock Marsh, adjacent to Harbor Isle, and
completes the Garrett Marsh restoration work
begun in the Proposed Project.
•

Restore the Oceanside Park shoreline to increase
its resiliency and protect Schools 9E and 9M
from flooding. Oceanside Park is important to the
community and was used to distribute emergency
supplies after Superstorm Sandy. This project
would be completed in conjunction with the Town
of Hempstead’s $25 million capital improvement
plan for Oceanside Park.

•

Consider acquisition and development of additional
usable open space. This NYRCR Plan includes
an Additional Resiliency Recommendation to
investigate the feasibility of securing sites and
developing them into usable open space.

This strategy is further supported by an Additional
Resiliency Recommendation to restore and enhance
parks in Barnum Island and the Village of Island
Park, including Shell Creek Park, and construction of
improvements for Wrights Field in Oceanside.

Table 12: Projects that implement the strategy to restore, enhance, and
improve natural areas
Strategy: Restore, enhance, and improve natural areas, including local beaches, marshes, parks,
and other open spaces, to provide recreation opportunities and enhance the natural
environment.
Project name

Short project description

Estimated
cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional
project (Y/N)

Shoreline and
beach restoration
and environmental
enhancements

Restore local beaches; Little Beach (in
conjunction with an existing U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers project), Harbor Isle
Beach, and Masone Beach.

$5.95 million

Proposed

N

Improve the recreational capacity of
Oceanside Park and restore the Park’s
shoreline to protect adjacent schools
and neighborhoods from flooding.
Marsh restoration:
phase 1

Conduct a marsh restoration study and
implement a restoration pilot project for
Garrett Marsh east of Barnum Island.

$600,000

Proposed

N

Marsh restoration:
phase 2

Complete restoration of Garrett Marsh,
conduct a marsh restoration study
for Simmons Hassock Marsh west of
Harbor Isle, and conduct restoration of
Simmons Hassock Marsh.

$2 million

Featured

N

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

77

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Implement progressive stormwater
management systems and infrastructure
upgrades to decrease flooding in areas that
consistently flood during storm events and high
tides.
Stormwater infrastructure analysis, repairs, and
upgrades are high priorities for the Community.
According to the risk assessment, sanitary sewer/
stormwater drainage systems received the highest risk
score because the Community is low-lying and their
assets are at extreme risk in future high-magnitude
storms. The risk assessment recognizes the need for a
complete assessment and overhaul of the stormwater
drainage system.
This strategy fulfills the Infrastructure RSF and
includes several phased projects to address specific
problem locations in the short term and entire
Community stormwater system in the long term:

Flooding on Waterview Road, Barnum Island
Source: URS

78

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

•

Drainage improvements: Streets and vital
intersections flood because the stormwater
system cannot handle the combined stormwater
runoff and tidal infiltration during storm events.
The proposed drainage project includes a
comprehensive analysis of the stormwater
drainage, followed by systematic improvements
using a combination of green infrastructure
(e.g., permeable surfaces, rain gardens), pump
stations at particularly low-lying areas (e.g.,
Island Park “bowl”), recharge basins, roadways
elevations where feasible, and a Complete
Streets pilot project on Long Beach Road in
Oceanside to improve stormwater drainage
and create amenities to support new economic
investment.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

Tidal backflow prevention: Blocked stormwater
drains and tidal backflows are major sources
of flooding in low-lying areas. This is due to
stormwater outfalls that are blocked because
they are partially or fully under water during
high tides and storms. The proposed tidal
backflow prevention project would install tidal
water backflow devices to prevent tidal water
from entering the stormwater system and
flooding low-lying areas.

Figure 20: Tidal backflow prevention

This strategy is further supported by an Additional
Resiliency Recommendation that recommends
implementation of drainage improvements (in
accordance with the comprehensive drainage analysis)
to reduce flooding in Empire Boulevard, and Louisiana,
Georgia, Florida, Carolina and Alabama Avenues.

Water eventually overflows back
onto streets and other areas
Water backflows into outfalls
during high tide and storm
events

Normal flow to outfalls

Standard outflow pipe
opening

Current drainage conditions

Normal flow to
outfalls

Duck valve outflow allows water to
push out but prevents stormwater
from flowing back into system

Drainage conditions with backflow prevention

Source: URS

Table 13: Projects that implement the strategy to employ progressive stormwater
management systems and infrastructure upgrades
Strategy: Implement progressive stormwater management systems and infrastructure upgrades
to decrease flooding in areas that consistently flood during storm events and high tides.
Project name

Short project description

Estimated
cost

Proposed
or Featured
Project

Regional
project
(Y/N)

Drainage improvements

Conduct a comprehensive analysis of
the stormwater drainage system and
implement systematic improvements,
using a combination of green
infrastructure, pump stations at priority
locations, recharge basins, and roadway
elevations where feasible.

$20.23 million

Proposed

N

Tidal backflow prevention

Install tidal backflow devices to prevent
tidal water from entering the stormwater
system and flooding low-lying areas.

$2.39 million

Proposed

N

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

79

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Protect shoreline areas from tidal
surge through a combination of structural,
nonstructural, and hybrid shoreline
stabilization techniques.
Tidal flooding is a problem for the Community, even in
minor rainfall or high-tide events. Existing bulkheads
were severely damaged by Superstorm Sandy. The
Community recognizes that bulkheads offer erosion
protection but only offer limited protection from
tidal floodwaters; therefore, a comprehensive set of
solutions will be needed to address Community needs.
The low-lying areas along California Place Canal,
Wreck Lead, Bedell Creek, and Grand Canal flood
regularly during high tide. Because of a lack of high
ground to tie into, a single flood barrier system would
be ineffective against tidal surges. The proposed
perimeter flood safeguards projects would take a
comprehensive approach.
The first step in this project will be the completion
of a shoreline conditions analysis and improvement
strategy to assess conditions and analyze potential
solutions to restore shorelines to pre-Hurricane Irene
and Superstorm Sandy conditions. It will consider

hard infrastructure, such as bulkheads, levees, and
sea walls; natural solutions, such as marsh restoration
and wetland construction; hybrid solutions, which
combine hard infrastructure with natural approaches;
and wave attenuation methods, such as reefs and sea
grass beds, to slow down the water.
This analysis is expected to recommend a system of
barriers and natural flood protection improvements,
including installing flood barrier systems adjacent
to water bodies where feasible and constructing a
“second line of protection” along the LIRR tracks to
protect downtown Island Park.
This strategy fulfills the Infrastructure RSF. An early
action item for the perimeter protection system will
be the protection of street ends in Barnum Island, the
Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle. This project
will also include protections at Landgraf Park in the
Village of Island Park to protect adjacent properties.
The Town of Hempstead has no active project to
mitigate this. Several street ends are unprotected and
at much lower elevation than abutting properties,
so water flows up the street and floods bulkheaded
private properties.

Table 14: Projects that implement the strategy to protect shoreline areas
from tidal surge
Strategy: Protect shoreline areas from tidal surge through a combination of structural,
nonstructural, and hybrid shoreline stabilization techniques.
Project name

Short project description

Estimated
cost

Proposed
or Featured
Project

Regional
project
(Y/N)

Perimeter flood safeguards:
California Place Canal and
Wreck Lead: Phase I

Complete a comprehensive shoreline
conditions analysis and improvement
strategy to design a system of flood
barriers and natural flood protection
improvements. Implement high-priority
projects identified in the study.

$4 million

Proposed

N

Perimeter flood safeguards:
California Place Canal Phase II

This project builds on phase I perimeter
flood safeguards to construct additional
barrier systems and natural improvements
to protect against flooding from California
Place Canal.

$2.1 million

Featured

N

Perimeter flood safeguards:
Oceanside

Create a system of barriers and
natural shoreline improvements to reduce
flooding from Oceanside waterways,
including but not limited to, Bedell Creek,
Powell Creek, and Grand Canal.

$6.45 million

Proposed

N

Tidal protection at street ends
and Landgraf Park

Install barriers at public street ends
and Landgraf park to protect adjacent
neighborhoods from tidal flooding.

$1. 01 million

Proposed

N

80

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Expand housing stock to meet the
needs of seniors and young adults, and identify
financial resources for homeowners and renters
impacted by Superstorm Sandy.

Strategy: Support solutions for regional and
local power generation, sewage treatment
upgrades to Bay Park and Long Beach Sewage
Treatment Plants, and regional tidal protection.

This strategy is needed to support continued
rebuilding of the Community and to continue to retain
existing and attract new residents. It is also consistent
with the Long Island Region Economic Development
Corporation goal of strengthening, protecting, and
expanding the housing stock.44

This strategy commits the Community’s support and
participation in resolving issues that impacted all of
Long Island after Superstorm Sandy. The Committee
did not identify any Proposed or Featured projects
for this strategy; actions to address each separate
issue of power, tidal flooding, and sewage treatment
upgrades are included as Additional Resiliency
Recommendations in this NYRCR Plan.

As noted in the Section II, approximately half of
all housing units in the Community were damaged
in Superstorm Sandy, impacting homeowners and
renters, especially vulnerable populations, including
low- and moderate-income families, seniors, and
the disabled, who face additional challenges during
reconstruction. This strategy helps to address the
needs of residents whose homes were damaged by
Superstorm Sandy, and also considers housing needs
not fully met by the current housing stock.
The destination revitalization and transit-oriented
development project and Oceanside waterfront
revitalization project listed in Table 11 are repeated
below in Table 15. These projects help to implement
this strategy and fulfill the Housing RSF by creating
senior and mixed-age, multi-family, and mixed-use
housing options to supplement the predominant
single-family housing stock in the Community.

Table 15: Projects that implement the strategy to expand housing stock
Strategy: Expand housing stock to meet the needs of seniors and young adults, and identify financial
resources for homeowners and renters impacted by Superstorm Sandy.
Project name

Short project description

Estimated
cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional
project
(Y/N)

Destination revitalization
and transit-oriented
development

Create and implement a mixed-use,
transit-oriented development plan to
revitalize Island Park’s downtown and the
Wreck Lead waterfront.

$250,000

Proposed

N

Oceanside waterfront
revitalization

Prepare a plan for the long-term
revitalization of the Oceanside waterfront
industrial area, considering economic
development opportunities to support
new water-dependent and waterenhanced business and mixed-use
development, including senior housing.

$150,000

Featured

N

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

81

Source: URS

Section IV:
Implementation Project profiles
82

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

IV: Proposed and featured project profiles
The NYRCR Program has allocated to the NYRCR
Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/
Harbor Isle Community (Community) up to $36.6
million (Barnum Island: $4 million; Oceanside: $22.2
million; the Village of Island Park: $7.4 million; and
Harbor Isle: $3 million). The funding is provided
through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) Community Development Block
Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) Program.  
While developing projects and actions for inclusion
in the NYRCR Plan, Planning Committees took
into account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses,
the effectiveness of each project in reducing risk
to populations and critical assets, feasibility, and
community support.
Planning Committees also considered the potential
likelihood that a project or action would be eligible for
CDBG-DR funding. The projects and actions set forth
in the NYRCR Plan are divided into three categories.
The order in which the projects and actions are listed
in the NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate
the Community’s prioritization of these projects and
actions. Proposed Projects are projects proposed
for funding through the Community’s allocation of
CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are projects and
actions that the Planning Committee has identified
as important resiliency recommendations and has
analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding
through the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations (see Section V) are projects and
actions that the Planning Committee would like to
highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed
Projects or Featured Projects.  
The total cost of Proposed Projects in the NYRCR Plan
exceeds the NYRCR Community’s CDBG-DR allocation
to allow for flexibility if some Proposed Projects
cannot be implemented due to environmental review,
U.S. HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other
factors. Implementation of the projects and actions
found in the NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations,
including the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
Inclusion of a project or action in the NYRCR Plan

does not guarantee that a particular project or action
will be eligible for CDBG-DR funding or that it will be
implemented.
This section provides a project profile for each
Proposed and Featured Project identified by the
NYRCR Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island
Park/Harbor Isle Planning Committee (Committee)
and Community. The Proposed and Featured Projects
were identified, selected and advanced as a response
to the risks, needs, and opportunities described in
Section II of the NYRCR Plan and are implementation
mechanisms for the Reconstruction and Resiliency
Strategies in Section III. These projects represent
actions that are expected to be implemented in the
next four years to build resiliency and fulfill other
important community goals.
In addition to providing a description of each project,
the profiles include information on two important
elements used by the Committee to evaluate the
value of each project, a cost-benefit analysis and a
risk reduction analysis. The benefits were presented
with qualitative descriptions that demonstrate how
the projects will assist the NYRCR Community in
economic, environmental, and health and social
services terms. Before proceeding to the projects
themselves, it is important to understand these two
analytical elements of the Project Profiles.

Cost-benefit analysis
A cost-benefit analysis (CBA) is a tool used to
compare the benefits and costs associated with a
project. The CBA provides decision-makers with a
framework for comparing different projects (i.e.,
anticipated cost of implementation against total
expected benefits), and determining whether the
benefits of a particular project outweigh the costs.
More specifically, the value of the CBA is two-fold:
(1) to inform the NYRCR Planning Committees as
they formulate reconstruction measures; and (2) to
help provide information needed to prepare grant
applications for funds.

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

83

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Because the NYRCR Program is a community-driven
process, the CBA has focused on identifying project
costs and benefits that easily relate to the Community.
Committee and Community input, informed by
a true understanding of local conditions, needs,
and community values, plays a crucial role in the
selection of projects that are implemented. The risk
reduction benefits are described in terms of how
much the Proposed or Featured Project would lower
the vulnerability calculated in the Risk Assessment,
contained in Section II. The additional benefits of the
projects are provided in descriptive qualitative terms
that explain how these projects bring additional value
to the community.

•

Project benefits
The types of benefits considered in the CBA include:    
•

Risk reduction: The extent to which a project
reduces the risk of damage to a community
asset from a future storm event (discussed
further below under “risk reduction analysis”).  

•

Economic: The project’s potential to help
minimize economic costs and reduce the time it
takes for the local economy to rebound from a
storm event.  

•

Health and social services: Qualitative
information was provided on the overall
population benefits of improved access to
health and social service facilities including
public safety services and degree to which
essential health and social service facilities are
able to provide services to a community during
a future storm or weather event as a result of
the project.

•

Environmental protection: Benefits include
the protection of crucial environmental assets
or high-priority habitat, threatened and
endangered species, migration or habitat
connectivity; any clean-up resulting from
the action; creation of open space or a new
recreational asset.

The costs and benefits used to evaluate projects
through the CBA are explained further below.  

Project costs
Project Profiles include a cost estimate for project
implementation. The CBA cannot forecast costs or
benefits with complete certainty. It does provide the
community with a practical understanding of the
potential estimated costs of project implementation
and the potential benefits accrued to the community
with the particular project in place.
The cost of implementing a project is just one
aspect of the justification for funding these Proposed
Projects. Conversely, another important variable
is the future costs of not implementing these
Proposed Projects. Inaction has the potential to
negatively impact the long-term viability of Barnum
Island, Oceanside, the Village of Island Park and
Harbor Isle. While these “lost opportunity costs” of
not implementing the projects do not always lend
themselves to quantification, they are important to
the analysis, and are therefore addressed qualitatively.
These costs include:
•

Economic loss to residents and to local and
regional employers as a result of the inability to
work;

•

Hindrance in the provision of life safety and
emergency services resulting in repeated
inability to access vast areas of the community;
and,

84

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Extensive, repetitive damage to personal
property (vehicles, residences) and public and
infrastructure resulting from frequent recurring
flooding and future storm events.

Risk-reduction analysis
A risk reduction analysis estimates the extent to
which Proposed and Featured Projects will lower
the flood risk to identified community critical assets
and population when the project is in place. The risk
reduction analysis uses information from the Risk
Assessment in Section II to determine the risk of an
asset before the project implementation.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 21: Guide for understanding proposed and featured project profiles

Project key:
Proposed

Project
category

Recovery support
function
Location

Oceanside

Recovery support function symbols:

Community
planning

Economic
development

and capacity

Health

Housing

Infrastructure

Natural and

and social

cultural

services

resources

building

Color coding by location:
Barnum Island
Oceanside

The Village of Island Park
Harbor Isle

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

85

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Proposed projects
Critical facility resiliency and emergency
response resources

The Village of Island Park

Critical facility resiliency and emergency
response resources

Oceanside

Tidal backflow prevention

Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle

Tidal backflow prevention

Oceanside

Drainage improvements

Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle

Drainage improvements

Oceanside

Perimeter flood safeguards - California Place
Canal and Wreck Lead: Phase 1

Barnum Island and the
Village of Island Park

Perimeter flood safeguards

Oceanside

Destination revitalization and transit-oriented
development

The Village of Island Park

Tidal protection at street ends and at
Landgraf Park
Shoreline and beach restoration and
environmental enhancements

Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle
Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle

Shoreline and open space preservation

Oceanside

Marsh restoration: Phase 1

Barnum Island

Emergency transportation lifeline safety plan
and initial implementation

Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle

86

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Featured projects
Emergency transportation lifeline safety plan
and initial implementation

Oceanside

Marsh restoration: Phase 2

Barnum Island and Harbor
Isle

Emergency staging area feasibility study and
implementation

Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor
Isle

Perimeter flood safeguards - California Place
Canal: Phase 2

Barnum Island and the
Village of Island Park

Critical facility resiliency - Island Park Village
Hall reconstruction

The Village of Island Park

Oceanside industrial waterfront revitalization

Oceanside

Critical facility resiliency: Oceanside Fire
Station

Oceanside

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

87

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Critical facility resiliency and
emergency response resources
During Superstorm Sandy, the Village
of Island Park Firehouse and Francis
X. Hegarty School were severely
damaged by flooding. The Hegarty
School was closed for the remainder
of the school year, creating serious
disruptions for students. The extent of
structural damages to the Firehouse is
still unknown.
Description
This project would make Francis X. Hegarty School
and Island Park Firehouse more resistant to flood
damage. This project would mitigate flood risk to
these critical facilities, enable schools to reopen more
quickly after an emergency, and reduce flood damage
to these important facilities.

Proposed
The Village of Island Park

Implementation steps would include:
•

Conduct a structural assessment of the Village
of Island Park Firehouse;

•

Design and implement Firehouse improvements
and flood mitigation;

•

Design and construct perimeter floodwall
protection around the Firehouse;

•

Relocate interior and exterior mechanical and
electrical equipment above projected flood
heights;

•

Install flood protection at Francis X. Hegarty
School;

•

Install multi-fuel generators to maintain power
for emergency functions at Francis X. Hegarty
School and the Firehouse;

•

Install facilities in the Firehouse to serve out of
area emergency responders; and,

•

Acquire rescue boat(s) for emergency
preparedness and response.

Cost estimate:
Cost estimate includes the study, improvements to the Francis X. Hegarty School
and the Firehouse, as well as the purchase of a rescue boat.
Firehouse structural assessment and improvements:		
School improvements:

88

$580,000
$1,970,000

Rescue boat(s):							

$140,000

Total Cost Estimate:						

$2,690,000

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 22: Potential improvements to critical facilities

Building
envelope
upgrades

Francis X. Hegarty School

Building
envelope
upgrades

Perimeter
floodwall
protection

Island Park Firehouse
Source: Google Earth

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

89

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits
Local benefits include direct improvements to the
Frances X. Hegarty School and the Village of Island
Park Firehouse. Area benefits include improved
facilities for hosting additional emergency responders.
The school improvements would decrease the future
likelihood of having to reconstruct damaged schools,
and/or the need move children to other locations.

Economic Benefits
Improved protection of the Village of Island Park
commercial districts would aid in increasing recovery
functions after a storm. This more rapid recovery
reduces the chance that the area businesses would
reduce services and lay off employees. In addition,
the presence of the protected school and Island Park
Firehouse would provide support to resident and
business owners looking to move back to Barnum
Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle.
This project would indirectly help the local economy
as it would serve as a resource to residents to
help them recover more rapidly, which would help
maintain the customer base needed for many local
businesses. This project would help reduce postdisaster emergency and recovery costs by protecting
the facilities. It can also accelerate the recovery by
providing early recovery centers to assist residents in
providing information and assistance needed postdisaster.

90

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Environmental Benefits
This project can reduce some contamination
associated with buildings being flooded and chemicals
that end up in floodwaters.

Health and Social Benefits
Protection of Hegarty School would reduce the threat
of damages in future storms and speed the return of
children to school after a flood, reducing disruptions
and stress. Flood protection would provide additional
space for essential health and social services facilities
to help keep them operational or to quickly recover
from storm events and would help provide space for
improved access to health and social services facilities
after storm events.

Cost-benefit analysis
Increasing flood protection features in schools and
emergency response facilities would avoid damages
and save tax payers money over the long run.
Improvements to the Firehouse and the purchase
of emergency response equipment would increase
the capability of the Community to prepare for and
respond to disasters, reducing the time and cost of
recovery. Over time, these cost savings will offset the
initial investment made.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk reduction

Jurisdiction

This project would make Hegarty School and Island
Park Firehouse and emergency response facilities
more flood resistant, reducing the risk to the school
and emergency response assets. The risk assessment
conducted for this project anticipates that the project
would reduce the vulnerability of these assets,
reducing the risk of future flooding from high to
moderate.

The project is under the jurisdiction of the Village of
Island Park, the Island Park Fire Department, and
Island Park School District.

A secure firehouse would enhance emergency
response and re-entry to damaged areas. Risk would
be reduced to emergency responders and vulnerable
populations, including students and seniors.
Emergency response facilities would be more readily
accessible during and after key storm events.

Timeframe
Immediate (within two years)

Regulatory requirements
The project will need to meet the Village of Island
Park zoning and building permit requirements.

Sample rescue boat
Source: Wikimedia Commons

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

91

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Critical facility resiliency and
emergency response resources
Superstorm Sandy flooded Oceanside
schools and emergency facilities,
damaging them and interfering with
emergency response activities.
Description
This project would make schools and emergency
facilities more resistant to flood damage and
accessible following flood events. This project
would make improvements to emergency response
facilities, sanitation facilities, and schools to facilitate
their use for post-disaster relief. It would construct
improvements to Schools 4, 8, 9E, and 9M to provide
flood protection that would enable the safe return of
children and normal educational function as quickly as
possible after disasters. It would provide generators
for all schools and Hose No. 3, and improvements
to sanitation facilities to improve their emergency
response function. Work would be accomplished in
coordination with the Oceanside School District, Fire
Department, and Sanitation Department. The project
would build on improvements already completed or
underway, most notably the resilient reconstruction
of the Oceanside Fire Headquarters and emergency
dispatch center.

Proposed
Oceanside

Implementation steps would include:

Schools
•

Purchase and install multi-fuel generators at
Schools 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9E, and 9M;

•

Relocate mechanical and electrical equipment
above projected flood heights; and

•

Seal low-lying building openings at Schools 4, 8,
9E and 9M; and,

•

Install passive perimeter floodwall and flood
door protection.

Firehouses
•

Purchase and install a multi-fuel generator at
Hose No. 3;

•

Relocate mechanical and electrical equipment
above projected flood heights;

•

Seal low-lying building openings and install
passive perimeter floodwall and flood door
protection;

•

Provide and install communication towers and
radio resources;

•

Purchase emergency response resources and
vehicles;

Cost estimate:
Cost estimate includes a study to analyze needed improvements and construction
of resiliency enhancements to schools, fire facilities, and sanitation facilities; and
the purchase of emergency response equipment.
Schools:

$3,800,000

Firehouse:			

$4,200,000

Sanitation:
Total cost estimate:						

92

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$700,000
$8,700,00

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 23: Potential improvements to Oceanside schools

Perimeter
Floodwall
Protection

Oceanside School #8

Building
Envelope
Upgrades
Seal
Building
Openings

Oceanside School #4

Source: Google Earth

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

93

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

Purchase rescue boat(s); and,

Health and social

•

Install facilities in Hose No. 3 and Engine No. 1
to serve out-of-town emergency responders.

The acquisition of emergency response equipment
and building improvements would allow Oceanside
emergency responders and residents to act more
quickly in an efficient and well-coordinated manner
and to prepare for and address situations that arise
before, during and after emergencies. The schools
and emergency response facilities are in strategic
locations that can provide services to vulnerable
populations, including seniors, the disabled, schoolaged children, and families. These improvements
would enable the facilities to function as feeding
stations and supply distribution locations during
emergencies. Flood protection would provide
additional space for essential health and social
services facilities to help keep them operational or to
quickly recover from storm events.

Sanitation facilities
•

Improve sanitation facilities to provide enhanced
emergency response function, including:
•

Purchase and install a multi-fuel generator;

•

Relocate mechanical and electrical
equipment above projected flood heights;
and,

•

Seal low-lying building openings and install
passive perimeter floodwall and flood door
protection.

Benefits
Local benefits include more resilient school facilities
to reduce damage and enable children to return to
school more quickly after a major flood. By increasing
the protection of facilities, particularly schools,
timeframes for recovery are significantly reduced. The
value and benefits derived from these projects directly
relate to the issues and concerns the Community
and its residents faced immediately after Superstorm
Sandy. Children were displaced from schools and
relocated to other schools that experienced less
damage. The school improvements would decrease
the future likelihood of having to reconstruct damaged
schools, and/or the need move children to other
locations.

Economic
Enhanced emergency response would help Oceanside
economic centers recover their functions faster after
a storm. This more rapid recovery reduces the chance
that the centers would reduce services and lay off
employees. In addition, the early reestablishment of
the schools would help provide a needed boost to
residents and business owners looking to move back
to Oceanside and reestablish themselves.
This project would indirectly help the local economy
as it would serve as a resource to residents to help
them recover more rapidly, which would help maintain
the customer base needed by local businesses.
This project would also help reduce post-disaster
emergency and recovery costs by protecting the
facilities. It could also accelerate the recovery by
providing early recovery centers that assist residents
in providing information and assistance needed postdisaster.

Environmental
This project could reduce some contamination
associated with buildings being flooded and chemicals
that end up in floodwaters.

94

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Cost-benefit analysis

Regulatory requirements

Increasing flood protection features in Oceanside
schools and emergency response facilities would avoid
damages and save tax payers money over the long
run. Improvements to firehouses and the purchase
of emergency response equipment would increase
the capability of the Community to prepare for and
respond to disasters, reducing the time and cost of
recovery. Over time, these cost savings will offset the
initial investment made.

The project needs to meet the requirements of Town
of Hempstead building permits.

Risk reduction

Jurisdiction
The project is within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Hempstead, Oceanside School District, Oceanside Fire
Department, and Oceanside Sanitation District.

The entire school-aged population of Oceanside would
directly benefit from the protection provided. The risk
assessment completed for this project anticipates that
the project would reduce the vulnerability of school
and emergency response assets, reducing the risk of
future flooding from high to moderate.
This project would make buildings and equipment
more flood resistant. Critical facilities directly affected
by these improvements include Schools 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9E, and 9M as well as Hose No. 3. Secure
facilities would enhance emergency response and reentry to damaged areas.

Timeframe
Immediate (within two years)

Bulkhead door with shield panel
Source: FEMA

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

95

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Proposed

Tidal backflow prevention
Superstorm Sandy tidal surge
overwhelmed the stormwater systems
in Barnum Island, the Village of Island
Park, and Harbor Isle, resulting in
inland flooding that covered more than
95% of the Village and two hamlets.
Outside of major storm events, tidal
backflows into the stormwater system
cause flooding of low-lying areas
during full moon high tides and even
moderate storms because stormwater
outfalls are partially or fully under
water.

Barnum Island, the Village of
Island Park & Harbor Isle

Description
This project would install tidal water backflow devices
to prevent tidal water from entering the stormwater
system and flooding low lying areas.
Implementation steps would include:
•

Perform a phased analysis of outflow function at
Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park, and
Harbor Isle locations shown in Figure 24;

•

Develop a phased implementation strategy in
conjunction with Nassau County, the Town of
Hempstead, and the Village of Island Park; and,

•

Install/repair backflow prevention devices on
stormwater outfalls.

Cost estimate:
Cost estimates include but are not limited to the analysis of outflow functions,
development of a phased implementation strategy, and installation and/or repair of
backflow prevention devices on all stormwater outfalls.
Barnum Island:				
Village of Island Park:			
Harbor Isle:				
Total Cost Estimate:			

96

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$550,000
$90,000
$290,000
$930,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 24: Stormwater outfall locations

vd
Bl
in
st
Au

Long Beach Rd

Lo

ng

Be
a

ch

R
d

HU RR
ICA NE
EVACUA
TIO N
RO UT
E

Legend
NYRCR Community
Stormwater outfalls
HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

Primary evacuation route

´

0     0.125  0.25            0.5

Miles

Source: OpenStreetMap

Marshes
Parks

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

97

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits

Cost-benefit analysis

This project would reduce flooding caused by tidal
backflow and infiltration, protecting Barnum Island,
the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle during a
major storm and from repetitive nuisance flooding
caused by moon tides and other high tide events and
storms.

Installation of backflow prevention systems would
reduce localized flooding and alleviate repetitive
flooding caused by storms and high tide events.
This would reduce damages and costs of repairs to
infrastructure, homes, and businesses. It will also
reduce economic disruptions caused by nuisance
flooding. The cost savings created would be greater
than the relatively modest cost of installing and
maintaining the backflow valves.

Health and social
Installation of backflow preventers at outflow
locations would aid in reducing localized flooding and
failure of stormwater systems. This would reduce
locations of pooled water that can carry pathogens
and breed mosquitoes that can cause West Nile virus
and other diseases.

Economic
An increased investment in asset protection
demonstrates a high level of public service capacity,
which helps with retaining existing businesses and
attracting new ones. This project would indirectly
help the local economy as it would serve as a means
to help local businesses recover more rapidly, which
would help maintain the customer base. This project
would help reduce post-disaster emergency and
recovery costs by protecting the facilities and reducing
post-disaster cleanup times.

Environmental
Many parks and open space assets currently affected
by tidal flooding and high water would experience
reduced downtime and expedited recovery through
this action. Backflow preventers would help to avoid
spillback into stormwater facilities that contribute
to overflow and localized flooding throughout the
Community.

98

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Risk reduction
Primary risk reduction affects a significant portion
of the population due to the location of homes and
businesses adjacent and proximate to low-lying areas
on the shoreline, in proximity to affected stormwater
drains, and other areas where tidal backflow currently
exists. Application of drainage improvements would
directly affect residences and businesses along the
western edge of Harbor Isle, on either side of the
Island Park Channel, California Canal, Wreck Lead,
the lagoon adjacent to Kingston Boulevard, and the
Redfield Road area.
Implementation of the tidal backflow prevention
project would significantly reduce the risk of flooding
to multiple assets. The risk assessment anticipated the
risk of future flooding would be reduced from extreme
to moderate for the sanitary sewer, stormwater
drainage systems, and single-family housing. The risk
assessment further anticipated that the risk of future
flooding would be reduced from high to moderate for
transportation assets including the Long Island Rail
Road (LIRR), Austin Boulevard, and Long Beach Road,
providing improved safety and access to services for
the 8,370 residents living in the area45.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Timeframe
Immediate (within two years)

Regulatory requirements
This project would require Town of Hempstead,
Village of Island Park, and NYS Department of
Environmental Conservation (DEC) permits. It could
also require U.S. Army Corps of Engineer permits,
and where Federal permits or funding are involved,
Coastal Zone Management federal consistency review
by NYS DOS.

Jurisdiction
Village of Island Park, Town of Hempstead, and
Nassau County

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

99

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Proposed

Tidal backflow prevention
Superstorm Sandy tidal surge
overwhelmed Oceanside’s stormwater
system, resulting in inland flooding
that covered the southern two-thirds
of Oceanside. Outside of major
storm events, tidal backflows into the
stormwater system cause flooding
of low-lying areas during full moon
high tides and even moderate storms
because stormwater outfalls are
partially or fully under water.

Oceanside

Description
This project includes installation of tidal water
backflow devices to prevent tidal water from entering
the stormwater system and flooding low lying areas.
Implementation steps would include:
•

Perform a phased analysis of outflow location
and function at Oceanside locations shown on
Figure 25;

•

Develop a phased implementation strategy
to identify the locations where tidal backflow
devices would have the greatest benefit; and,

•

Work in conjunction with Nassau County
and the Town of Hempstead to install/repair
backflow prevention devices on stormwater
outfalls.

Cost estimate:
Cost estimate includes but is not limited to the analysis of outflow functions,
development of a phased implementation strategy, and installation and repair of
backflow prevention devices on all stormwater outfalls.
Total Cost Estimate:		

100

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$1,460,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 25: Stormwater outfall locations

Long B

each Ro

ad

H
EV UR
AC R I C
R O UA A N
UT TIO E
E N

Legend
NYRCR Community
Stormwater outfalls
HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

Primary evacuation route

´

0      0.2     0.4             0.8

Miles

Source: OpenStreetMap

Marshes
Parks

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

101

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits
This project would reduce flooding caused by tidal
backflow and infiltration, protecting Oceanside during
a major storm. It would protect lower lying areas
throughout the area from repetitive nuisance flooding
caused by moon tides and other high tide events and
storms.

Health and social
Installation of backflow preventers at outflow
locations would aid in reducing localized flooding and
failure of stormwater systems. This would reduce
locations of pooled water that can carry pathogens
and breed mosquitoes that can cause West Nile virus
and other diseases.

Economic
An increased investment in asset protection
demonstrates a high level of public service capacity,
which helps with retaining existing businesses and
attracting new ones. This project would indirectly help
the local economy as it would serve as means to help
local businesses recover more rapidly which would
help maintain the customer base. This project would
help reduce post-disaster emergency and recovery
costs by protecting the facilities and reducing postdisaster cleanup times.

102

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Environmental
Parks and open space assets currently affected
by tidal flooding and high water would experience
reduced downtime and expedited recovery through
this action. Backflow preventers would help to avoid
spillback into stormwater facilities that contribute to
overflow and localized flooding.

Cost-benefit analysis
Installation of backflow prevention systems would
reduce localized flooding and alleviate repetitive
flooding caused by storms and high tide events.
This would reduce damages and costs of repairs to
infrastructure, homes, and businesses. It will also
reduce economic disruptions caused by nuisance
flooding. The cost savings created would be greater
than the relatively modest cost of installing and
maintaining the backflow valves.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk reduction
Primary risk reduction affects a significant portion
of the population due to the location of homes and
businesses near affected stormwater drains and
other areas where tidal backflow currently occurs.
Application of drainage improvements would directly
affect residences and businesses along the Hog Island
Channel, the Lawson Boulevard commercial/industrial
corridor, Powell Creek, Mill River, and Bedell Creek to
reduce the risk of future flooding.
Implementation of the tidal backflow prevention
project would significantly reduce the risk of flooding
to multiple. The risk assessment completed for
this project anticipated the risk of future flooding
would be reduced from extreme to moderate for the
sanitary sewer, stormwater drainage systems, and
single-family housing. The risk assessment further
anticipated that the risk of future flooding would be
reduced from high to moderate for transportation
assets including the Long Beach Road, Oceanside
Road, and other major north-south and east-west
roadways, providing increased safety and improved
access to services for the 32,109 residents living in
the area.46

Timeframe
Immediate (within two years)

Tidal backflow prevention
Source: URS

Regulatory requirements
This project will require Town of Hempstead and NYS
DEC permits. It could also require U.S. Army Corps
of Engineer permits, and where Federal permits or
funding are involved, Coastal Zone Management
federal consistency review by NYS DOS.

Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead, and Nassau County

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

103

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Proposed

Drainage improvements
Superstorm Sandy overwhelmed
the stormwater drainage systems in
Barnum Island, the Village of Island
Park, and Harbor Isle. The resulting
floodwaters inundated homes, schools,
and businesses, and blocked streets,
preventing evacuation and emergency
access. Moreover, the system regularly
becomes overloaded during storms
resulting in inadequate drainage of
runoff and flooded streets. Streets and
vital intersections become dangerous
for travel due to stormwater and
tidal flooding during high tide and
minor rainfall events. This can block
evacuation early in a major storm
event, impeding evacuation and
emergency access.

Barnum Island, the Village of
Island Park & Harbor Isle

Description
This project would improve the stormwater drainage
system to reduce flooding in Barnum Island, the Village
of Island Park, and Harbor Isle in low-lying areas,
roadways, and evacuation routes.
Implementation steps would include:
•

Conduct a comprehensive phased analysis of the
stormwater drainage system to:
•

Analyze system needs;

•

Inspect condition of system;

•

Identify and clear blockages and prioritizes
repairs; and,

•

Identify improved regulatory actions
(permitting, land use, zoning) to improve the
long term function of the system.

Cost estimate:
Cost estimates include the study, phased implementation, and pilot projects specified above:
Barnum Island:
Study:
Improvements:			

$100,000
$1,250,000

Village of Island Park:
Study:
Improvements:			

$200,000
$6,380,000

Harbor Isle:
Study:
Improvements:			
Total cost estimate:			

104

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$100,000
$1,880,000
$9,910,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 26: Drainage improvements in Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle

Openings in tree pit to
allow greater infiltration of
water from roadway
Rd

Pervious
parking
area

Continuous stormwater
trench with street trees
and landscaping

Lo

ng

Be

ac

h

Continuous stormwater
trench with street trees
and landscaping

Potential drainage improvements to Long Beach Road in the Village of Island Park
Tra
f

0

du

bo

20

Blv

Feet

Source: URS

d

Barnum Island Low-Lying Streets

nB

lvd

H
EV UR
AC R IC
R O UA A N
U T T IO E
E N

d

au
ss
Na

vd
Bl
in
st
Au

lan

Is

Deal Rd

Long Beach Rd

Au

sti

n

Bl

vd

La

Radcliffe Rd

Suffolk Rd

Warwick Rd
Brighton Blvd

Au

ar

ne

Na

ss

au

La

ne

alg

wy
Pk
S

Island Pkwy S

Harbor Isle low-lying streets & homes

The Village of Island Park downtown and “bowl”

Legend

HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

NYRCR Community

Marshes

Areas prone to flooding

Parks

Primary evacuation route

Buildings

´

0      0.2     0.4             0.8
Source: OpenStreetMap

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Miles

105

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

•

•

Design and construct phased improvements
to the stormwater drainage system at priority
locations, including pump station(s) in the
Village of Island Park downtown to alleviate
flooding of the area that includes the LIRR
Station, Long Beach Road, and Nassau Lane;
In Harbor Isle, assess feasibility of, and if
feasible, elevate roadways and install yard
drains at the southern tip of Harbor Isle
to mitigate flooding. Roads include: Island
Parkway West, North, and South; Island Park
Place West; Sheridan Place and Washington
Avenue; and,
Implement a pilot project testing the
application of green stormwater infrastructure,
including permeable pavement.

Benefits
This project would reduce flooding, protecting
Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park, and
Harbor Isle during a major storm. It would protect
lower lying areas, including the Island Park “bowl”
and the southern end of Harbor Isle, from repetitive
nuisance flooding caused by moon tides and other
high tide events and small and moderate storms.

Health and social
Drainage improvements would aid in reducing
localized flooding and failure of stormwater systems.
Many locations and assets, including senior housing,
special needs services, and schools would see
improved conditions with this improvement.

106

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Economic
Drainage improvements around employment centers
would help them recover their functions faster after a
storm. This more rapid recovery reduces the chance
that the centers would reduce services and lay off
employees. This project would help reduce postdisaster emergency and recovery costs by decreasing
the extent of flooding in the community.

Environmental
Parks and open space assets currently affected
by tidal flooding and high water would experience
reduced downtime and expedited recovery through
this action. Pump stations and retention basins would
help to slow the inundation of low-lying areas. Green
infrastructure and recharge options would serve as
filters to ensure that groundwater contamination is
reduced.

Cost-benefit analysis
Drainage infrastructure improvements are a critical
step to eliminating repetitive nuisance flooding during
small storm events. Although the total project cost is
high, the cost reductions achieved through eliminating
the need for repeated repairs to infrastructure,
homes, and businesses would offset these costs. The
project will also reduce economic disruptions caused
by nuisance flooding.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk reduction

Timeframe

This project would increase the stormwater drainage
system capacity to reduce flooding in low-lying
areas, roadways, and evacuation routes. Significant
improvements in the drainage system would
drastically reduce vulnerability for a large number of
assets including economic resources, government
facilities, schools, transportation systems, stormwater
systems, water systems, religious organizations, parks
and recreation, and single-family housing.

Near-term (within three years)

This project would affect a majority of the population
due to the geographic extent of low-lying areas, and
most residential assets that would see benefits from
the improvements. Primary application of drainage
improvements would directly affect residences and
businesses in the “bowl” of the Village of Island Park,
bounded roughly by Nassau Lane and Long Beach
Road, the Village of Island Park business district along
Long Beach Road, Harbor Isle between Warwick Road
and Island Parkway South, and Barnum Island along
Austin Boulevard from Nassau Lane east to Trafalgar
Boulevard.

Regulatory requirements
This project will require Village of Island Park and
NYS DEC permits. It could also require U.S. Army
Corps of Engineer permits, and where Federal permits
or funding are involved, Coastal Zone Management
federal consistency review by NYS DOS.

Jurisdiction
Village of Island Park, Town of Hempstead (for Harbor
Isle and Barnum Island), and Nassau County

Implementation of the drainage improvement project
would provide improved stormwater drainage for the
8,370 residents living in the area47 and significantly
reduce the risk of future flooding to multiple assets.
The risk assessment completed for this project
anticipated that the risk of future flooding to
economic, sanitary sewer, stormwater drainage, and
single family housing assets would be reduced from
extreme to high risk. Flood risk to assisted living areas
that house vulnerable populations, emergency rescue
facilities, water systems, the transportation network,
parks, recreation, and religious assets would be
reduced from high to moderate.

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

107

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Proposed

Drainage Improvements
Superstorm Sandy overwhelmed
Oceanside’s stormwater drainage
system. The resulting floodwaters
inundated homes, schools, and
businesses, and blocked streets,
preventing evacuation and emergency
access. Moreover, the system regularly
becomes overloaded during storms,
resulting in inadequate drainage of
runoff and flooded streets. Streets and
vital intersections become dangerous
for travel due to stormwater and
tidal flooding during high tide and
minor rainfall events. This can block
evacuation early in a major storm
event, impeding evacuation and
emergency access.

Oceanside

Description
This project would improve the stormwater drainage
system to reduce flooding in low-lying areas,
roadways and evacuation routes.
Implementation steps would include:
•

•

Conduct a comprehensive phased analysis
of the stormwater drainage system for
implementation of a pilot or phased program
of improvements that may include but is not
limited to:
•

Analyze system needs;

•

Inspect condition of system;

•

Identify and clear blockages and prioritize
repairs; and,

•

Identify improved regulatory actions
(permitting, land use, zoning) to improve
the long term function of the system.

Conduct a phased implementation of identified
drainage improvements at eight to ten
intersections; and,

Cost estimate:
Cost estimates include the study, phased implementation, and pilot project
specified above:
Study:				
Improvements:
Total cost estimate:			

108

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$200,000
$10,120,000
$10,320,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 27: “Complete street” improvements along Long Beach Road

Sidewalk extended
to 10’

Wide shoulder with shared
bike symbols

Median converted to rain garden/
retention system with walkway

Wide shoulder with shared
bike symbols

Typical section for potential “complete street” improvements to Long Beach Road

Sidewalk
extended
to 10’

0

20

Feet

Source: URS

Long Beach Road viewed from Davison Avenue
Source: LiRo Group

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

109

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

Implement a “complete street” pilot project on
Long Beach Road, which will include improved
stormwater drainage, streetscaping, and
pedestrian and bicycle improvements to create
amenities to support new economic investment.

Benefits
This project would reduce flooding, protecting
Oceanside during a major storm. It would protect
lower lying areas, including Schools 9E and 9M, from
repetitive nuisance flooding caused by moon tides
and other high tide events and small and moderate
storms.

Health and social
Drainage improvements would aid in reducing
localized flooding and failure of stormwater systems.
Many locations, including senior housing, special
needs services, and schools would see improved
conditions with this improvement. This project would
provide for a reduction in flooding that should improve
access before, during, and after an emergency.

110

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Economic
Drainage improvements around employment centers
would help them recover their functions faster after a
storm. This more rapid recovery reduces the chance
that the centers would reduce services and lay off
employees. This project will help reduce post-disaster
emergency and recovery costs by decreasing the
extent of flooding in the community.

Environmental
Parks and open space assets currently affected
by tidal flooding and high water would experience
reduced downtime and expedited recovery through
this action. Green infrastructure, complete street
design, and pervious pavement options would serve
as filters to ensure that groundwater contamination is
reduced.

Cost-benefit analysis
Drainage infrastructure improvements are a critical
step to eliminating repetitive nuisance flooding during
small storm events. Although the total project cost is
high, the cost reductions achieved through eliminating
the need for repeated repairs to infrastructure,
homes, and businesses would offset these costs. The
project will also reduce economic disruptions caused
by nuisance flooding.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk reduction
This project would increase the stormwater
drainage system capacity to reduce flooding in
low-lying areas, roadways, and evacuation routes.
Significant improvements would drastically reduce
vulnerability for a large number of assets including
economic resources, government facilities, schools,
transportation systems, stormwater systems, water
systems, religious organizations, parks and recreation,
and single-family housing.
This project would affect a majority of the
population south of Windsor Parkway due to the
geographic extent of low-lying areas, and residential
assets located there would see benefits from the
improvements. Primary application of drainage
improvements will directly affect residences and
businesses along major roads, including but not
limited to, Lawson Boulevard, Daly Boulevard, Long
Beach Road from Daly Boulevard to Windsor Parkway,
Mott Street from Long Beach Road to Oceanside
Road, and Oceanside Road from Mott Street to
Windsor Parkway. Improvements to these corridors
and major intersections would help to reduce flood
risk for many residents and businesses.
Implementation of the drainage improvement
project would provide improved stormwater drainage
for the 32,109 residents living in the area48 and
significantly reduce the risk of future flooding to
multiple assets. The risk assessment conducted for
this project anticipated that the risk of future flooding
to economic, sanitary sewer, stormwater drainage,
and single family housing assets would be reduced
from extreme to high risk. Flood risk to schools, water
systems, the transportation network, and religious
assets would be reduced from high to moderate.

Example complete street in Charlotte, North Carolina
Source: Complete Streets

Timeframe
Near-term (within three years)

Regulatory requirements
This project will require Town of Hempstead and NYS
DEC permits. It could also require U.S. Army Corps
of Engineer permits, and where Federal permits or
funding are involved, Coastal Zone Management
federal consistency review by NYS DOS.

Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead and Nassau County

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

111

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Perimeter flood safeguards –
California Place Canal and Wreck
Lead: Phase 1
Superstorm Sandy tidal surge from
California Place Canal and Wreck Lead
devastated Barnum Island’s residential
neighborhoods, the Austin Boulevard
commercial corridor, and the Village
of Island Park’s downtown, including
the Island Park LIRR Station. Tidal
surge from high tide events and
even small storms causes regular
flooding of adjacent Barnum Island
neighborhoods, Austin Boulevard, and
downtown Island Park. The entire
area is low-lying, which limits the
effectiveness of barrier systems, such
as bulkheads, berms, and floodwalls.
Without high ground to tie into, water
simply flows around the edges of
barriers.

Proposed
Barnum Island & the Village of
Island Park

Description
This project would evaluate technically feasible
solutions to tidal flooding from California Place Canal
and Wreck Lead and implement the first phase of
a system of barriers and natural improvements to
reduce flooding.
Implementation steps would include:
•

Conduct a phased comprehensive shoreline
conditions analysis and improvement strategy
to determine a set of strategies to reduce tidal
flooding of the entire low-lying area, including
analysis of potential solutions to restore
shorelines to better than pre-Hurricane Irene
and Superstorm Sandy condition, considering
a mix of technical and natural strategies
including:
•

Hard infrastructure, such as bulkheads,
levees and sea walls;

•

Natural solutions, such as marsh restoration
and wetland construction;

Cost estimate:
Cost estimates include a study and phased implementation of improvements to
California Canal and Wreck Lead.
Barnum Island:
Study:
Construction/improvements:			

$125,000
$3,000,000

Village of Island Park:
Study:

$125,000

Construction/improvements:

$750,000

Total cost estimate:						

112

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$4,000,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 28: Vulnerable shorelines along California Place Canal and Wreck Lead

H
EV URR
AC IC
R O UA A N
U T T IO E
E N

Califo

rnia P

lace C

anal

Garrett
Marsh

Wreck Lead

Legend
NYRCR Community
Marsh restoration
Shoreline conditions analysis area
Vulnerable shoreline
HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

Primary evacuation route
Direction of tidal flow

´

0                0.125              0.25                                     0.5
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

Buildings
Marshes
Parks

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

113

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

Hybrid solutions, which combine hard
infrastructure with natural approaches; and,

•

Wave attenuation, such as reefs, sea grass
beds, to slow down the water.

•

Implement flood barrier systems adjacent to the
Canal and Wreck Lead where feasible; and,

•

Coordinate with U.S. Army Corp of Engineers,
the Village of Island Park, Town of Hempstead,
Nassau County, and New York State to
develop a phased approach to implement all
recommendations from the shoreline conditions
analysis and improvement strategy.

Benefits
This project would reduce flooding, protecting Barnum
Island and the Village of Island Park during a major
storm. It would protect lower lying areas, including
California Place Canal North and California Place
Canal South, downtown Island Park, and the Long
Island Rail Road Station and electrical substation from
repetitive nuisance flooding caused by moon tides
and other high tide events and small and moderate
storms.

Health and Social
Flood barriers would aid in reducing localized flooding
and inundation of stormwater systems. Many
locations, including senior housing and schools would
see improved conditions with this improvement. This
project would provide for a reduction in flooding that
should improve access during and after emergencies.

Economic
Flood safeguards around employment centers,
especially in the low-lying areas around downtown
Island Park, would help them recover their functions
faster after a storm. This more rapid recovery reduces
the chance that the centers would reduce services
and lay off employees. This project would indirectly

114

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

help the local economy as it would decrease flooding
of the affected areas which would help maintain the
customer base needed for many local businesses. This
project would help reduce post-disaster emergency
and recovery costs by decreasing the extent of
flooding in the community.

Environmental
Parks and open space assets currently affected
by tidal flooding and high stormwater would
experience reduced downtime and expedited recovery
through this action. Flood barriers and additional
improvements would reduce the amount of inundation
experienced by the community, reducing the amount
of cleanup necessary following the event.

Cost-benefit analysis
The first phase of this project, the shoreline conditions
analysis, will identify technically feasible and costeffective solutions to reduce tidal flooding from
California Place Canal and Wreck Lead. The cost of no
action is high due to the high frequency of flooding
during high tides and even minor storm events. The
costs of repeated repairs to infrastructure, homes, and
businesses are high. Frequent flooding of downtown
Island Park has spurred disinvestment, reducing the
economic capacity and the tax base of the Village of
Island Park. Given this situation, the benefits appear
to outweigh the costs based on the findings of the
risk assessment and the determination of the health,
social, environmental, and economic benefits this
project can provide.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk reduction
This project would create a system of barriers
and natural shoreline improvements. Significant
communities exist around these resources, including
residential neighborhoods and commercial corridors.
The flood reductions resulting from these projects
would greatly reduce the risk for all of these
communities.
Primary risk reduction would affect a significant area
of the population due to the location of homes and
businesses near low-lying areas on the eastern edge
of Barnum Island and adjacent to downtown Village of
Island Park. Application of these barriers and shoreline
improvements would directly affect residences and
businesses along California Place Canal, Shell Creek
Park, and Wreck Lead.
Implementation of the perimeter flood safeguards
phase I project at California Place Canal and Wreck
Lead would significantly reduce risk to multiple
assets. The risk assessment conducted for this
project anticipated that the future risk of flooding
to economic, sanitary sewer, stormwater drainage
systems, and single family housing assets would be
reduced from extreme to high. Flood risk to assets
including assisted living areas that house vulnerable

populations and transportation systems would be
reduced from high to moderate, providing improved
access to services for the 2,414 residents living in the
area.49

Timeframe
Near-term (within three years)

Regulatory requirements
This project will require Town of Hempstead, Village
of Island Park, and NYS DEC permits. It could also
require U.S. Army Corps of Engineer permits, and
where Federal permits or funding are involved,
Coastal Zone Management federal consistency review
by NYS DOS.

Jurisdiction
Village of Island Park, Town of Hempstead, and
Nassau County

California Place North, Barnum Island
Source: LiRo Group

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

115

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Perimeter flood safeguards

Proposed
Oceanside

Superstorm Sandy tidal surge along
Bedell Creek, Powell Creek and
Grand Canal was the major source of
flooding along the Lawson Boulevard
and Long Beach Road commercial
corridors and Oceanside schools and
neighborhoods. Tidal flows affect
Bedell Creek and Grand Canal during
high tide and small storm events,
causing flooding of adjacent lowlying roads, the Lawson Boulevard
commercial/industrial corridor, schools,
neighborhoods, and parks.

of the area is low-lying, making solutions complex. A
phased comprehensive shoreline conditions analysis
would be the first step in the process. The analysis
would identify a set of feasible permanent solutions.
Implementation steps would include:
•

Installation of flood barrier systems, which may
include but are not limited to, the area along
Bedell Creek, Powell Creek, and Grand Canal;

•

Conducting and implementing a phased
shoreline conditions analysis and improvement
strategy; and,

•

Coordination with U.S. Army Corp of Engineers,
Town of Hempstead, Nassau County, and New
York State to develop a phased approach to
implement recommendations from the shoreline
conditions analysis and improvement strategy.

Description
This project would create a system of barriers and
natural shoreline improvements to reduce flooding
from Oceanside waterways, including but not limited
to, Bedell Creek, Powell Creek, and Grand Canal. Much

Cost estimate
Cost estimate includes a comprehensive study and phased implementation of
improvements.
Study:							
Construction of improvements:			
Total cost estimate:					

116

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$400,000
$6,050,000
$6,450,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 29: Vulnerable shorelines along Powell Creek, Grand Canal, Domar Canal and Bedell Creek

HURR ICAN E
EVAC UATIO N
ROUT E

Powell Creek

Bedell Creek

Grand Canal
Domar Canal

Tidal flooding and wind-driven tides

Legend
NYRCR Community
Shorelines requiring additional protections
HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

Primary evacuation route

´

0   0.125    0.25             0.5
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

Direction of tidal flow
Marshes
Parks

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

117

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits

Cost-benefit analysis

This project would reduce flooding, protecting all of
Oceanside during a major storm. It would protect
lower lying areas, including the Lawson Boulevard
commercial/industrial corridor, Waukena Avenue,
Oceanside Park, and Schools 8, 9E, and 9M, from
repetitive nuisance flooding caused by moon tides
and other high tide events and small and moderate
storms.

Although the total cost is high, the benefits appear
to outweigh the costs based on the findings of the
risk assessment and the determination of the health,
social, environmental, and economic benefits this
project can provide. The cost of no action is high due
to the high frequency of flooding during high tides
and even minor storm events. The costs of repeated
repairs to infrastructure, homes, and schools are high.

Health and social
Flood barriers would aid in reducing localized flooding
and inundation of stormwater systems. Many
locations, including senior housing and schools would
see improved conditions with this improvement. This
project would provide for a reduction in flooding
that should improve access before, during, and after
emergencies.

Economic
Flood safeguards around employment centers,
especially in the Grand Canal area, would help them
recover their functions faster after a storm. This more
rapid recovery reduces the chance that the centers
would reduce services and lay off employees. This
project would indirectly help the local economy as
it would decrease flooding in neighborhoods, which
would help maintain the customer base needed by
local businesses. This project would help reduce postdisaster emergency and recovery costs by decreasing
the extent of flooding in the community.

Environmental
Parks and open space assets currently affected
by tidal flooding and high stormwater would
experience reduced downtime and expedited recovery
through this action. Flood barriers and additional
improvements would reduce the amount of inundation
experienced by the community, reducing the amount
of cleanup necessary following the event.

118

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Risk reduction
This project would create a system of barriers and
natural shoreline improvements to reduce flooding in
the areas near Oceanside waterways, including but
not limited to, Bedell Creek, Powell Creek and Grand
Canal. Significant communities exist around these
resources, including residential neighborhoods and
commercial corridors. The flood reduction resulting
from these projects would greatly reduce the risk for
all of these communities.
Primary risk reduction would affect a significant
portion of the population due to the location of homes
and businesses in proximity or directly adjacent to
low-lying areas, creeks, and shorelines. Application of
barriers and shoreline improvements would directly
affect residences and businesses along Grand Canal,
Oceanside Park, Schools 8, 9E, and 9M, and along
Barnum’s Channel, Garrett Lead, and Bedell Creek.
Implementation of the perimeter flood safeguards in
Oceanside would significantly reduce risk to multiple
assets. The risk assessment anticipated that the
future risk of flooding to economic, sanitary sewer,
and stormwater drainage systems would be reduced
from extreme to high. Flood risk to assets including
single family housing and transportation systems
would be reduced from high to moderate, providing
improved flood safeguards for the 8,123 residents
living in the area.50

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Timeframe

Jurisdiction

Near-term (within three years)

Town of Hempstead

Regulatory requirements
This project will require Town of Hempstead and NYS
DEC permits. It could also require U.S. Army Corps
of Engineer permits, and where Federal permits or
funding are involved, Coastal Zone Management
federal consistency review by NYS DOS.

Grand Canal, Oceanside
Source: URS

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

119

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Destination revitalization and
transit-oriented development
Downtown flooding from Superstorm
Sandy damaged businesses along
Long Beach Road in the Village of
Island Park. Sandy damage, on top
of repeated damage from nuisance
flooding from high tide events and
small storms, has discouraged
businesses from making investment
in their properties. Several businesses
decided not to reopen after Sandy. A
plan to revitalize the downtown area
and connect it to the Wreck Lead
waterfront is needed to maintain and
increase its economic viability.

Proposed
Barnum Island & the
Village of Island Park

Description
This project would build on the drainage and
perimeter flood protection projects to support
investment in the Village of Island Park’s downtown
and Wreck Lead waterfront. The infrastructure
projects would reduce flooding, and the revitalization
plan would identify the tools needed to attract new
investment to the area. The project would result in
the development of a mixed-use, transit-oriented
development plan to revitalize the Village of Island
Park’s downtown and waterfront to attract new
residents, businesses, and visitors to the Long Beach
Road business district and Wreck Lead waterfront.
Implementation steps would include:
•

Preparation of a downtown/waterfront
revitalization plan that:
•

Identifies needed improvements for the
Island Park business district and the Wreck
Lead waterfront; and,

•

Develops a strategy to create transitoriented development, including mixedaged housing and mixed-use (residential/
retail/office) options.

Cost estimate:
Cost estimate includes the revitalization plan and retention of a local disaster
recovery manager for two years.

120

Revitalization Plan:			

$150,000

Local Disaster Recovery Manager:

$100,000

Total Cost Estimate:			

$250,000

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 30: The Village of Island Park downtown and waterfront revitalization area

H
EV URR
AC I C
R O UAT A N E
UT IO
E N

Masone
Beach

Au

sti

nB

lvd

Little
Beach

Village
Hall

*

Shell
Creek
Park

Legend
NYRCR Community
Downtown revitalization area
Pedestrian and accessibility improvements

´

0           0.125           0.25                            0.5
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

Primary evacuation route
Connections to waterfront
Buildings
Marshes
Parks

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

121

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

Retention of a local disaster recovery manager
to manage programs and pursue additional
funding.

Future implementation steps to be funded by other
sources would include:
•

Implement identified improvements to create a
walkable downtown, including:
•

•

122

Streetscape improvements to enhance the
appearance, create a cohesive sense of
place, and improve pedestrian and bike
circulation;

•

Building façade improvement program; and,

•

Zoning changes to encourage mixed-use
development throughout the downtown and
waterfront area.

Establish new multi-modal road linkages:
•

Between downtown Island Park and the
Wreck Lead waterfront;

•

Across downtown at the LIRR Station to
create attractive and safe access across the
tracks and Austin Boulevard to Shell Creek
Park;

•

Improve pedestrian linkages between
downtown and community beaches; and,

•

Create a waterfront walk/bike way and
other improvement to support revitalization
of the Wreck Lead waterfront.

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Benefits
The revitalization plan would provide the direction
and policy changes needed to spur reinvestment in
the Village of Island Park downtown and waterfront,
rebuilding tax base and providing new multi-family
and mixed-use housing options.

Economic
The plan would initiate future redevelopment that
would reduce risk for the identified areas. New
development would support new jobs.

Cost-benefit analysis
The fiscal benefits of revitalizing Island Park’s
downtown and Wreck Lead waterfront are critical to
the economic recovery of the Community from the
aftermath of Superstorm Sandy. The cost of preparing
a revitalization plan and employing a local disaster
recovery manager to manage programs and pursue
additional funding are low in comparison to the
private investment and resulting increased tax base
expected to be achieved with plan implementation.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk reduction
This project would create and implement a mixeduse, transit-oriented development plan to revitalize
Island Park’s downtown and waterfront to attract new
residents, businesses, and visitors to the Long Beach
Road business district and Wreck Lead waterfront.
The plan would initiate future public investments
and redevelopment that would reduce risk for the
identified areas.

Timeframe
Near-term (within three years)

Regulatory requirements
The plan will include an Environmental Impact
Assessment per the New York State Environmental
Quality (SEQR) Review standards.

Jurisdiction
Village of Island Park and Town of Hempstead

Streetscaping along Long Beach Road at the Island
Park Public Library
Source: URS

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

123

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Tidal protection at street ends
and near Landgraf Park
While most privately-owned shoreline
properties are protected by bulkheads
or other barriers, many street
ends and parks are unprotected.
Superstorm Sandy tidal surge
inundated these breaks in the line of
protection to flood streets, homes,
schools, and businesses in Barnum
Island, the Village of Island Park, and
Harbor Isle. The Planning Committee
identified protection of street ends and
parks as a first step toward a more
comprehensive perimeter protection
system.

Proposed
Barnum Island, the Village of
Island Park & Harbor Isle

Description
This project would construct flood barriers at public
street ends to protect roadways, residences, and
businesses from tidal flooding. Prior to construction an
analysis is required to determine the best method to
reduce flooding at street ends. This may include but is
not limited to installation of bulkheads, raising existing
bulkheads, installing berms where feasible, and/or
install other investigated flood barrier systems.
Implementation steps would include:
•

Use the phased comprehensive shoreline
conditions analysis conducted in the Phase 1
Perimeter Flood Safeguards to identify the best
methods to alleviate flooding using flood barrier
systems, berms and bulkheads at unprotected
street ends and Landgraf Park on Waterford
Road as shown in Figure 31;

Cost estimate
Cost estimate includes a study and implementation of pilot programs.
Barnum Island:
Study:
Pilot program/implementation:				

$38,000
$300,000

Village of Island Park:
Study:
Pilot program/implementation:				

$38,000
$300,000

Harbor Isle:
Study:

124

$38,000

Pilot program/implementation:				

$300,000

Total cost estimate:						

$1,014,000

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 31: Street ends to evaluate for protection

HU RR
EVAC IC AN E
UA
RO UTTI ON
E

Landgraf
Park

Au

sti

nB

lvd

Island Park Street
Protections

Barnum
Island Street
Protections

Island Park Street
Protections

Legend

HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

NYRCR Community

Buildings

Street end protections

Marshes

Primary evacuation route

Parks

´

0           0.125          0.25                           0.5
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

Shoreline conditions analysis area

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

125

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

Implement identified improvements as pilot
projects is key locations; and,

•

Coordinate actions with other agency studies
including the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers.

Benefits
This project would reduce flooding, protecting Barnum
Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle
during a major storm. It would protect lower lying
areas, including Francis X. Hegarty School, the Austin
Boulevard commercial corridor, and the residences
located in the Island Park “bowl.”

Health and social
Street end protection would aid in reducing localized
flooding and inundation of stormwater systems and
local streets. Many locations, including senior housing
and schools would see improved conditions with this
project. Streets would be more passable through
implementation of the street end protective measures.

Economic
An increased investment in enhancing emergency
preparedness demonstrates a high level of public
service capacity which helps with retaining existing
businesses and attracting new ones. This project
would indirectly help the local economy as it would
serve as means to help local businesses recover more
rapidly which would help maintain the customer
base. This project would help reduce post-disaster
emergency and recovery costs by protecting the
facilities and reducing post-disaster cleanup times.

126

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Environmental
Landgraf Park on Waterford Road is a primary
recipient of improvements through street end
protection. The park would be able to withstand storm
surges and floodwaters with more frequency through
installation of these safeguards. The project could
reduce some contamination associated with streets
and backyards being flooded with trash and debris
that washes out of the channels.

Cost-benefit analysis
The costs of this project are justified by the protection
of high-risk roadways, residences, and businesses.
Significant communities exist around these resources,
including residential neighborhoods, recreation assets,
and commercial corridors. The flood risk reduction
would reduce damage and the cost of repairs,
providing strong benefits to these assets and the
Community.

Risk reduction
This project would implement street end flood barriers
to protect roadways, residences and businesses.
It would directly affect residences and businesses
along Island Park Channel, the Redfield Road area
near Landgraf Park, and the entire eastern edge of
Barnum Island including Trafalgar Boulevard, Kingston
Boulevard, and Empire Boulevard. The resulting
flood protection would improve the resiliency of
significant assets, including residential neighborhoods
and infrastructure systems, and the flood reduction
resulting from this project would greatly reduce their
risk.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The risk assessment completed for this project
anticipated that the risk of future flooding to sanitary
sewer, stormwater drainage systems, and singlefamily housing assets would be reduced from extreme
to high. Flood risk to assets including transportation
systems and parks would be reduced from high to
moderate, providing improved flood safeguards for
the 6,057 residents living in the area.51

Timeframe

Regulatory requirements
This project will require Town of Hempstead, Village
of Island Park, and NYS DEC permits. It could also
require U.S. Army Corps of Engineer permits, and
where Federal permits or funding are involved,
Coastal Zone Management federal consistency review
by NYS DOS.

Jurisdiction

Near-term (within three years)
Village of Island Park and Town of Hempstead

Street end bulkhead at California Place Canal, Barnum Island
Source: URS

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

127

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Shoreline and beach restoration and
environmental enhancements
Superstorm Sandy damaged the
beaches in the Village of Island Park
and Harbor Isle. All three beaches
are in need of restoration and repairs
to protect them from erosion and to
protect adjacent areas from flooding.
Description
This project would restore local beaches, including
Little Beach (in conjunction with an existing U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers project), Masone Beach,
and Harbor Isle Beach to protect them from erosion,
and to protect adjacent residential areas from
experiencing flooding at high and moon tides.

Proposed
Barnum Island, the Village of
Island Park & Harbor Isle

•

Restore and replenish beaches;

•

Conduct a seawall integrity analysis and pilot
repair program at Masone Beach;

•

Restore recreational equipment at Masone
Beach;

•

Provide matching funds for the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers beach revitalization project at Little
Beach;

•

Remediate erosion at Jackson Place; and,

•

Create access points to the Nassau County
South Shore Blueway Trail.

Implementation steps would include:
•

Conduct a viability analysis and, where feasible,
implement soft solutions and living shorelines,
including but not limited to implementation of
pilot projects along the beaches and shorelines;

Cost estimate
Cost estimates include a study, pilot programs, and implementation of
improvements.
Village of Island Park:
Little Beach U.S.A.C.E match:
Masone Beach stability study and seawall pilot project:		

$300,000
$1,000,000

Harbor Isle:
Environmental enhancement study:				

$100,000

Harbor Isle Beach restoration:

$750,000

Total cost estimate:

128

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$2,150,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 32: Living shoreline/beach replenishment and revitalization

Masone
Beach

Long Beach Road

Harbor Isle
Beach

Little
Beach

Island Parkway

Living shoreline/beach replenishment and revitalization

Legend
NYRCR Community
Beach restoration
Potential connection to Blueway Trail
Beaches

´

0                        0.125                       0.25     
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

Buildings
Marshes

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

129

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits

Cost-benefit analysis

Beach repair and restoration would protect the
adjacent residential neighborhoods from tidal flooding
and provide enhanced recreational resources for the
residents of Barnum Island, the Village of Island Park,
and Harbor Isle.

The costs of improvements to Harbor Isle Beach, Little
Beach, and Masone Beach would be justified by the
benefits of enhanced recreational facilities, reduced
risk of tidal flooding to adjacent neighborhoods, and
reduced clean-up and recovery costs.

Health and social
Beach improvements would add another line of
protection to many of the neighborhoods surrounding
Harbor Isle, Little, and Masone Beaches.

Economic
Improvements to these beaches and hard
infrastructure would help them serve as needed
shore breaks and filters for storm surges during and
after a storm. This more rapid recovery reduces the
chance that neighboring employment centers would
reduce services and lay off employees. Funding these
improvements would leverage current commitments
from outside sources to reduce the effective amount
that local government is committed to for these
repairs.

Environmental
The project can reduce some contamination
associated with floodwaters, acting as a filter system
before those contaminants reach neighborhoods.
While not creating new open space, this project would
restore previously reduced open space to past levels.

130

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Risk reduction
This project would restore local beaches including
Little Beach (in conjunction with the existing U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers project), Masone Beach,
and Harbor Isle Beach. These improvements would
add stability to weakened neighborhood beaches
to restore them to more complete flood control
capacities. This strengthening would help to
reduce risk to neighboring residential and business
populations.
Primary risk reduction would be to the beaches
themselves, and beaches were identified as significant
assets to the community. With this project, it is
anticipated that the risk to beaches would be reduced
from high to moderate. Secondary risk reduction will
be provided to homes and businesses in proximity to
the beaches along the northern edge of the Village of
Island Park and Harbor Isle.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Timeframe
Immediate (within two years)

Regulatory requirements
This project will require Town of Hempstead, Village
of Island Park, and NYS DEC permits. It could also
require U.S. Army Corps of Engineer permits, and
where Federal permits or funding are involved,
Coastal Zone Management federal consistency review
by NYS DOS.

Harbor Isle Beach, Harbor Isle
Source: URS

Jurisdiction
Village of Island Park and Town of Hempstead

Little Beach, the Village of Island Park
Source: URS

Masone Beach, the Village of Island Park
Source: LiRo Group

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

131

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Shoreline and open space
preservation
Superstorm Sandy eroded the
Oceanside Park shoreline, and
floodwaters crossed the park to flood
Schools 9E and 9M, located adjacent
to the park. Oceanside Park is a
significant community amenity and
was used to distribute emergency
supplies after Superstorm Sandy.
Description
This project would revitalize the Oceanside Park
shoreline to improve the resiliency of the area
and establish a more sustainable resource for the
Community. It would improve the resiliency of the
nearby schools and neighborhoods by stabilizing the
shoreline.

Proposed
Oceanside

implementation of the improvements may include but
are not limited to the following:
•

Installation of erosion control and shoreline
revitalization measures, including living
shorelines where feasible;

•

Establishing a connection to the Nassau County
South Shore Blueway;

•

Construction of resiliency improvements to the
park and recreation facilities in coordination
with any improvements that may be identified
by the Town of Hempstead;

•

Educating the public about the park’s role
in emergency response, recreation, and
potential to attract new residents and economic
development; and,

•

Coordinating actions with other agency
studies including the Town of Hempstead, U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers and Department of
Environmental Conservation.

Implementation steps would include:
Prepare a shoreline improvement study and
phased project implementation schedule. Phased

Cost estimate
Cost estimate includes study and phased implementation of shoreline and
recreation improvements.
Shoreline improvements and open space study:
Shoreline improvements and open space construction/improvements:

$200,000
$3,600,000

Total cost estimate:								 $3,800,000

132

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 33: Shoreline restoration for Oceanside Park

M
on

i
ah
r
D
er
ow

Br
Marine Nature
Study Area

lvd

ly B

Da

r

eD

tre

en

Gre

Oceanside Park
Living Shoreline

Connection to
South Shore Blueway

Legend
NYRCR Community
Shoreline restoration
Potential connection to Blueway Trail
Buildings

´

0                        0.125                       0.25     
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

Marshes
Open space

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

133

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits

business areas by reducing their susceptibility to
flooding.

The shoreline restoration would protect the adjacent
residential neighborhoods, areas in proximity to the
Park and Schools 9E and 9M from tidal flooding. The
project would also provide enhanced recreational
resources for the residents of Oceanside.

Residential areas and school populations directly
border the project area and are impacted by Bedell
Creek, which flows alongside many population centers
in this portion of the community. Improvements
proposed for this area would reduce the likelihood of
flooding in these populated areas.

Health and social
Park and shoreline improvements would add another
line of protection to many of the neighborhoods
surrounding Oceanside Park. There are school
populations directly adjacent to the area that would
directly benefit from an additional line of protection
against tidal flooding and storm surge. This project
would provide for a reduction in flooding that should
improve access during and after an emergency.

Environmental
Oceanside Park would be protected and enhanced
through this project. While not creating new open
space, this project would restore previously reduced
open space to past levels and greatly protect this
asset in future storm events.

Cost-benefit analysis
This project would revitalize Oceanside Park to
improve the resiliency of the area and establish a
more sustainable resource for the Community. It
leverages any park improvements identified by the
Town of Hempstead, to maximize benefits to the
Community. Stabilizing the shoreline would add
another line of protection for nearby schools and
neighborhoods surrounding Oceanside Park.

Risk reduction
This project would improve the recreational capacity
of Oceanside Park and would establish a more
sustainable and resilient resource for the Community
by restoring the Park’s shoreline. These improvements
would directly affect neighboring residential and

134

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Primary risk reduction would affect a significant
population due to the location of homes and
businesses in or adjacent to Oceanside Park or within
range of the Bedell Creek flood path. Application of
these shoreline improvements would directly affect
residences and businesses along and adjacent to
Greentree Drive, Mahlon Brower Drive, and Oceanside
school 9E and 9M.
The risk assessment completed for this project
anticipated that implementation of the shoreline and
open space preservation project would significantly
reduce risk to multiple assets. The risk of future
flooding of sanitary sewer and stormwater drainage
systems is anticipated to be reduced from extreme to
high. The risk of future flooding to parks, single-family
housing, and schools would be reduced from high to
moderate, providing improved flood safeguards for
the 1,905 residents living in the area.52

Timeframe
Immediate (within two years)

Regulatory requirements
This project will require Town of Hempstead and NYS
DEC permits. It could also require U.S. Army Corps
of Engineer permits, and where Federal permits or
funding are involved, Coastal Zone Management
federal consistency review by NYS DOS.

Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 34: Potential improvements to Oceanside Park

Current conditions along Oceanside Park shoreline

Potential improvements to the Oceanside Park shoreline
Source: URS

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

135

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Proposed

Marsh restoration: Phase I
Marsh degradation has been
exacerbated by Superstorm Sandy and
resulting waste water infiltration from
the Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant.
High nutrient content has reduced
the structure of the marsh grass
roots, which degrades the integrity of
the marshland, causing accelerated
erosion. Rising sea level threatens
vegetation survival. Continued marsh
degradation will further decrease
water quality and threaten vulnerable
habitats, inhibiting the ecological and
protective functions of these vital
environmental resources.

Barnum Island, the Village of
Island Park & Harbor Isle

Description
This project would conduct a marsh restoration study
and pilot implementation project for Garrett Marsh,
located east of California Place Canal at Barnum
Island. The goals are to increase flood protection to
California Canal and the surrounding neighborhoods
and to revitalize the marsh habitat and ecosystem.
Implementation steps would include:
•

Preparation of a marsh revitalization plan; and,

•

Implementation of a pilot project to implement
initial improvements identified in the marsh
revitalization study, including:
•

Hard or hybrid-structures (flow controls,
weirs, tide gates); and,

•

Natural solutions, such as marsh
nourishment, re-vegetation, and living
shorelines.

Cost estimate
Cost estimates include the study and pilot project implementation.
Marsh revitalization study:				

$100,000

Marsh revitalization pilot 				

$500,000

Total cost estimate:					

136

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$600,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 35: Garrett Marsh at California Place Canal

HU RR
EVACUICA NE
ATI
RO UT ON
E

Garrett Marsh

California
Place Canal

Garrett Marsh at California Place Canal

Legend
NYRCR Community
Marsh restoration area
Marshes

´

0       0.125    0.25                0.5
Miles

Source: OpenStreetMap

Parks

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

137

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits
The marsh restoration would enhance the
environmental quality of the water surrounding the
Community, improve fish and wildlife habitat, and
improve the natural flood attenuation features of the
marshes, reducing flood risk for the Community.

Health and social
Marsh restoration would add another line of protection
to many of the neighborhoods in Barnum Island
and the Village of Island Park. There are school
populations, senior housing, and special needs
populations directly adjacent to the area that would
directly benefit from an additional line of protection
against tidal flooding and storm surge. This project
would provide for a reduction in flooding that should
improve access during emergencies.

This project would help reduce post-disaster
emergency and recovery costs by protecting
neighboring assets and reducing post-disaster cleanup
times.

Environmental
Marsh degradation has been exacerbated by
Superstorm Sandy and resulting waste water
infiltration from the Bay Park Sewage Treatment plant.
Continued marsh degradation can lead to decreased
quality of water and vulnerable habitats, which
inhibits the ecological and protective functions of
these vital lands. These assets would be strengthened
and secured through this project. The project can
also reduce some contamination associated with
floodwaters, with the marsh acting as a filter system
before those contaminants reach neighborhoods.
Marshland restoration would improve the ability to
withstand future storm events and break storm surge
and high water events in the future.

Economic
Improvements to these marshlands would help
them serve as needed wave attenuation and filters
for storm surges during and after a storm. This
improvement would dampen the initial impacts and
reduce the chance that neighboring employment
centers would reduce services and lay off employees.

View of Garrett Marsh from Barnum Island
Source: LiRo Group

138

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Cost-benefit analysis
The cost of conducting a marsh revitalization study
and restoration pilot project for Garrett Marsh
would be justified by the enhanced environmental

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

quality of the water surrounding the Community and
improvement in the natural flood attenuation features
of the marsh, reducing flood risk and avoiding future
flood repair costs for the Community.

reduce the risk of future flooding to nearby singlefamily housing from extreme to high, providing
improved flood safeguards for the 1,303 residents
living in the area.53

Risk reduction

Timeframe

This project would conduct a restoration pilot project
for Garrett Marsh east of California Place Canal at
Barnum Island. These improvements would add
stability to weakened marshlands and assess options
to further restore them to more complete capacities.
This strengthening would help to reduce risk to
neighboring residential and business populations
by adding another line of defense against rising
floodwaters.

Immediate (within two years)

Risk reduction would affect a significant percentage
of the population due to the location of homes and
businesses in or adjacent to the marsh. Application
of these marsh improvements would directly affect
residences and businesses by restoring the marsh and
returning its properties for water filtration and wave
attenuation.
The risk assessment anticipates that implementation
of the first phase of marsh restoration phase would

Regulatory requirements
This project will require Town of Hempstead, Village
of Island Park, and NYS DEC permits. It could also
require U.S. Army Corps of Engineer permits, and
where Federal permits or funding are involved,
Coastal Zone Management federal consistency review
by NYS DOS.

Jurisdiction
Village of Island Park and Town of Hempstead

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

139

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Emergency transportation
lifeline safety plan and initial
implementation
During Superstorm Sandy the
transportation network, including
along evacuation routes and streets
approaching evacuation routes,
became hazardous. Traffic lights did
not operate due to power outages,
and there was no communication
system for informing residents of the
flooded roads to avoid. It took four
weeks to fully restore power and a
fully-functioning street network. This
project would identify emergency
routes and the improvements needed
for them to function during and after
an emergency.

Proposed
Barnum Island, the Village of
Island Park & Harbor Isle

Description
This project would prepare a transportation safety
enhancement plan that identifies a “lifeline” road
network and the improvements needed to help it
function better before, during, and after emergencies.
It includes implementation of initial improvements,
including solar powered backup street lighting and
vehicle message signs.
This project would include the following components:
•

Identification of local lifeline roads leading to
critical facilities and regional evacuation routes;

•

Development of comprehensive lifeline
guidelines and standards for:
•

Priority debris removal on lifeline roads;

•

Connecting lifeline roads with critical
facilities;

•

Priority power restoration on lifeline roads;

•

Operational cell phone tower coverage;

Cost estimate:
Cost estimates include preparation of the lifeline plan and implementation of solar
powered backup street lights and vehicle message signs.

140

Barnum Island:		

$320,000

Village of Island Park:

$320,000

Harbor Isle:			

$320,000

Total cost estimate:		

$960,000

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 36: Austin Boulevard: The main evacuation route from Barnum
Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle

Au

sti

nB

ou

lev

ar

d

Lo

ng

Be
a

ch

R
d

HU RR
EVAC ICA NE
UATIO
N
RO UT
E

Warwick Rd

Legend
NYRCR Community
HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

Primary evacuation route

´

0    0.125    0.25         0.5
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

Major connector
Marshes
Parks

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

141

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

•

Needs and locations for independently
powered streetlights at key intersections
and roadways;

•

Strategic locations for vehicle message
signs;

•

Uniform lifeline signage;

•

Identify roadways that need to be raised to
function in emergencies; and,

•

Connections to public transportation along
lifeline roads.

Coordination with regional emergency
management agencies, including Nassau
County, Town of Hempstead, Village of Island
Park, and other emergency responders;

•

Prioritized phased implementation plan;

•

Public education; and,

•

Implementation of initial lifeline improvements,
including solar powered backup street lighting
and vehicle message signs.

Health and social
The identification of lifeline corridors would assist
local governments in securing better access to
critical facilities including those that serve vulnerable
populations such as schools children, the disabled,
and senior citizens. This action would identify lifeline
roads across the three communities that would
enable a more coordinated and rapid response to the
majority of residents. The entire population would
have better access to needed post-disaster supplies,
services, and information that would be provided in
locations accessible through the lifeline network.

Economic
The lifeline plan would help Community assets recover
their functions faster after a storm. This more rapid
recovery reduces the chance that employment centers
would reduce services and lay off employees. Initial
capital invested in the project would quickly show
dividends in advanced recovery capabilities and
response coordination.

Environmental

Benefits
This project would enhance public safety for
evacuations and post-disaster returns for all residents
and workers in Barnum Island, the Village of Island
Park, Harbor Isle, and the barrier island. It would also
improve access for emergency response.

142

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

The plan would provide a framework for coordinated
debris removal from lifeline roadways.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Cost-benefit analysis
Roadway improvements have a generally long
useful life with proper maintenance and upgrades.
Telecommunications upgrades are beneficial as long
as upgrades are regularly conducted. The reduction
in risk to public safety and the losses avoided due to
rapid recovery make this project cost-effective.

Risk reduction
This project would enhance public safety during
evacuations and post-disaster returns by helping the
transportation and communication systems to function
better before, during and after emergencies. This
project would greatly assist in removing barriers to
reach population centers faster and more reliably.
This project would directly affect many properties.
Primary risk reduction would affect a large percentage
of the population due to the location of homes
and businesses directly on or adjacent to Austin
Boulevard, Long Beach Road, and Warwick Road.
While the project will not reduce the risk of flooding,
it will support safe evacuation for the 8,370 residents
living in the area54 and residents of the City of Long
Beach and the entire barrier island.  

Timeframe
Immediate (within two years)

Solar street lighting
Source: Maxwell Hamilton

Regulatory requirements
The project would need to meet the roadway design
standards of Nassau County and the NYS Department
of Transportation (DOT).

Jurisdiction
Village of Island Park, Town of Hempstead, and
Nassau County

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

143

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Emergency transportation lifeline
Featured
safety plan and initial implementation
Oceanside

During Superstorm Sandy the
transportation network, including
along evacuation routes and streets
approaching evacuation routes,
became hazardous. Traffic lights did
not operate due to power outages,
and there was no communication
system for informing residents of the
flooded roads to avoid. It took four
weeks to fully restore power and a
fully-functioning street network. This
project would identify emergency
routes and the improvements needed
for them to function during and after
an emergency.

Description
This project would prepare a transportation safety
enhancement plan that identifies a “lifeline” road
network and the improvements needed to help it
function better before, during, and after emergencies.
It includes implementation of initial improvements,
such as solar powered backup street lighting and
vehicle message signs.
This project would include the following components:
•

Identification of local lifeline roads leading to
critical facilities and regional evacuation routes;

•

Development of comprehensive lifeline
guidelines and standards for:
•

Priority debris removal on lifeline roads;

•

Connecting lifeline roads with critical
facilities;

Cost Estimate:
Cost estimates include preparation of the lifeline plan and implementation of solar
powered backup street lights and vehicle message signs.
Total cost estimate:		

144

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$1,440,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 37: Proposed lifeline network for Oceanside
Atlanti

c Ave

Long Beach

n Blvd

Rd

Lawso
e

or Av

Anch

kwy

Oceanside Rd

sor P

Wind

ve

Fulton Ave

ner A

Weid

W. Cortland Av

e

E. Cortland Ave
kena

Wau

W. Waukena Av

e

na Ave

Ave

Wauke

d

hR

eac

gB

Lon
t

Mott S

n Blvd

Lawso
Long Beach Rd.
Economic Corridor

HU RR
EVAC ICA NE
UATIO
N
RO UT
E

Legend

HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

NYRCR Community

Buildings

Primary evacuation route

Parks

Major connector

Marshes

´

0            0.125         0.25                          0.5
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

Intersections to receive
proposed improvements

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

145

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

Priority power restoration on lifeline roads;

Health and social

•

Operational cell phone tower coverage;

•

Needs and locations for independently
powered streetlights at key intersections
and roadways;

•

Strategic locations for vehicle message
signs;

•

Uniform lifeline signage;

•

Identify roadways that need to be raised to
function in emergencies; and,

•

Connections to public transportation along
lifeline roads.

The identification of lifeline corridors would assist
local governments in securing better access to
critical facilities including some that serve vulnerable
populations such as children, the disabled, and senior
citizens. This action would identify lifeline roads
that would enable a more coordinated and rapid
emergency response to the benefit of a majority of
residents. The entire population would have better
access to needed post-disaster supplies, services,
and information that would be provided in locations
accessible through the lifeline network.

•

Coordination with regional emergency
management agencies, including Nassau
County, Town of Hempstead, Village of Island
Park, and other emergency responders;

•

Prioritized phased implementation plan;

•

Public education; and,

•

Implementation of initial lifeline improvements,
including solar powered backup street lighting
and vehicle message signs.

Benefits
This project would enhance public safety for
evacuations and post-disaster returns for all residents
and workers in Oceanside as well as those in Barnum
Island, the Village of Island Park, Harbor Isle, and
the barrier island. It would also improve access for
emergency response.

146

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Economic
The lifeline plan would help Community assets recover
their functions faster after a storm. This more rapid
recovery reduces the chance that employment centers
would reduce services and lay off employees. Initial
capital invested in the project would quickly show
dividends in advanced recovery capabilities and
response coordination.

Environmental
The plan provides a framework for coordinated debris
removal from key lifeline roadways.

Cost-benefit analysis
Roadway improvements have a generally long
useful life with proper maintenance and upgrades.
Telecommunications upgrades are beneficial as long
as upgrades are regularly conducted. The reduction
in risk to public safety and the losses avoided due to
rapid recovery make this project cost-effective.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk reduction
This project would enhance public safety during
evacuations and post-disaster returns by helping the
transportation and communication system to function
better before, during, and after emergencies. This
project would assist in removing barriers to reach
population centers faster and more reliably.
This project would directly affect many properties.
Primary risk reduction would affect a large percentage
of the population due to the location of homes and
businesses directly on or adjacent to Long Beach
Road, Lawson Boulevard, Waukena Avenue, Windsor
Parkway, and Cortland Avenue.
While the project will not reduce the risk of flooding,
it will support the safe evacuation of the 32,109
residents living in the area55 and residents of Barnum
Island, the Village of Island Park, Harbor Isle, the City
of Long Beach, and the entire barrier island.

Timeframe

Hurricane evacuation signage
Source: Wikimedia commons

Immediate (within two years)

Regulatory requirements
The project would need to meet the roadway design
standards of Nassau County and the NYS Department
of Transportation (DOT).

Jurisdiction
The Town of Hempstead and Nassau County

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

147

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Marsh restoration: Phase II

Featured
Barnum Island & Harbor Isle

Marsh degradation has been
exacerbated by Superstorm Sandy
and resulting waste water infiltration
from the Bay Park Sewage Treatment
Plant. Continued marsh degradation
will further decrease water quality and
threaten vulnerable habitats, inhibiting
the ecological and potential protective
functions of these vital environmental
resources.

Implementation steps would include:
•

Preparation of a marsh revitalization plan for
Simmons Hassock Marsh; and,

•

Implementation of phased improvements
identified in the Phase 1 (Garrett Marsh) and
Phase 2 (Simmons Hassock) marsh revitalization
studies, including:
•

Hard or hybrid-structures (flow controls,
weirs, tide gates); and,

•

Natural solutions, such as marsh
nourishment and re-vegetation, living
shorelines.

Description
This project would continue restoration of Garrett
Marsh east of Barnum Island begun in Phase 1
and conduct a marsh restoration study and marsh
restoration on Simmons Hassock Marsh west of
Harbor Isle.

Cost estimate
Cost estimates include the study, continued restoration of Garrett Marsh and
restoration of Simmons Hassock Marsh.
Marsh revitalization study:				

148

$200,000

Marsh revitalization 					

$1,800,000

Total cost estimate:					

$2,000,000

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 38: Garrett and Simmons Hassock marshes

HU RR
EVACUICA NE
ATI
RO UT ON
E

Garrett
Marsh

Simmons
Hassock
Garrett Marsh at California Place Canal

Legend
NYRCR Community
Marsh restoration area
Marshes

´

0       0.125    0.25                0.5
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

Parks

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

149

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits
The marsh restoration would enhance the
environmental quality of the water surrounding the
Community and improve the natural flood attenuation
features of the marshes, reducing flood risk.

Health and social
Marsh restoration would add another line of protection
to many of the neighborhoods in Barnum Island and
Harbor Isle. There are school populations, senior
housing, and special needs populations directly
adjacent to the area that would directly benefit from
an additional line of protection against tidal flooding
and storm surge.

Economic
Improvements to these marshes would dampen
the initial impacts and reduce the chance that
neighboring marinas would reduce services and lay
off employees. This project would help reduce postdisaster emergency and recovery costs by protecting
neighboring assets and reducing post-disaster cleanup
times.

Environmental
Marsh degradation has been exacerbated by
Superstorm Sandy and resulting waste water
infiltration from the Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant.
Continued marsh degradation will lead to decreased
quality of water and will endanger vulnerable habitats,

150

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

which will inhibit the ecological and protective
functions of these vital lands. These assets would
be strengthened and secured through this project.
The project could also reduce some contamination
associated with floodwaters, with the marsh acting
as a filter system before those contaminants reach
neighborhoods. Marshland restoration would improve
the ability to withstand future storm events and break
storm surge and high water events in the future.

Cost-benefit analysis
The cost of completing restoration at Garrett Marsh
and Simmons Hassock Marsh would be justified by
the enhanced environmental quality of the water
surrounding the Community and improvement in the
natural flood attenuation features of the marshes,
reducing flood risk and avoiding future flood repair
costs for the Community.

Risk Reduction
This project would conduct a marsh restoration
along Garrett Marsh at Barnum Island and Simmons
Hassock Marsh at Harbor Isle. These improvements
would add stability to weakened marshlands and
assess options to further restore them to fully realize
their flood control capabilities. This strengthening
would help to reduce risk to neighboring residential

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

and business populations by adding another line
of defense against rising floodwaters. Risk to a
significant percentage of the population would be
reduced due to the location of homes and businesses
adjacent to the channels that surround each of these
marshes.
The risk assessment completed for this project
anticipates marsh restoration would reduce the risk of
future flooding to nearby single-family housing from
extreme to high, providing improved flood safeguards
for the 4,932 residents living in the area.56

Timeframe
Near-term (within three years)

Regulatory requirements
This project will require Town of Hempstead and NYS
DEC permits. It could also require U.S. Army Corps
of Engineer permits, and where Federal permits or
funding are involved, Coastal Zone Management
federal consistency review by NYS DOS.

Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead

Hail Cove, Chesapeake Bay, before and after living
shoreline marsh reconstruction
Source: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

151

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Emergency staging area feasibility
study and implementation
During Superstorm Sandy, there
was no place to stage emergency
equipment and vehicles in Barnum
Island, the Village of Island Park,
and Harbor Isle. The Island Park Fire
Department moved equipment and
vehicles out of the area to protect
it from flooding, but still lost a fire
engine, ambulance, two chiefs’
vehicles, and a heavy rescue vehicle
to flooding. Opportunities for a safe
staging area are limited because all of
the Village of Island Park is at a low
elevation and subject to flooding.
Description

Featured
Barnum Island, the Village of
Island Park & Harbor Isle

Implementation steps would include:
•

Conduct a location feasibility study to determine
requirements, considering needs to:
•

Elevate emergency vehicles and other
response equipment above flood elevations;

•

Enhance the ability to serve the Island
Park Village Hall during and outside of
emergencies; and,

•

Supplement economic development efforts.

•

Evaluation of the potential for a multi-story
parking deck to be used to store emergency
vehicles during flooding; and,

•

Acquisition of a site near Village Hall and the
LIRR Station and construction of a parking deck
that would store emergency vehicles during
flooding and would serve other Village uses,
provide additional parking for transit users, and
support downtown economic revitalization in
other times.

This project would identify potential sites for and
construct an emergency staging area for operations
during an emergency and to store emergency
response equipment and supplies before, during and
after a crisis.

Cost estimate:
Cost estimate includes feasibility study, acquisition costs, and construction of a
structure.
Feasibility study:			
Acquisition and construction:
Total cost estimate:			

152

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$200,000
$2,287,000
$2,487,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 39: Potential emergency staging area locations

HU RR
EVAC ICA NE
UATIO
N
RO UT
E

Austin Blvd
at Long
Beach Rd

PSE&G
Substation

h

ng

c
ea

Rd

B

Lo

Alternative Locations

Downtown
Island Park

Legend
NYRCR Community

´

0       0.1       0.2                 0.4
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

Primary evacuation route
Potential emergency staging area location
Buildings
Marshes
Parks

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

153

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits

Risk reduction

This project would increase the emergency response
functions of the Island Park Fire Department,
increasing safety for the residents of Barnum Island,
the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle during
emergencies. If construction of a multi-story parking
deck downtown is the selected solution, it would
support economic revitalization of the Village of Island
Park’s downtown.

This project would identify potential sites to
function as an emergency operations center during
an emergency and to store emergency response
equipment and supplies before, during and after a
crisis. The population served by this project would
include all of Barnum Island, the Village of Island
Park, and Harbor Isle. The potential for coordination
between this project and others including critical
facilities resiliency and the lifeline plan would help to
reduce overall risk and response and recovery times.

Health and social
Establishing an emergency staging area would provide
a central location for critical post-disaster supplies to
be provided to the entire population, including socially
vulnerable communities in the immediate vicinity
such as school children, seniors, and the disabled.
Establishing an emergency staging area would provide
a central location for critical post-disaster supplies to
be distributed to the entire Community.

Economic
The staging area would help bring services back faster
after a storm. This more rapid recovery reduces the
chance that employers will reduce services and lay
off employees. The staging area would enable the
Village of Island Park, Barnum Island, and Harbor
Isle to better coordinate supply stock and response
procedures. Efficiencies will be realized through
shared costs of community services related to in-event
response and coordination processes.

Cost-benefit analysis
The project is needed to support effective emergency
response. Outside of crisis periods, the deck could be
used for parking for the Island Park LIRR Station and
to support the economic revitalization of downtown
Island Park. Parking revenues would  help to make
this a cost-effective strategy. Additional parking will
also support additional development in downtown and
on the waterfront. The parking deck will indirectly
support this new development and resulting tax revenues.   

154

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

The risk assessment conducted for this project
anticipated that it would demonstrate risk reductions
to government and civic buildings as well as to
emergency response equipment, providing improved
access to services for the 8,370 residents living in the
area.57

Timeframe
Near-term (within three years)

Regulatory requirements
The project will need to meet the Village of Island
Park zoning and building permit requirements.

Jurisdiction
Village of Island Park, Town of Hempstead, and
Nassau County

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Potential staging area location: Parking lot at Island Park LIRR Station
Source: LiRo Group

Island Park Fire Department
Source: LiRo Group

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

155

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Perimeter flood safeguards –
California Place Canal Phase II
Tidal flows from California Place Canal
cause regular flooding of adjacent
Barnum Island neighborhoods, Austin
Boulevard, and downtown Island Park.
The entire area is low-lying, which
limits the effectiveness of barrier
systems, such as bulkheads, berms,
and floodwalls. When placed on lowlying ground, water simply flows
around the edges of barriers.
Description
This project would build on the Phase 1 perimeter
flood safeguards to add to a system of barriers and
natural improvements to reduce flooding, including
but not limited to raising California Place North and
South roadways and Iowa Place.

Featured
Barnum Island & the Village of
Island Park

Implementation steps would include:
•

Phased construction of barriers and natural
improvements identified in the Phase 1
shoreline conditions analysis; and,

•

Coordination with the U.S. Army Corp of
Engineers, Town of Hempstead, Nassau County
and New York State to develop a phased
approach to implement recommendations
from the comprehensive shoreline conditions
analysis and improvement strategy completed
in Phase I. The recommendations could include
installation of flood protection including but not
limited to:
•

Installation of flood barrier systems
adjacent to the Canal where feasible;

•

Phased construction of elevated roads road
at California Place Canal (North and South)
plus Iowa Place; and,

•

Construction of a “second line of protection”
along the LIRR tracks to protect downtown
Village of Island Park.

Cost estimate
Cost estimate includes barrier installation, phased roadway elevations, and
construction of a second line of protection.
Total cost estimate:			

156

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$2,000,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 40: Vulnerable shorelines along California Place Canal
H
EV URR
AC I C
R O UA A N
UT TIO E
E N

Califo

rnia P

lace C

anal

Legend
NYRCR Community
Vulnerable shoreline
HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

Primary evacuation route
Direction of tidal flow
Shoreline conditions analysis area
Buildings

´

0                0.125              0.25                                     0.5
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

Marshes
Parks

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

157

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits
This project would expand on Phase I improvements,
reducing flooding, protecting Barnum Island and
the Village of Island Park during a major storm. It
would protect lower lying areas, including California
Canal Place North and California Canal Place South,
downtown Island Park, and the LIRR Station and
electrical substation from repetitive nuisance flooding
caused by moon tides and other high tide events and
small and moderate storms.

Health and Social
Flood barriers would aid in reducing localized flooding
and inundation of stormwater systems. Many
locations, including senior housing and schools, would
see improved conditions with this improvement. This
project would provide for a reduction in flooding
that should improve access to these facilities before,
during, and after an emergency.

Economic
Flood safeguards around employment centers,
especially in the low-lying areas around downtown
Island Park, would help them recover their functions
faster after a storm. This more rapid recovery reduces
the chance that the centers would reduce services
and lay off employees. It would help reduce postdisaster emergency and recovery costs by decreasing
the extent of flooding in the community.

Environmental
Many parks and open space assets currently
affected by tidal flooding and high stormwater
would experience reduced downtime and expedited
recovery through this action. Flood barriers and
additional improvements identified through study
would reduce the amount of inundation experienced
by the community, reducing the amount of cleanup
necessary following the event.

158

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Cost-benefit analysis
The first phase of this project, will identify technically
feasible and cost-effective solutions to reduce tidal
flooding from California Place Canal and Wreck
Lead. The cost of no action is high due to the high
frequency of flooding during high tides and even
minor storm events. The costs of repeated repairs
to infrastructure, homes, and businesses are high.
Frequent flooding of downtown Island Park has
spurred disinvestment, reducing the economic
capacity and the tax base of the Village of Island
Park. Given this situation, the benefits appear to
outweigh the costs based on the findings of the risk
assessment and the determination of the health,
social, environmental, and economic benefits this
project can provide.

Risk reduction
This project would create a system of barriers and
natural shoreline improvements and raise the roadway
to reduce flooding in the areas around California
Place Canal and Iowa Place. Significant communities
exist around these resources, including residential
neighborhoods and commercial/business corridors.
These flood management improvements would greatly
reduce the risk for all of these communities.
Primary risk reduction would be to homes and
businesses near low-lying areas on the eastern edge
of Barnum Island or downtown Village of Island
Park. Application of these barriers and shoreline
improvements would directly affect residences and
businesses along California Place Canal, Shell Creek
Park, and along Wreck Lead.
The risk assessment anticipated that the future risk
of flooding to economic, sanitary sewer, stormwater
drainage systems, and single-family housing assets
would be reduced from extreme to high. Flood risk
to assets including assisted living areas that house
vulnerable populations and transportation systems
would be reduced from high to moderate, providing
improved access to services for the 2,414 residents
living in the area.58

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Timeframe

Jurisdiction

Near-term (within three years)

Village of Island Park, Town of Hempstead, and
Nassau County

Regulatory requirements
This project will require Town of Hempstead, Village
of Island Park, and NYS DEC permits. It could also
require U.S. Army Corps of Engineer permits, and
where Federal permits or funding are involved,
Coastal Zone Management federal consistency review
by NYS DOS.

Facing west on California Place Canal
Source: LiRo Group

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

159

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Critical facility resiliency – Island
Park Village Hall reconstruction
Superstorm Sandy destroyed the
Island Park Village Hall, rendering it
unable to perform its function as a
community and emergency facility.
Description

Featured
The Village of Island Park

•

Interior and exterior mechanical and electrical
equipment to be placed above projected flood
heights;

•

Installation of flood protection along the
building envelope and parking lot; and,

•

Installation of multi-fuel generators to maintain
power for its emergency functions.

This project would construct a new building for Village
Hall, making it more resistant to flood damage, and
accessible for emergency response during flooding
events. This project is designed to mitigate future
flooding damage to this important facility.
The reconstruction of Village Hall would include the
following features:

Cost estimate
Cost estimate includes the reconstruction of Village Hall.
Total cost estimate:		

160

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$1,430,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 41: Downtown Village of Island Park and Village Hall

Long Bea

H
EV URR
AC I C
R O UA A N
UT TIO E
E N

ch Road

Island Park
Public Library

nB
sti

Island Park
LIRR Station

Au

Francis X.
Hegarty
School

ou

lev

ard

Island Park
Village Hall

California Place
Canal

Source: Google earth
Legend
HURRICANE
EVACUATION
ROUTE

Primary evacuation route
Shoreline conditions analysis area
Long Island Rail Road
Community Asset
Connections to waterfront

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

161

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits

Risk reduction

The project would restore the function of Village
Hall. A more resilient Village Hall would be less likely
to be damaged in future storms, reducing future
reconstruction and associated costs and service
interruptions.

This project would make the Village Hall building
and equipment more flood resistant. A secure facility
would enhance emergency response and re-entry
to damaged areas, reducing risk to vulnerable
populations and emergency responders. This key
facility would be more readily accessible during and
after key storm events.

Health and social
The Village Hall is in a key strategic facility that
needs to be able to function during an emergency.
Reconstruction would ensure that the facility is able to
function on a daily basis and during emergencies.

Economic
This project would help reduce post-disaster
emergency and recovery costs by protecting the
facility. It could also accelerate the recovery by
providing an early recovery center location that
assists residents in getting information and assistance
needed post-disaster.

Environmental
The project could reduce contamination associated
with flooding, which results from the release of
chemicals into floodwaters when structures are
flooded.

Cost-benefit analysis
A more resilient Village Hall would provide invaluable
benefits to the community in terms of an important
community facility that can withstand damages, and
would reduce future reconstruction and associated
costs and service interruptions.

162

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

This project would directly affect Village Hall, and
it would indirectly affect many nearby properties.
Reconstruction of Village Hall would affect residences
and businesses along Long Beach Road and
neighborhoods adjacent to this area by providing
a revitalized destination for community interaction,
and in the event of future emergencies, a central
coordination center.

Timeframe
Immediate (within two years)

Regulatory requirements
The project will need to meet the Village of Island
Park zoning and building permit requirements.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Village of Island Park

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Temporary Island Park Village Hall
Source: URS

Island Park Village Hall building
Source: LiRo Group

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

163

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Oceanside industrial waterfront
revitalization
During Superstorm Sandy, the
industrial area located on Oceanside’s
western waterfront experienced
flooding and damage. Tidal and
storm flooding consistently affect the
waterfront area flooding streets and
businesses. Such flooding leaves the
area vulnerable to economic, social,
and environmental damage.

Featured
Oceanside

The project would prepare a waterfront revitalization
plan that:
•

Identifies needed improvements for the
industrial area;

•

Establishes new water-dependent and waterenhanced uses; and,

•

Develops a strategy to create mixed-use
development, including options for senior
housing.

Description
This project would develop a mixed-use revitalization
plan for the waterfront industrial area to prepare
for its long-term revitalization and redevelopment.
The plan will, consider economic development
opportunities to support new water-dependent
and water-enhanced businesses and mixed-use
development, including senior housing.

Cost estimate:
Cost estimate includes the study only.
Total cost estimate:

164

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$150,000

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 42: Waterfront revitalization study area

lvd

nB
Lawso

a Ave

uken

Ham

pto

nR

d

W Wa

Daly Blvd

Legend
NYRCR Community
Industrial Area
Buildings
Marshes

´

0          0.125        0.25                          0.5
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

Parks

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

165

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits

Risk reduction

The revitalization plan would provide the direction and
policy changes needed to spur reinvestment in the
Oceanside waterfront industrial area, rebuilding tax
base and providing new senior housing and mixed-use
housing options.

This project would create and implement a mixed-use
plan to revitalize Oceanside’s industrial area along its
waterfront to attract new businesses, residents, and
visitors. The plan would create the framework for
future investment and redevelopment that will reduce
risk for the identified areas.

Health and social
Mixed-use development with an emphasis on senior
housing options would benefit the larger community
by providing an additional housing choice for specific
vulnerable populations.

Economic
This project would indirectly help the local economy
as it will serve as a resource to residents and
businesses that will help to maintain and increase the
customer base needed and attract new residents to
support local businesses.

Environmental
Plan implementation would require an environmental
assessment to aid in potential cleanup of brownfield
sites.

Cost-benefit analysis
The cost of preparing a revitalization plan is justified
by the potential economic benefits of reinvestment in
the Oceanside waterfront industrial area, additional
senior housing, and mixed-use development that
would enhance the tax base.

166

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Timeframe
Near-term (within three years)

Regulatory Requirements
The plan will include an Environmental Impact
Assessment per the New York State Environmental
Quality (SEQR) Review standards

Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Infrastructure conditions in the waterfront industrial district
Source: LiRo Group

View of the waterfront industrial district from adjacent neighborhoods
Source: LiRo Group

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

167

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Critical facility resiliency:
Oceanside Fire Station
Superstorm Sandy pushed emergency
response in Oceanside to its limits.
The inadequacies of two existing
fire stations were particularly
apparent. Engine No. 1 is outdated
and is no longer effective, and Hose
No. 1 was flooded during Sandy.
Additional capacity is needed to
increase emergency response and
preparedness functions.

Featured
Oceanside

Description
This project would construct a new fire station to
replace Engine No. 1 and Hose No. 1.
The project would:
•

Acquire and/or purchase a site for a new fire
station;

•

Design and construct a new fire station, park,
and community center; and,

•

Implement new recreational areas and preserve
area(s) around the new fire station for open
space opportunities.

Cost estimate:
Cost estimate includes the acquisition of a site and the development of a new
fire station, community center, and park.
Total cost estimate:		

168

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

$20 million

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 43: Potential location of new Oceanside Fire Station

Oceanside
FD Hose
No. 1
Oceanside
FD Engine
No. 1

Oceanside
School #8

Legend
NYRCR Community
Potential fire station location
Nearby community assets

´

0          0.125        0.25                          0.5
Miles
Source: OpenStreetMap

Buildings

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

169

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Benefits

Risk reduction

The project would provide improved emergency
response capabilities for Oceanside. It would also
provide recreational facilities for an area that currently
lacks them.

This project would construct new flood resistant
buildings, replacing obsolete facilities at Engine 1 and
Hose 1. Secure facilities would enhance emergency
response in a disaster. Risk would be reduced to
vulnerable populations and emergency responders.
The new fire station would be more readily accessible
during and after storm events.

Health and social
The new fire station would be strategically located,
decreasing emergency response time and enhancing
disaster preparedness. The project would ensure that
the fire station can function well during emergencies
and will be an upgrade from other stations in the
area.

Economic
This project would help reduce post-disaster
emergency and recovery costs by constructing a wellprotected and fully operational facility to respond to
emergencies. It could aid in accelerating recovery by
providing information and assistance needed before,
during, and after a disaster.

Environmental
The project would preserve and upgrade open space
and could aid in the reduction of contamination
associated with flooding of existing facilities.

Cost-benefit analysis
The project steps of acquisition of a site and the
development of a new fire station, community
center, and park, are cost-effective when the benefits
of enhanced emergency response capabilities,
accelerated recovery, and increased recreational space
are considered.

Primary risk reduction would affect a large percentage
of the population due to the location of homes and
businesses in the service area of the new fire station.
Nearby residents will be able to utilize the community
center and park, and might some reduction in
their risk of flooding due to increased groundwater
recharge area at the park.
The risk assessment conducted for this project
anticipated that construction of a new Oceanside Fire
Station project would significantly reduce risk to some
assets. The risk of future flood damage to economic
assets would be significantly reduced from extreme
to high risk. The risk to fire and rescue assets would
be reduced from high to moderate risk, providing
improved access to services for the 24,968 residents
living in the area.59

Timeframe
Near-term (within three years)

Regulatory Requirements
The project will need to meet the Town of Hempstead
zoning and building permit requirements.

Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead

170

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Oceanside Fire Department Hose No. 1
Source: LiRo Group

Oceanside Fire Department Engine No. 1
Source: Google Earth

Section IV: Implementation - Project profiles

171

Source: LiRo Group

Section V:
Additional materials

172

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

V. Additional materials
A. Additional resiliency
recommendations
Additional Resiliency Recommendations are projects
and actions the NYRCR Barnum Island/Oceanside/the
Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle Planning Committee
(Committee) would like to highlight but has not
categorized as Proposed or Featured projects. The
Additional Resiliency Recommendations are identified

in the table below and are categorized by strategy,
project name, project description, and whether or
not the project is regional in scope. Identifying these
projects in the NY Rising Community Reconstruction
Plan (NYRCR Plan) will aid the Community in potential
future implementation.

Table 16: Additional resiliency recommendations
Additional resiliency recommendations
Regional
project
(Y/N)

Strategy

Project name

Short project description

Reduce the risk of flooding to critical
facilities and emergency service
facilities, such as police and fire
departments, schools, and other
facilities that serve vulnerable
populations

Expand critical facility
resiliency & emergency
response resources

Install generators in senior facilities and emergency
response centers in the Village of Island Park.

N

Implement progressive stormwater
management systems and
infrastructure upgrades to decrease
flooding in areas that consistently
flood during storm events and high
tides

Barnum Island drainage
improvements

Install drainage improvements to reduce flooding in
Empire Boulevard, and Louisiana, Georgia, Florida,
Carolina and Alabama Avenues.

N

Leverage the economic potential of
the area’s waterfront location and
proximity to New York City

Community and economic
asset preservation

Install Harbor Isle gateway signage on Warwick Road
and Island Parkway Bridges as they cross Island
Park Canal. Plant trees and vegetation on Harbor
Isle streets to continue to attract new residents and
economic development. Make local marinas more
resistant to flood damage.

N

Restore, enhance, and improve
natural areas, including local
beaches, marshes, parks, and other
open spaces, to provide recreation
opportunities and enhance the
natural environment

Shoreline & open space
improvements

Secure new open space and protect/ restore/improve
existing open space in Barnum Island, Village of
Island Park and Harbor Isle. Project may include
acquisition and remediation of a brownfield site for
recreational use.

N

Section V: Additional materials

173

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 16: Additional resiliency recommendations, continued
Additional resiliency recommendations
Regional
project
(Y/N)

Strategy

Project name

Short project description

Restore, enhance, and improve
natural areas, including local
beaches, marshes, parks, and other
open spaces, to provide recreation
opportunities and enhance the
natural environment.

Shoreline & open space
improvements

Restore and enhance parks in Barnum Island and
the Village of Island Park, including Shell Creek
Park. Construct improvements for Wrights Field in
Oceanside. The project goal is to reduce flooding
of adjacent neighborhoods, restore and increase
resiliency, and enhance recreational facilities.

N

Support solutions for regional and
local power generation, waste water
treatment upgrades to Bay Park
and Long Beach Sewage Treatment
Plants, and regional tidal protection

Alternative power
generation & distribution

Evaluate the potential for generation and distribution
of solar, wind, tidal, geothermal, fuel cell, and other
alternative power sources. Evaluate solar carports
at public parking facilities. The project will require
coordination with traditional and alternative power
companies to evaluate power distribution options.

Y

Support solutions for regional and
local power generation, waste water
treatment upgrades to Bay Park
and Long Beach Sewage Treatment
Plants, and regional tidal protection

Bay Park Sewage
Treatment Plant upgrades

Continue to monitor Bay Park Sewage Treatment
Plant improvement projects and work with Nassau
County to tie local improvements into the Sewage
Treatment Plant Potential local projects for this
Community include integrating the timing of the
Austin Boulevard stormwater improvements with
the proposed treatment plant improvements and
supporting the relocation of the treatment plant
outfall from Reynolds Channel to the Atlantic Ocean.

Y

Support solutions for regional and
local power generation, waste water
treatment upgrades to Bay Park
and Long Beach Sewage Treatment
Plants, and regional tidal protection

Regional tidal protection
approaches

Implement natural enhancements in support of
regional solutions such as new vegetation, reef
construction, and shell mounds. Support the
region-wide implementation of barriers – such as
gates across narrow waterway openings and raised
roadways – where studied and appropriate.

Y

174

Section V: Additional materials

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Master table of projects
The Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and
Additional Resiliency Recommendations identified
throughout the NYRCR Plan are reflected in the table
below. These are categorized according to strategy,
project name, project description, recovery support

function (RSF), estimated cost, and whether or not
the project is regional in scope. This will aid the
Committee in meeting benchmarks to implement the
NYRCR Plan.

Table 17: Master table of projects
Proposed, featured, and additional resiliency recommendations
Strategy

Project name

Short project description

Project
category

RSF

Cost
estimate

Regional
project
(Y/N)

Reduce the risk
of flooding to
critical facilities and
emergency service
facilities, such as
police and fire
departments, schools,
and other facilities
that serve vulnerable
populations

Critical facility
resiliency &
emergency
response
resources

Make improvements to
firehouses, emergency response
facilities, schools, and sanitation
facilities and equipment to
improve flood resiliency. Purchase
of emergency rescue boats and
multiple generators are also
included.

Proposed

Community
planning &
capacity building
and health &
social services

$11.39
million

N

Implement progressive
stormwater
management systems
and infrastructure
upgrades to decrease
flooding in areas that
consistently flood
during storm events
and high tides

Tidal backflow
prevention

Install tidal water backflow
devices to prevent tidal water
from entering the stormwater
system and flooding low lying
areas.

Proposed

Infrastructure

$2.39 million

N

Implement progressive
stormwater
management systems
and infrastructure
upgrades to decrease
flooding in areas that
consistently flood
during storm events
and high tides

Drainage
improvements

Conduct a comprehensive
analysis of the stormwater
drainage system and improve it
to reduce flooding in low lying
areas. Implement improvements
including but not limited to
raising roadways, upgrading
systems within and adjacent to
evacuation routes, at identified
streets and intersections, and
along economic corridors. Project
includes a potential pilot study/
project to implement green
infrastructure and pervious
paving.

Proposed

Infrastructure

$20.23
million

N

Section V: Additional materials

175

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 17: Master table of projects, continued
Proposed, featured, and additional resiliency recommendations
Strategy

Project name

Short project description

Project
category

RSF

Cost
estimate

Regional
project
(Y/N)

Protect shoreline
areas from tidal surge
through a combination
of structural,
nonstructural, and
hybrid shoreline
stabilization
techniques

Perimeter flood
safeguards:
Southern
Oceanside,
Wreck Lead,
and Phase 1 of
California Place
Canal

Conduct a comprehensive
shoreline analysis to identify
feasible shoreline protection
strategies, and then implement
a system of barriers and natural
shoreline improvements along
Grand Canal, Bedell Creek,
Powell Creek, Wreck Lead, and
California Place Canal to reduce
flooding of adjacent assets and
neighborhoods.

Proposed

Infrastructure
and natural &
cultural resources

$10.45
million

N

Leverage the economic
potential of the area’s
waterfront location
and proximity to New
York City

Destination
revitalization
and transitoriented
development

Create and implement a mixeduse transit-oriented development
plan to revitalize Island Park’s
downtown and waterfront to
attract visitors, residents and
new businesses to the Long
Beach Road business district
and Wreck Lead waterfront. The
project includes a revitalization
plan and retention of a local
disaster recovery manager to
manage programs and pursue
additional funding.

Proposed

Community
planning &
capacity building,
housing, and
economic
development

$250,000

N

Protect shoreline
areas from tidal surge
through a combination
of structural,
nonstructural, and
hybrid shoreline
stabilization
techniques

Tidal protection
at street ends &
near Landgraf
Park

Install barriers at public street
ends and Landgraf park to
protect adjacent neighborhoods
from tidal flooding.

Proposed

Infrastructure

$1.01 million

N

Restore, enhance,
and improve natural
areas, including local
beaches, marshes,
parks, and other
open spaces, to
provide recreation
opportunities and
enhance the natural
environment

Shoreline,
beach, and
open space
restoration,
preservation,
and
environmental
enhancement

Restore local beaches – Little
Beach (in conjunction with the
existing U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers project), Harbor Isle
Beach, and Masone Beach.

Proposed

Natural & cultural
resources

$5.95 million

N

Restore, enhance,
and improve natural
areas, including local
beaches, marshes,
parks, and other
open spaces, to
provide recreation
opportunities and
enhance the natural
environment

Phase 1 marsh
restoration

Conduct a marsh restoration
study and implement a
restoration pilot project for
Garrett Marsh east of Barnum
Island.

Proposed

Natural & cultural
resources

$600,000

N

176

Improve the recreational
capacity of Oceanside Park and
restore the Park’s shoreline to
protect adjacent schools and
neighborhoods from flooding.

Section V: Additional materials

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 17: Master table of projects, continued
Proposed, featured, and additional resiliency recommendations
Strategy

Project name

Short project description

Project
category

RSF

Cost
estimate

Regional
project
(Y/N)

Implement an
emergency response
system that engages
in emergency
planning, response,
and communications
at the Community level

Emergency
transportation
lifeline safety
plan & initial
implementation

Prepare a public safety plan
that identifies a “lifeline” road
network and improvements to
help them function better before,
during, and after emergencies.
Implement initial improvements,
including independently powered
streetlights and vehicle message
signs.

Proposed
in Barnum
Island, the
Village of
Island Park
and Harbor
Isle

Community
planning &
capacity building
and infrastructure

$960,000

Y

Featured in
Oceanside

$1.44 million

Restore, enhance,
and improve natural
areas, including local
beaches, marshes,
parks, and other
open spaces, to
provide recreation
opportunities and
enhance the natural
environment

Phase 2 marsh
restoration

Complete restoration of Garrett
Marsh, conduct a marsh
restoration study for Simmons
Hassock Marsh west of Harbor
Isle, and conduct restoration of
Simmons Hassock Marsh.

Featured

Natural & cultural
resources

$2 million

N

Implement an
emergency response
system that engages
in emergency
planning, response,
and communications
at the Community level

Emergency
staging area
feasibility
study and
implementation

Identify a site for and construct
an emergency operations center
and to store emergency response
equipment and supplies before,
during, and after a crisis for
Barnum Island, the Village of
Island Park, and Harbor Isle.

Featured

Community
planning &
capacity building,
infrastructure,
and economic
development

$2.49 million

N

Protect shoreline
areas from tidal surge
through a combination
of structural,
nonstructural, and
hybrid shoreline
stabilization
techniques

Phase 2
perimeter flood
safeguards:
California Place
Canal

This project builds on phase
1 perimeter flood safeguards
to construct additional
barrier systems and natural
improvements to protect against
flooding from California Place
Canal.

Featured

Infrastructure

$2 million

N

Reduce the risk
of flooding to
critical facilities and
emergency service
facilities, such as
police and fire
departments, schools,
and other facilities
that serve vulnerable
populations

Critical facility
resiliency:
Island Park
Village Hall
Reconstruction

Construct a new building for the
Village Hall in Island Park using
resilient techniques, such as
elevating utilities, floodproofing
the building envelope, and
installing generators.

Featured

Community
planning &
capacity building

$1.43 million

N

Leverage the economic
potential of the area’s
waterfront location
and proximity to New
York City

Oceanside
waterfront
revitalization

Prepare a plan for the long-term
revitalization and redevelopment
of the Oceanside waterfront
industrial area, considering
economic development
opportunities to support new
water-dependent and waterenhanced businesses and mixeduse development, including
senior housing.

Featured

Community
planning &
capacity building,
housing, and
economic
development

$150,000

N

Section V: Additional materials

177

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 17: Master table of projects, continued
Proposed, featured, and additional resiliency recommendations
Strategy

Project name

Short project description

Project
category

RSF

Cost
estimate

Regional
project
(Y/N)

Reduce the risk
of flooding to
critical facilities and
emergency service
facilities, such as
police and fire
departments, schools,
and other facilities
that serve vulnerable
populations

New Oceanside
fire station,
park, and
community
center

Construct a new fire station to
replace Hose 1 and Engine 1 in
Oceanside. Project includes a
small community center and park
to serve the area, which currently
lacks recreation facilities.

Featured

Community
planning &
capacity building,
health & social
services, natural
& cultural
resources

$20 million

N

Reduce the risk
of flooding to
critical facilities and
emergency service
facilities, such as
police and fire
departments, schools,
and other facilities
that serve vulnerable
populations

Critical facility
resiliency &
emergency
response
resources

Install generators in senior
facilities and emergency response
centers in the Village of Island
Park.

Additional

Health & social
services

$1-$5 million

N

Implement progressive
stormwater
management systems
and infrastructure
upgrades to decrease
flooding in areas that
consistently flood
during storm events
and high tides

Barnum Island
drainage
improvements

Install drainage improvements
to reduce flooding in Empire
Boulevard, and Louisiana,
Georgia, Florida, Carolina and
Alabama Avenues.

Additional

Infrastructure

$5 to $10
million

N

Leverage the economic
potential of the area’s
waterfront location
and proximity to New
York City

Harbor Isle
community &
economic asset
preservation

Protect economic assets
and provide community
enhancements in Harbor Isle,
including installation of gateway
signage at the Warwick Road
and Island Parkway Bridges as
they cross Island Park Canal; and
planting of trees and vegetation
on Harbor Isle streets to continue
to attract new residents and
economic development

Additional

Economic
development

$1 to $5
million

N

Restore, enhance,
and improve natural
areas, including local
beaches, marshes,
parks, and other
open spaces, to
provide recreation
opportunities and
enhance the natural
environment

Open space
protection

Secure new open space and
protect/ restore/improve existing
open space in Barnum Island,
Village of Island Park and
Harbor Isle. Project may include
acquisition and remediation of a
brownfield site for recreational
use.

Additional

Natural & cultural
resources

$15 million

N

178

Section V: Additional materials

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 17: Master table of projects, continued
Proposed, featured, and additional resiliency recommendations
Strategy

Project name

Short project description

Project
category

RSF

Cost
estimate

Regional
project
(Y/N)

Restore, enhance,
and improve natural
areas, including local
beaches, marshes,
parks, and other
open spaces, to
provide recreation
opportunities and
enhance the natural
environment

Shoreline &
open space
improvements

Restore and enhance parks in
Barnum Island and the Village of
Island Park, including Shell Creek
Park. Construct improvements
for Wrights Field in Oceanside.
The project is meant to
reduce flooding of adjacent
neighborhoods, restore and
increase resiliency, and enhance
recreational facilities.

Additional

Natural & cultural
resources

$1 to $5
million

N

Support solutions for
regional and local
power generation,
waste water treatment
upgrades to Bay
Park and Long Beach
Sewage Treatment
Plants, and regional
tidal protection

Alternative
power
generation &
distribution

Evaluate the potential for
generation and distribution of
solar, wind, tidal, geothermal,
fuel cell, and other alternative
power sources. Evaluate solar
carports at public parking
facilities. The project will require
coordination with traditional and
alternative power companies
to evaluate power distribution
options.

Additional

Infrastructure

>$10 million

Y

Support solutions for
regional and local
power generation,
waste water treatment
upgrades to Bay Park
and Long Beach Waste
Water Treatment
Plants, and regional
tidal protection

Bay Park
Sewage Plant
upgrades

Continue to monitor the Bay
Park Sewage Treatment Plant
improvement projects, and
work with Nassau County to
tie local improvements into the
Waste Water Treatment Plan.
Potential local projects for this
Community include integrating
Austin Boulevard stormwater
improvements with the proposed
treatment plant improvements
and supporting the relocation of
the treatment plant outfall from
Reynolds Channel to the Atlantic
Ocean.

Additional

Infrastructure
and natural &
cultural resources

>$10 million

Y

Support solutions for
regional and local
power generation,
waste water treatment
upgrades to Bay
Park and Long Beach
Sewage Treatment
Plants, and regional
tidal protection

Regional tidal
protection
approaches

Implement natural enhancements
in support of regional solutions
such as new vegetation, reef
construction, and shell mounds.
Support the region-wide
implementation of barriers – such
as gates across narrow waterway
openings and raised roadways –
where studied and appropriate.

Additional

Infrastructure
and natural &
cultural resources

>$10 million

Y

Section V: Additional materials

179

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

C. Public engagement process
The NYRCR Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village
of Island Park/Harbor Isle Community (Community)
public engagement process included nine Planning
Committee meetings, an online survey, and three
Public Engagement Events. This section summarizes
of the meetings public outreach process.

Planning Committee meetings
The Committee held nine meetings during the
planning process, from September 2013 through
March 2014. Each meeting was open to the public
and audience participation was encouraged through
questions and public comment cards, which asked
for feedback and served as a mechanism for
people to sign up to receive future announcements
about upcoming Public Engagement Events. Public
attendance of Committee meetings varied over the
course of the project from as few as four to as many
as 40 people.
The list below summarizes the purpose of and topics
discussed at each of the Committee meetings:
Meeting 1: Introduction to the NYRCR planning
process and identification of key
Community issues
Meeting 2: Asset identification and Community
visioning
Meeting 3: Confirmation of key messages
using feedback from the first Public
Engagement Event
Meeting 4: Consideration of potential strategies,
projects, and actions for inclusion in the
Plan using feedback from the second
Public Engagement event

180

Section V: Additional materials

Meeting 5: Refinement of the risk assessment
Meeting 6: Project refinement and initial prioritization
Meeting 7: Project prioritization and selection for
inclusion in the Plan
Meeting 8: Confirm Proposed and Featured Projects
and finalize  Additional Resiliency
Recommendations
Meeting 9: Review draft Plan
Due to the large geographic area of the Community,
the Committee split into two geographic-based
subcommittees to address project details. One
subcommittee represented the areas of Barnum
Island, the Village of Island Park, and Harbor Isle;
The other represented Oceanside. Six subcommittee
meetings were held during the course of the project
to facilitate open dialogue about community-specific
issues, strategies, and projects.

Community survey
The public engagement process included a survey
that was available at the Oceanside and Island Park
libraries and online at the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program website from
October 2013 through February 2014. The survey
asked questions on how Superstorm Sandy affected
residents, what issues were still concerns during
flood events, priorities for the future, and the types
of strategies that would lessen flooding during storm
events.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Public Engagement Events

•

Flyers were mailed or emailed to organizations
for distribution through their own networks;
and,

•

Lawn signs were printed and distributed at
visible locations throughout the Community
including key intersections, commercial corridors
and shopping centers, Island Park Village Hall,
LIRR stations, and public plazas.

Public outreach methods
Public outreach methods used to publicize and
promote the Public Engagement Events included:
Door hangers, signs, and flyers
•

Flyers were sent home with elementary and
middle school students in the Oceanside and
Island Park school districts;

•

Committee members shared flyers with family,
friends, colleagues, and neighbors;

•

Street teams distributed door hangers
throughout the Community for each meeting,
focusing on residential neighborhoods, senior
communities, houses of worship, and Long
Island Rail Road (LIRR) stations;

•

Street teams distributed flyers to businesses
and organizations throughout the Community
prior to each meeting;

Electronic and social media
•

Each meeting was announced via the
Community’s Storm Recovery website and the
Storm Recovery Facebook page;

•

Meetings were announced on the Island Park
School District’s website and electronic signs;
and,

•

Emails were sent to people who had provided
their names and email addresses at Committee
meetings and prior Public Engagement Events.

October 9, 2013 Public Engagement Event
Source: Sustainable Long Island

Section V: Additional materials

181

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

First Public Engagement Event
The first Public Engagement Event was held on
October 9, 2013 at Saint Anthony’s Church in
Oceanside, New York and was attended by more
than 75 residents. In addition, an online survey was
used to obtain feedback on resiliency planning from
residents unable to attend meetings. The survey was
advertised at the meeting and made available through
a link on the NYRCR Program website.
The first Public Engagement Event was structured
as an open house during which people could come
at any time and stay as long as they liked. The
open house was designed to gather community
knowledge, experience, and recommendations,
which were essential to developing the Community’s
Plan. Participants were invited to review information
on the NYRCR Program and information about the
Committee’s work, including draft vision statements,
community assets, needs and opportunities, and
preliminary strategies.

November 6, 2013 Public Engagement Event
Source: Sustainable Long Island

182

Section V: Additional materials

Interactive stations that addressed Plan topics
were arranged around the room. Each station was
staffed by members of the Consultant Team, and
members of the Committee were available throughout
the evening to help answer questions and further
guidance to attendees. An exit survey was conducted
as participants left the meeting to gain feedback
on the format and information presented, and
as a way to collect additional email addresses to
continue to inform the community about future Public
Engagement Events and opportunities to remain
involved in the project.

Second Public Engagement Event
The second Public Engagement Event was held on
November 6, 2013 at Lincoln Orens Middle School
in the Village of Island Park, New York and was
attended by more than 180 people. The Public
Engagement Event began with a brief overview
of the NYRCR Program and a review of strategies
included in the Community’s Conceptual Plan. The
Committee welcomed participants and spoke about

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

the importance of the planning process. The meeting
then moved to small-group facilitated break-out
sessions. Participants were asked to provide insights
on local storm damages due to Superstorm Sandy and
Hurricane Irene, identify their top priorities among
the Conceptual Plan strategies to help the Community
become more resilient, and brainstorm innovative
strategies and resiliency techniques that should be
further investigated as part of the NYRCR planning
process.

Third Public Engagement Event
The third Public Engagement Event was held on March
3, 2014 to review of the Proposed Projects, Featured
Projects, and Additional Resiliency Recommendations
under consideration for inclusion in the NYRCR Plan.
The meeting was organized using an open house
format held over two sessions at the Father Joseph
O’Connell Knights of Columbus in Oceanside, New
York. The first session was held in the afternoon, from
2:00p.m. to 4:00p.m., and the second in the evening
from 7:30p.m. to 10:00p.m.

A brief orientation was given multiple times during
each open house session to provide attendees with
an understanding of the purpose and format of
the meeting. Display boards featuring each of the
Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional
Resiliency Recommendations were set up around
the room so that participants could view projectspecific information. Members of the Committee and
Consultant Team were on-hand to answer questions
and discuss projects. Project feedback forms were
provided to gather public feedback on the projects.
The project feedback form was also made available
online via the Storm Recovery website for anyone who
was not able to attend the meeting in person.

Final public meeting
A final public meeting, to be held later in spring 2014,
will share the work of the Committee and the NYRCR
Plan with the public.

March 3, 2015 Public Engagement Event
Source: Sustainable Long Island

Section V: Additional materials

183

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

D. Community asset inventory
Table 18: Interpreting risk scores
Interpreting Risk Scores
100-year event
(Hazard score = 3)

Exposure

500-year event
(Hazard score = 4)

5

15

30

45

60

75

5

20

40

60

80

100

4.5

13

27

40.5

54

67.5

4.5

18

36

54

72

90

4

12

24

36

48

60

4

16

32

48

64

80

3.5

10.5

21

31.5

42

52.5

3.5

14

28

42

56

70

3

9

18

27

36

45

3

12

24

36

48

60

2.5

7.5

15

22.5

30

37.5

2.5

10

20

30

40

50

2

6

12

18

24

30

2

8

16

24

32

40

1.5

4.5

9

13.5

18

22.5

1.5

6

12

18

24

30

1

3

6

9

12

15

1

4

8

12

16

20

0.5

1.5

3

4.5

6

7.5

0.5

2

4

6

8

10

2

3

4

5

2

3

4

5

1

Vulnerability

Exposure

1

Vulnerability

For the purpose of preparing a NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan the storm event recommended for
considering the efficacy of projects and actions is a 100 year storm (1% annual chance). Communities may
additionally want to evaluate risk to a higher intensity, less frequent event, such as the 500-year event (0.2%
annual chance).  For this reason, two sets of possible risk score ranges (one for the 100-year event, using a
hazard score of 3; and another for the 500-year event, using a hazard score of 4) are provided, with guidance
on how to interpret the risk scores.  While the risk scores themselves differ between the two events as a result
of using different hazard scores, the basis for how assets are categorized into the severe, high, moderate, or
residual risk levels is the same between the two events, as shown by the similarly shaded regions in the tables
above.  For example, a risk score of 60 in the 100-year event evaluation is shown as an 80 in the 500-year even
evaluation, but both scores are classified as Severe risk.
Risk scores help identify assets with elevated potential for storm damage.  In addition to the risk score, other
factors also contribute to determining which assets should be addressed, how soon they should be addressed,
and their priority for the community.  Some factors that should be considered for each asset in developing a
community risk management strategy include: contribution to life safety, if the asset is a critical facility, value
of asset to the community, environmental services provided, economic contribution of the asset, whether
alternatives are available, and capacity of the asset to adapt.

184

Section V: Additional materials

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

RISK SCORE RANGES
100 year event:

500 year event:

Severe (Risk Score >53)

Severe (Risk Score >70)

Risk scores in this category occur only if one of the two factors, exposure or vulnerability, is rated 5, and
the other is 4 or higher; this could represent that the asset is in a dangerous situation.  Both exposure and
vulnerability should be reduced, if possible.  Consider relocation a priority option for these assets.

High (Risk Score 24 - 53)

High (Risk Score 32 - 70)

Risk scores in this category are indicative of conditions that could lead to significant negative outcomes from a
storm.  Using the risk scoring system, a total of 24 (or 32 for the 500-year event) can only be achieved if the
vulnerability is 4 and exposure is 2, or vice versa.  A vulnerability of 4 indicates the likely loss of service of an
asset for an extended period of time.  For many assets this may be unacceptable.  Actions should be taken to
reduce vulnerability, such as elevating or floodproofing the asset, to help avoid a long-term loss of function.  
A score of 4 for exposure indicates most of the local landscape attributes that help reduce storm damages
are absent.  Actions to restore landscape attributes may be appropriate.  All other risk scores higher than 24
(or 32 for the 500-year event) indicate either the exposure or the vulnerability, or both, are higher than the
conditions discussed above, lending more weight to the need to take actions that reduce risk.  Relocation may
be necessary in the future if other means of adaptation or management actions are not effective.
Moderate (Risk Score 6 - 23)

              Moderate (Risk Score 8 - 31)

Risk scores in this category pose moderate to serious consequences, but adaptation may be of lower priority
due to one factor, exposure or vulnerability, remaining relatively low.  Use a combination of measures to
reduce exposure and/or vulnerability.

Residual (Risk Score <6)

Residual (Risk Score < 8)

Risk scores in this category occur when both exposure and vulnerability are relatively low.  This situation
suggests floods would pose minor or infrequent consequences.  However, a vulnerability score of 3 may not
be acceptable for critical facilities or high community value assets, because the community cannot afford to
be without these services, event on an infrequent basis.  Note that risk is never completely eliminated.  Some
residual risk still remains even after management measures have been implemented.  Monitor conditions and
adapt as necessary.

Section V: Additional materials

185

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 19: Risk scores by asset group
Asset

Risk Area

Hazard Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

Assisted living, PSCH Island House and South
Point Plaza Nursing & Rehab

High

3

3.00

3

27.0

Beaches

Extreme

3

4.50

3

40.5

Economic / commercial districts – Island Park,
Long Beach Rd, Lawson Blvd

Extreme

3

4.00

4

48.0

Economic / industrial districts – Hampton Rd,
Lawson Blvd, Island Park

Extreme

3

4.50

4

54.0

Government / civic – Village Hall, IP FD Exempts
Hall, Libraries, Post Offices

Extreme

3

4.00

4

48.0

Community organizations – American Legion,
community centers, Knights of Columbus, VFW
5199, Sacred Heart Parish Center

Extreme

3

3.50

4

42.0

Emergency response Island Park, Barnum Island,
Harbor Isle – BI Fire, IP FDHQ, IP FD Training

High

3

3.00

4

36.0

Emergency response Oceanside – Maintenance,
Engine 1, HQ, Hose 1-3

High

3

2.50

4

30.0

Fueling stations

High

3

2.50

3

22.5

Healthcare – SN Communities Hospital, Dialysis
Center

Moderate

3

2.00

3

18.0

Apartments & condominiums

Extreme

3

3.50

3

31.5

Marinas

Extreme

3

4.50

5

67.5

Schools

High

3

3.00

5

45.0

Sanitary sewer & stormwater drainage – Bay
Park WWTP, TOH Sanitation D7, IP Public Works,
system-wide sanitation and storm sewer

Extreme

3

4.50

5

67.5

System-wide telecommunications

Extreme

3

3.50

5

52.5

System-wide water systems

High

3

3.00

5

45.0

Power – LIPA/PSEG and LIRR  electric substations

Extreme

3

4.50

5

67.5

Parks & recreation

Extreme

3

4.50

3

40.5

Religious organizations

High

3

2.50

3

22.5

Senior housing

High

3

3.00

3

27.0

Senior services – Oceanside Care Center

Moderate

3

2.00

3

18.0

Transportation system – Austin Blvd evacuation
route, LIRR IP and Oceanside, system-wide
roadways

Extreme

3

4.00

3

36.0

Single-family housing Oceanside

High

3

2.50

4

30.0

Single-family housing Island Park, Barnum Island,
Harbor Isle

Extreme

3

4.50

4

54.0

186

Section V: Additional materials

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 20: Community asset risk scores
Economic
Asset Name

Risk Area

Risk Score

1

Aero Marine

Extreme

67.5

2

Andy’s Marina

Extreme

67.5

3

Bridgeview Yacht Club

Extreme

67.5

4

Empire Point Marina

Extreme

67.5

5

Island Park Business District

Extreme

48.0

6

Island Park Industrial District

High

42.0

7

K&K Marina

Extreme

67.5

8

Oceanside Hampton Rd Industrial District

Extreme

54.0

9

Oceanside Lawson Blvd Economic Corridor

Extreme

48.0

10

Oceanside Lawson Blvd Industrial District

Extreme

54.0

11

Oceanside Long Beach Rd Economic Corridor

Extreme

48.0

Asset Name

Risk Area

Risk Score

Barnum Island Fire District

High

36.0

Health and Social Services

12
13

Oceanside Schools #9E and #9M

High

45.0

14

Florence Smith School #2

Moderate

30.0

15

Francis X. Hegarty Elementary School

High

45.0

16

Fulton Avenue School #8

High

37.5

17

Island Park FD Exempts Hall

High

36.0

18

Island Park FD Headquarters

High

36.0

19

Island Park Fire Department Training Facility

High

36.0

20

Island Park Village Hall

Extreme

48.0

21

Lincoln Orens Middle School

High

45.0

22

North Oceanside School #5

Moderate

30.0

23

Oaks School #3

Moderate

30.0

24

Oceanside Care Center Inc.

Moderate

18.0

25

Oceanside FD Engine 1

High

30.0

26

Oceanside FD Headquarters

Moderate

24.0

27

Oceanside FD Hose 1

Moderate

24.0

28

Oceanside FD Hose 2

High

30.0

29

Oceanside FD Hose 3

Moderate

24.0

30

Oceanside FD Maintenance Bldg

High

30.0

31

Oceanside High School #7

Moderate

30.0

* Denotes system asset

Section V: Additional materials

187

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 20: Community asset risk scores, continued
32

Oceanside High School Castleton #6

Moderate

30.0

33

South Nassau Communities Hospital

Moderate

18.0

34

South Nassau Dialysis Center

High

22.5

35

South Oceanside School #4

High

37.5

36

TOH Sanitation District 7

High

37.5

37

U S Post Office Island Park

Extreme

48.0

38

U S Post Office Oceanside

Moderate

30.0

39

Village of Island Park Department of Public Works

High

45.0

Asset Name

Risk Area

Risk Score

40

Alhambra Condos

High

22.5

41

Bishop Kellenberg Garden Apts

Moderate

18.0

42

Island Park Senior Housing

High

27.0

43

Mill River Gardens Apartments

High

22.5

44

Ocean Harbor Apartments

High

22.5

45

Oceanside Cove Co-ops

High

22.5

46

Oceanside Knolls Apartments

Moderate

18.0

47

PSCH Island House

High

27.0

48

Regency Apartments

Extreme

31.5

Housing

49

Sherwood Townhouse Apartments

Moderate

18.0

50*

Single-Family Housing Island Park, Barnum Island,
Harbor Isle

Extreme

54.0

51*

Single-Family Housing Oceanside

High

30.0

52

South Point Plaza Nursing and Rehabilitation Center

High

27.0

53

Summit Apartments

Moderate

18.0

54

The Glen Apartments

Moderate

18.0

55

The Yacht Club

Extreme

31.5

56

Theresa Gardens Apartments

Moderate

18.0

57

Valley Town House Apartments

Moderate

18.0

58

Woodcrest Apartments

High

22.5

* Denotes system asset

188

Section V: Additional materials

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 20: Community asset risk scores, continued
Infrastructure Systems
Asset Name

Risk Area

Risk Score

Austin Boulevard evacuation route

Extreme

36.0

60

Auto Spa

High

27.0

61

Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant and pump stations

Extreme

67.5

59

62

BP Gas Station

Moderate

18.0

63

Gulf Oceanside Gas Station

Moderate

18.0

64

Hess Gas Station

High

22.5

65

Hess Gas Station

Moderate

18.0

66

Kings Oceanside C Store Gas Station

High

22.5

67

LIPA/PSEG E.F. Barrett Power Station

Extreme

67.5

68

LIRR Island Park Station

Extreme

31.5

69

LIRR Oceanside Station

Extreme

31.5

70

LIRR electric substation

Extreme

60.0

71*

Multi-community roadways

High

27.0

72*

Sanitation systems

Extreme

60.0

73*

Storm sewer systems

Extreme

60.0

74*

Telecommunications

Extreme

52.5

75

USA Gasoline Gas Station

Moderate

18.0

76

USA Gasoline Gas Station

Moderate

18.0

77

Valero Gas Station

Moderate

18.0

78*

Water systems

High

45.0

* Denotes system asset

Section V: Additional materials

189

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 20: Community asset risk scores, continued
Natural and Cultural Resources
Asset Name

Risk Area

Risk Score

79

American Legion Post 1246

Extreme

42.0

80

First Methodist Church

Moderate

18.0

81

First Presbyterian Church

Moderate

18.0

82

Full Gospel Church

High

22.5

83

Harbor Isle Beach

Extreme

40.5

84

Island Park Greek Orthodox Church

High

22.5

85

Island Park Jewish Center / Soul Stirring Church

High

22.5

86

Island Park Library

High

36.0

87

Island Park United Methodist Church

High

22.5

88

JCC

High

30.0

89

Knights Of Columbus

Moderate

24.0

90

Little Beach

Extreme

40.5

91

Margie Street Park

Extreme

40.5

92

Masone Beach

Extreme

40.5

93

Mayor Landgraf Park

Extreme

40.5

94

Oceanside Community Center

Moderate

24.0

95

Oceanside Jewish Center

Moderate

18.0

96

Oceanside Library

Moderate

30.0

97

Oceanside Lutheran Church

Moderate

18.0

98

Oceanside Marine Nature Study Area

Extreme

40.5

99

Oceanside Park

Extreme

40.5

100

Sacred Heart Parish Center

High

30.0

101

Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church & Rectory

High

22.5

102

Shell Creek Park

High

31.5

103

St Andrews Episcopal Church

Moderate

18.0

104

St Anthonys Church

Moderate

18.0

105

Temple Avodah

Moderate

18.0

106

VFW Post 5199

Extreme

42.0

107

Windsor Avenue Bible Church

Moderate

18.0

108

Wrights Field

Extreme

40.5

109

Young Israel of Oceanside

Extreme

31.5

* Denotes system asset

190

Section V: Additional materials

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 21: Risk to Systems
System Name

Risk
Area

Asset Type

Hazard

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Sanitary sewer & stormwater drainage
– Bay Park STP, TOH Sanitation D7, IP
Public Works, system-wide stormwater
drainage

Extreme

Wastewater

3

4.50

5

67.5

System-wide telecommunications

Extreme

Telecommunications

3

3.50

5

52.5

System-wide water systems

High

Water Supply

3

3.00

5

45.0

Transportation system – Austin
Blvd evacuation route, LIRR IP and
Oceanside, system-wide roadways

Extreme

Transportation

3

4.00

3

36.0

Single-family housing Oceanside

High

Single-Family
Residence

3

2.50

4

30.0

Single-family housing Island Park,
Barnum Island, Harbor Isle

Extreme

Single-Family
Residence

3

4.50

4

54.0

Section V: Additional materials

191

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 22: Risk assessment tool
Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset Sub-category

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical Facility

PSCH Island House

High

Housing

Supportive Housing

Yes

Yes, FEMA

South Point Plaza Nursing and
Rehabilitation Center

High

Housing

Senior Housing

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Harbor Isle Beach

Extreme

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No, Locally Significant

Little Beach

Extreme

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No, Locally Significant

Masone Beach

Extreme

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No, Locally Significant

Island Park Business District

Extreme

Economic

Downtown Center

No

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside Long Beach Rd Economic
Corridor

Extreme

Economic

Employment Hub

No

No, Locally Significant

Oceanside Lawson Blvd Economic
Corridor

Extreme

Economic

Employment Hub

No

No, Locally Significant

Oceanside Hampton Rd Industrial
District

Extreme

Economic

Industrial, Warehousing and Manufacturing

No

No, Locally Significant

Oceanside Lawson Blvd Industrial
District

Extreme

Economic

Industrial, Warehousing and Manufacturing

No

No, Locally Significant

Island Park Industrial District

High

Economic

Industrial, Warehousing and Manufacturing

No

No, Locally Significant

Island Park Village Hall

Extreme

Health_and_Social_Services

Government and Administrative Services

No

Yes, FEMA

Island Park Fd Exempts Hall

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Government and Administrative Services

No

Yes, FEMA

Island Park Library

High

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Libraries

No

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside Library

Moderate

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Libraries

No

Yes, FEMA

U S Post Office Island Park

Extreme

Health_and_Social_Services

Government and Administrative Services

No

No, Locally Significant

U S Post Office Oceanside

Moderate

Health_and_Social_Services

Government and Administrative Services

No

No, Locally Significant

American Legion Post 1246

Extreme

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Oceanside Community Center

Moderate

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Community Centers

No

No, Locally Significant

JCC

High

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Knights Of Columbus

Moderate

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Sacred Heart Parish Center

High

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

VFW Post 5199

Extreme

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Barnum Island Fire District

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Emergency Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

Island Park Fd Headquarters

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Emergency Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

Island Park Fire Department Training
Facility

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Emergency Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside Fd Maintenance Bldg

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Emergency Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside Fd Engine 1

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Emergency Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside Fd Headquarters

Moderate

Health_and_Social_Services

Emergency Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

192

Section V: Additional materials

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Landscape Attributes

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate ≥1
foot per
year or
unknown

Waterline
frequently
at shore
defense
or upland
vegetation

Shore
Protective Dunes absent,
defenses
vegetation
below BFE,
absent, not
between
eroding, little
constructed
asset
vegetation;
to anticipated and flood
Bluff slope
conditions, or
source
unstable, little
deteriorating
absent
vegetation

Risk Assessment

Asset on
coastal
Landscape
barrier
Hazard
Attribute Score
island
Score
(“Yes” = +0.5)
or filled
wetland

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Risk Score
Score

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27.0

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

40.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

40.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

40.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

4

48.0

High

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

4

48.0

High

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

4

48.0

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54.0

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54.0

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

4

42.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

4

48.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

4

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

4

48.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

4

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

3.50

4

42.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

4

24.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

4

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

4

24.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

4

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

3.50

4

42.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

4

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

4

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

4

24.0

Section V: Additional materials

193

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 22: Risk assessment tool, continued
Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset Sub-category

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical Facility

Oceanside Fd Hose 1

Moderate

Health_and_Social_Services

Emergency Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside Fd Hose 2

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Emergency Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside Fd Hose 3

Moderate

Health_and_Social_Services

Emergency Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

Hess Gas Station

High

Infrastructure_Systems

Liquid Fuels

No

No, Locally Significant

BP Gas Station

Moderate

Infrastructure_Systems

Liquid Fuels

No

No, Locally Significant

Gulf Oceanside Gas Station

Moderate

Infrastructure_Systems

Liquid Fuels

No

No, Locally Significant

Hess Gas Station

Moderate

Infrastructure_Systems

Liquid Fuels

No

No, Locally Significant

Kings Oceanside C Store Gas Station

High

Infrastructure_Systems

Liquid Fuels

No

No, Locally Significant

USA Gasoline Gas Station

Moderate

Infrastructure_Systems

Liquid Fuels

No

No, Locally Significant

Auto Spa

High

Infrastructure_Systems

Liquid Fuels

No

No, Locally Significant

USA Gasoline Gas Station

Moderate

Infrastructure_Systems

Liquid Fuels

No

No, Locally Significant

Valero Gas Station

Moderate

Infrastructure_Systems

Liquid Fuels

No

No, Locally Significant

South Nassau Communities Hospital

Moderate

Health_and_Social_Services

Primary/Regional Hospitals

Yes

Yes, FEMA

South Nassau Dialysis Center

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Healthcare Facilities

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Regency Apartments

Extreme

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

Alhambra Condos

High

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

Oceanside Cove Co-ops

High

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

The Yacht Club

Extreme

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

Ocean Harbor Apartments

High

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

Sherwood Townhouse Apartments

Moderate

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

Summit Apartments

Moderate

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

The Glen Apartments

Moderate

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

Valley Town House Apartments

Moderate

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

Woodcrest Apartments

High

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

Empire Point Marina

Extreme

Economic

Marina/Water Based Business

No

No

K&K Marina

Extreme

Economic

Marina/Water Based Business

No

No

Bridgeview Yacht Club

Extreme

Economic

Marina/Water Based Business

No

No

Andy’s Marina

Extreme

Economic

Marina/Water Based Business

No

No

Aero Marine

Extreme

Economic

Marina/Water Based Business

No

No

Boardman Elementary / Middle School
#9
High

Health_and_Social_Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Florence Smith School #2

Moderate

Health_and_Social_Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Francis Hegarty Elementary School

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

194

Section V: Additional materials

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Landscape Attributes

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate ≥1
foot per
year or
unknown

Waterline
frequently
at shore
defense
or upland
vegetation

Shore
Protective Dunes absent,
defenses
vegetation
below BFE,
absent, not
between
eroding, little
constructed
asset
vegetation;
to anticipated and flood
Bluff slope
conditions, or
source
unstable, little
deteriorating
absent
vegetation

Risk Assessment

Asset on
coastal
Landscape
barrier
Hazard
Attribute Score
island
Score
(“Yes” = +0.5)
or filled
wetland

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Risk Score
Score

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

4

24.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

4

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

4

24.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

3.50

3

31.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

3.50

3

31.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

67.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

67.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

67.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

67.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

67.5

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

5

45.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

5

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

5

45.0

Section V: Additional materials

195

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 22: Risk assessment tool, continued
Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset Sub-category

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical Facility

Fulton Avenue School #8

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Lincoln Orens Middle School

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

North Oceanside School #5

Moderate

Health_and_Social_Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Oaks School #3

Moderate

Health_and_Social_Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside High School #7

Moderate

Health_and_Social_Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside High School Castleton #6

Moderate

Health_and_Social_Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

South Oceanside School #4

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Bay Park WWTP and Pump Stations

Extreme

Infrastructure_Systems

Wastewater

No

Yes, FEMA

Sanitation systems

Extreme

Infrastructure_Systems

Wastewater

No

Yes, FEMA

TOH Sanitation District 7

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Public Works Facilities

No

Yes, FEMA

Village of Island Park Department of
Public Works

High

Health_and_Social_Services

Public Works Facilities

No

Yes, FEMA

Storm sewer systems

Extreme

Infrastructure_Systems

Stormwater

No

Yes, FEMA

Telecommunications

Extreme

Infrastructure_Systems

Telecommunications

No

Yes, FEMA

Water systems

High

Infrastructure_Systems

Water Supply

No

Yes, FEMA

LIPA E.F. Barrett Power Station

Extreme

Infrastructure_Systems

Power Supply

No

Yes, FEMA

LIRR Substation

Extreme

Infrastructure_Systems

Power Supply

No

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside Marine Nature Study Area

Extreme

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Natural Habitats

No

No

Margie Street Park

Extreme

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Mayor Landgraf Park

Extreme

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Oceanside Park

Extreme

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Shell Creek Park

High

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Wrights Field

Extreme

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Island Park United Methodist Church

High

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

First Methodist Church

Moderate

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

First Presbyterian Church

Moderate

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Full Gospel Church

High

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Island Park Greek Orthodox Church

High

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Island Park Jewish Center / Soul
Stirring Church

High

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Oceanside Jewish Center

Moderate

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Oceanside Lutheran Church

Moderate

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church
& Rectory

High

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

196

Section V: Additional materials

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Landscape Attributes

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate ≥1
foot per
year or
unknown

Waterline
frequently
at shore
defense
or upland
vegetation

Shore
Protective Dunes absent,
defenses
vegetation
below BFE,
absent, not
between
eroding, little
constructed
asset
vegetation;
to anticipated and flood
Bluff slope
conditions, or
source
unstable, little
deteriorating
absent
vegetation

Risk Assessment

Asset on
coastal
Landscape
barrier
Hazard
Attribute Score
island
Score
(“Yes” = +0.5)
or filled
wetland

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Risk Score
Score

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

5

37.5

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

5

45.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

5

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

5

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

5

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

5

30.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

5

37.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

67.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

5

60.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

5

37.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

5

45.0

High

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

5

60.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

3.50

5

52.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

5

45.0

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

67.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

5

60.0

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

40.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

40.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

40.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

40.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

31.5

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

40.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

Section V: Additional materials

197

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 22: Risk assessment tool, continued
Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset Sub-category

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical Facility

St Andrews Episcopal Church

Moderate

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

St Anthonys Church

Moderate

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Temple Avodah

Moderate

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Windsor Avenue Bible Church

Moderate

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Young Israel of Oceanside

Extreme

Natural_and_Cultural_Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

No

No, Locally Significant

Island Park Senior Housing

High

Housing

Senior Housing

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside Knolls Apartments

Moderate

Housing

Senior Housing

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Mill River Gardens Apartments

High

Housing

Senior Housing

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Bishop Kellenberg Garden Apts

Moderate

Housing

Senior Housing

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Theresa Gardens Apartments

Moderate

Housing

Senior Housing

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Oceanside Care Center Inc.

Moderate

Health_and_Social_Services

Daycare and Eldercare

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Austin Boulevard Evacuation Route

Extreme

Infrastructure_Systems

Transportation

No

Yes, FEMA

LIRR Island Park Station

Extreme

Infrastructure_Systems

Transportation

No

Yes, FEMA

Multi-community Roadways

High

Infrastructure_Systems

Transportation

No

Yes, FEMA

LIRR Oceanside Station

Extreme

Infrastructure_Systems

Transportation

No

Yes, FEMA

Single-Family Housing Oceanside

High

Housing

Single-Family Residence

No

No

Single-Family Housing Island Park,
Barnum Island, Harbor Isle

Extreme

Housing

Single-Family Residence

No

No

198

Section V: Additional materials

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Landscape Attributes

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate ≥1
foot per
year or
unknown

Waterline
frequently
at shore
defense
or upland
vegetation

Shore
Protective Dunes absent,
defenses
vegetation
below BFE,
absent, not
between
eroding, little
constructed
asset
vegetation;
to anticipated and flood
Bluff slope
conditions, or
source
unstable, little
deteriorating
absent
vegetation

Risk Assessment

Asset on
coastal
Landscape
barrier
Hazard
Attribute Score
island
Score
(“Yes” = +0.5)
or filled
wetland

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Risk Score
Score

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

3.50

3

31.5

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

3

22.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18.0

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

3

36.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

3.50

3

31.5

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27.0

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

3.50

3

31.5

High

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

4

30.0

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54.0

Section V: Additional materials

199

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

E. Endnotes
Foreword
1. Five of the 102 localities in the program—Niagara,
Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery
Counties—are not funded through the CDBG-DR
program.
2. The following localities’ allocations comprise the
NYRCR Community’s total allocation: Barnum Island$4 million; Oceanside - $22.2 million; the Village of
Island Park - $7.4 million, and Harbor Isle - $3 million.
Section I
3. American Community Survey. http://
factfinder2census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.
xhtml. U.S. Census. Web. Access January 9, 2014.
4. The Official Site of the Oceanside Education
Foundation. http://www.schoolhousegreen.org/
History-CivilWar.html. Web. Accessed March 3
5. The Official Site of the Oceanside Education
Foundation. http://www.schoolhousegreen.org/
History-1900to1960.html. Web. Accessed March 3
6. Village of Island Park. http://www.
villageofislandpark.com/history.html. Web. Accessed
March 3, 2014.

13. American Community Survey. http://
factfinder2census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.
xhtml. U.S. Census. Web. Access January 9, 2014.
14. Ibid.
15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
“Deaths Associated with Hurricane Sandy, October
– November 2012.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report. May 24, 2013. Available at: http://www.cdc.
gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6220a1.htm.
Accessed October 2013.
16. National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Report
Hurricane Sandy (AL182012) 22-29 October 2012
(February 12, 2013). Available at: http://www.nhc.
noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Sandy.pdf. Accessed
October 2013.
17.  State of New York. State of New York Action Plan
for Community Development Block Grant Program
Disaster Recovery. Prepared by the New York Homes
and Community Renewal Office of Community
Renewal. Federal Register Docket No. FR-5696-N-01.
April 2013.
18. EQECAT. Post-Landfall Loss Estimates for
Superstorm Sandy. November 1, 2012. Available at
http://www.eqecat.com/catwatch/post-landfall-lossestimates-superstorm-sandy-released-2012-11-01/.
Accessed October 2013.

7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. American Community Survey. http://
factfinder2census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.
xhtml. U.S. Census. Web. Access January 9, 2014.
11
Program of Applied Demographics at Cornell
University. http://pad.human.cornell.edu/counties/
projections.cfm Web. Accessed January 9, 2014

200

12. Nassau County Median Income as determined by
HUD can be found at: https://sites.google.com/site/
nymortgagelimits/hud-median-income-limits Web.
Accessed January 9, 2014

Section V: Additional materials

19. Kaplan, T. and R. Hernandez, “Cuomo Cites Broad
Reach of Hurricane Sandy in Aid Appeal”, New York
Times (November 26, 2012). Available at http://www.
nytimes.com/2012/11/27/nyregion/governor-cuomosays-hurricane-sandy-was-worse-than-katrina.html.
Accessed October 2013.

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

20. Nassau County website. http://www.
nassaucountyny.gov/agencies/countyexecutive/
newsrelease/2010/index.html. Web. Accessed April 6,
2014

Section II

21. Federal Emergency Management Agency Housing
Assistance Program, June 23, 2013

32. https://www.governor.ny.gov/press/02222014citizen-preparedness-corp-training. Accessed March
10,2014

22. United States Small Business Administration.
Report RPT-12788. December 13, 2013.
23. County of Nassau Department of Public Works.
Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant Super Storm Sandy
Recovery. 3 March 2014, PDF File.
24. Brodsky, Robert et al. Newsday. http://www.
newsday.com/long-island/nassau/hundreds-ofoceanside-residents-without-power-rally-1.14206058.
9 Nov 2012. Web. Accessed March 3, 2014
25. Village of Island Park. http://www.
villageofislandpark.com/July.html. Web. Accessed
March 3, 2014.
26. Al-Muslim, Aisha and Harrison, Lauren. Newsday.
http://www.newsday.com/long-island/towns/sandydisplaced-students-return-to-their-schools-1.4399912.
January 2, 2013. Web. Accessed March 3, 2014
27. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL092011_Irene.
pdf. Web. Accessed March 13, 2014
28. United States Small Business Administration.
Report RPT-12788. December 13, 2013
29. New York Governor Andrew M. Cuomo website.
http://www/governor.ny.gov/press/02112014-baypark-wastewater-plant. Web. Accessed March 13,
2014
30. New York Governor Andrew M. Cuomo website.
https://www.governor.ny.gov/press/1242014-mtasandy-restoration-aid. Web. Accessed March 13, 2014

31. NY DOS Guidance for Community Reconstruction
Zone Plans.

33. New York State Department of Public Service
website: http://documents.dps.ny.gov/public/
Common/ViewDoc.aspx?DocRefId={265FA9A5-786B4661-A85E-6B7165DB7F65}
34. New York Governor Andrew M. Cuomo website:
http://www.governor.ny.gov/press/10252013-fundingfor-electric-substations. October 25, 2013.
35. New York Governor Andrew M. Cuomo website:
https://www.governor.ny.gov/press/02212014-femaagreement. February 21, 2014.
36.Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery website:
http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/fuel-ny
37. US Department of Commerce; US Census Bureau.
http://censtats.census.gov/cgi-bin/zbpnaic/zbpsect.pl
Accessed January 9, 2014
38. United States Small Business Administration.
Report RPT-12788. December 13, 2013.
39. American Community Survey http://factfinder2.
census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml. US
Census Web. Accessed January 9, 2014
40. FEMA Fact Packs http://www.fema.gov/fact-sheets
41. URS meeting notes from September 10, 2014,
Meeting with the Nassau County, Office of Emergency
Management, Department of Public Works and NYRCR
Consultant Teams
42. New York Governor Andrew M. Cuomo website:
http://www.governor.ny.gov/press/02112014-baypark-wastewater-plant

Section V: Additional materials

201

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

43. URS meeting notes from September 10, 2014,
Meeting with the Nassau County, Office of Emergency
Management, Department of Public Works and NYRCR
Consultant Teams

56. United States Census Bureau. “Demographic
Profile Table DP1: Block Group Level.” United States
Census 2010. Web. Accessed Mar 20, 2014. http://
factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices

Section III

57. Ibid.

44. A New Vision For Long Island’s Economy – The
Strategic Economic Development Plan For Nassau
& Suffolk Counties, Long Island Region Economic
Development Corporation, 2011

58. Ibid.

Section IV
45. United States Census Bureau. “Demographic
Profile Table DP1: Census Designated Place.” United
States Census 2010. Web. Accessed Mar 20, 2014.
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices
46. Ibid.
47. Ibid.
48. Ibid.
49. United States Census Bureau. “Demographic
Profile Table DP1: Block Group Level.” United States
Census 2010. Web. Accessed Mar 20, 2014. http://
factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices
50. Ibid.
51. Ibid.
52. Ibid.
53. Ibid.
54. United States Census Bureau. “Demographic
Profile Table DP1: Census Designated Place.” United
States Census 2010. Web. Accessed Mar 20, 2014.
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices
55. United States Census Bureau. “Demographic
Profile Table DP1: Block Group Level.” United States
Census 2010. Web. Accessed Mar 20, 2014. http://
factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices

202

Section V: Additional materials

59. United States Census Bureau. “Demographic
Profile Table DP1: Census Tract Level.” United States
Census 2010. Web. Accessed Mar 20, 2014. http://
factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

F. Glossary
ADA - Americans with Disabilities Act
BFE - Base Flood Elevation
CBA – Cost Benefit Analysis
CDBG-DR - Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery
CERT - Community Emergency Response Team
FEMA – Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FEMA HMGP – FEMA Hazard Mitigation Grant Program
FEMA SFHA - FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area
GIS – Geographic Information System
HUD – Department of Housing and Urban Development.
LIREDC - Long Island Regional Economic Development Council
LIRR - Long Island Rail Road
NDRF – National Disaster Recovery Framework
NFIP – National Flood Insurance Program
NIMS – National Incident Management System
NYRCR – New York Rising Community Reconstruction Program
NYS – New York State
NYS DEC - New York Department of Environmental Conservation
NYSERDA - New York State Energy Research and Development Authority
NYS HCR – New York State Homes and Community Renewal
NYS DOS – New York State Department of State
NYS DOT – New York State Department of Transportation
NWS - National Weather Service
OEM - Office of Emergency Management
PSEG - Public Service Electric and Gas Company
RSF – Recovery Support Function
SART - State Agency Review Team
SLOSH - Sea, Lake, and Overland Surge from Hurricanes
SPLASH - Stop Polluting Littering and Save Harbors
STP - Sewage Treatment Plant
TOD - Transit-Oriented Development
USACE – U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
USGS – United States Geological Survey

Section V: Additional materials

203

Barnum Island/Oceanside/the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Barnum Island/Oceanside/
the Village of Island Park/Harbor Isle
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

204

March 2014

