Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan
March 2014
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Program

NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Planning Committee
Joe Baker, Co-Chair
Lawrence Eisenstein, Co-Chair
Joanne Bo, Committee Member
Eileen Casazza, Committee Member
Chris Clement, Committee Member
John Fabian, Committee Member
Allison Frankel, Committee Member
Julie Marchesella, Committee Member
Hugh Mason, Committee Member
Gary Panasuk, Committee Member
Randy Shotland, Committee Member
Paul Waterman, Committee Member
Neil Yeoman, Committee Member

Municipal Liaisons
Representative from Nassau County Department of Public Works

Attributions
This document was developed by the NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Planning Committee as part
of the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program within the Governor’s Office
of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is supported by NYS Homes and Community
Renewal, NYS Department of State, and NYS Department of Transportation. The document
was prepared by the following consulting firms:
Ove Arup & Partners, P.C.
ASA Analysis & Communications, Inc.
CAS Group LLC
Fine Arts & Sciences, LLC
HealthxDesign LLC
Sasaki Associates, Inc.
Urbanomics Inc.
VJ Associates Inc. of Suffolk

Cover image: Cammans Pond (source: Arup)

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Foreword
Introduction
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in August 2011, the State of New York experienced three
extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the
lives of New Yorkers and their communities. These tragic disasters signaled that New Yorkers are living in a
new reality defined by rising sea levels and extreme weather events that will occur with increased frequency
and power. They also signaled that we need to rebuild our communities in a way that will mitigate against future
risks and build increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo led the charge to develop an innovative, community-driven planning program on a scale unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program empowers the State’s most impacted communities with technical expertise needed to develop through the implementable reconstruction plans to build physically, socially,
and economically resilient and sustainable communities.
Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo in April of 2013, is a more than $650 million planning and implementation process established to provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities
severely damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy. Drawing on lessons learned
from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program is a unique combination of bottom-up community participation
and State-provided technical expertise. This power combination recognizes not only that community members
are best positioned to assess the needs and opportunities of the places where they live and work, but also that
decisions are best made when they are grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by the latest innovative
solutions.
One hundred and two storm-affected localities across the State were originally designated to participate in
the NYRCR Program. The State has allocated each locality between $3 million and $25 million to implement eligible projects identified in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for these projects is provided through the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) program.1
Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising one or more of the 102 localities, were created and led by
a NYRCR Planning Committee composed of local residents, business owners, and civic leaders. Members of
the Planning Committees were identified in consultation with established local leaders, community organizations, and in some cases municipalities. The NYRCR Program sets a new standard for community participation in recovery and resiliency planning, with community members leading the planning process. Across the
State, more than 500 New Yorkers represent their communities by serving on Planning Committees. More
than 400 Planning Committee Meetings have been held, during which Planning Committee members worked
with the State’s NYRCR Program team to develop community reconstruction plans and identify opportunities
to make their communities more resilient. All meetings were open to the public. An additional 125-plus Public
Engagement Events attracted thousands of community members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR
planning process and proposals. The NYRCR Program’s outreach has included communities that are traditionally underrepresented, such as immigrant populations and students. All planning materials are posted
on the NYRCR Program’s website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several ways for community
members and the public to submit feedback on materials in progress.

1. Five of the 102 localities in the program – Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and
Montgomery Counties – are not funding through the CDBG-DR program.

Foreword

i

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were supported by staff from the Governor’s Office of
Storm Recovery (GOSR), planners from New York State (NYS) Department of State (DOS) and NYS Department
of Transportation (DOT), and consultants from world-class planning firms that specialize in engineering, flood
mitigation solutions, green infrastructure, and more.
With the January 2014 announcement of the NYRCR Program’s expansion to include 22 new localities, the
program comprises over 2.7 million New Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent to
14% of the overall State population and 12% of the State’s overall geography.
The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR Plan. Governor Cuomo has allocated over $650 million of
funding to the program for implementing projects identified in the NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Communities are also
eligible for additional funds through the program’s NY Rising to the Top Competition, which evaluates NYRCR
Communities across eight categories, including best use of technology in the planning process, best approach
to resilient economic growth, and best use of green infrastructure to bolster resilience. The winning NYRCR
Community in each category will be allocated an additional $3 million of implementation funding. The NYRCR
Program is also working with both private and public institutions to identify existing funding sources and create
new funding opportunities where none existed before.
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated with State and Federal agencies to help guide the development of feasible projects. The program has leveraged the Regional Economic Development Council’s State
Agency Review Teams (SARTs), comprised of representatives from dozens of State agencies and authorities,
for feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR Communities. The SARTs review projects with an eye toward
regulatory and permitting needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources. The NYRCR
Program is continuing to work with the SARTs to streamline the permitting process and ensure shovels are in
the ground as quickly as possible.

Communities participating in
the NYRCR Program (Note:
map includes those NYRCR
Communities funded through the
CDBG-DR program, including
the NYRCR Communities
announced in January 2014.)

ii

Foreword

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

On the pages that follow, you will see the results of months of thoughtful, diligent work by NYRCR Planning
Committees, passionately committed to realizing brighter, more resilient futures for their communities.
The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more resilient community. Each NYRCR Planning
Committee began the planning process by defining the scope of its planning area, assessing storm damage,
and identifying critical issues. Next, the Planning Committee inventoried critical assets in the community and
assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On the basis of this work, the Planning Committee described recovery
and resiliency needs and identified opportunities. The Planning Committee then developed a series of comprehensive reconstruction and resiliency strategies, and identified projects and implementation actions to help
fulfill those strategies.
The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan are divided into three categories. The order in which
the projects and actions are listed in this NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the NYRCR Community’s
prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding through a
NYRCR Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in depth, but
has not proposed for funding through the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are projects and actions that the Planning Committee would like to highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed
Projects or Featured Projects. The Proposed Projects and Featured Projects found in this NYRCR Plan were
voted for inclusion by official voting members of the Planning Committee. Those voting members with conflicts of interest recused themselves from voting on any affected projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics
Handbook and Code of Conduct.
NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick is eligible for up to $12.1 million in CDBG-DR implementation funds.2
While developing projects for inclusion in this NYRCR Plan, Planning Committees took into account cost
estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical
assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees also considered the potential likelihood that a
project or action would be eligible for CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented with this source of
Federal funding must fall into a Federally-designated eligible activity category, fulfill a national objective (meeting
an urgent need, removing slums and blight, or benefiting low to moderate income individuals), and have a tie
to the natural disaster to which the funding is linked. These are among the factors that the Governor’s Office
of Storm Recovery will consider, in consultation with local municipalities and nonprofit organizations, when
determining which projects and actions are best positioned for implementation.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR Community’s CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review, HUD
eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the projects and actions found in this NYRCR
Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan does not guarantee that a particular
project or action will be eligible for CDBG-DR funding or that it will be implemented. The Governor’s Office of
Storm Recovery will actively seek to match projects with funding sources.
In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions outlined in this NYRCR Plan will become
a reality helping New York not only to rebuild, but also to build back better.

2. The following localities’ allocations comprise the NYRCR Community’s total allocation: Bellmore – $5.7 million; Merrick – $6.4 million.

Foreword

iii

Table of Contents
Executive Summary

1

Section I : Community Overview

11

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

13
14
22
24
25

Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan
Description of Storm Damage
Critical Issues
Community Vision
Relationship to Regional Plans

Section II : Assessment of Risk and Needs

31

A. Description of Community Assets and Assessment of Risk
B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities

32
49

Section III : Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

67

A. Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

68

Section IV : Implementation – Project Profiles

77

Proposed: Lifeline Corridor Study and Guidelines
Proposed: Downtown and Commercial Corridor Resiliency Plan
Proposed: Bellmore/Merrick Stormwater Drainage, Outfall, and Bulkhead Repair
Proposed: Southwest Merrick Masterplan and Flood Mitigation Pilot Project
Proposed: Meadowbrook Corridor Stormwater System Modeling, Analysis, and Pilot
Proposed: Bellmore/Merrick Community Assistance Centers 
Proposed: Public Communication and Education Gap Analysis
Proposed: Business Continuity Program
Proposed: Key Intersection Streetlight Retrofit
Proposed: South Shore Stormwater System Modeling and Analysis
Featured: Resilient Streetscape Implementation
Featured: Bellmore road raising: Army Place, Navy Place, Marine Place and Shore Road
Featured: Bellmore Road Raising: Koft-Boundary Road Area
Featured: Merrick Road Raising: George Court to Leslie Lane
Featured: Marina and Dock Resilience Guidelines

83
86
89
93
96
101
105
107
110
112
115
117
119
121
123

Section V : Additional Materials

127

A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations
128
B. Master Table of Projects
130
C. Public Engagement Process
136
D. Community Asset Inventory
142
E. End Notes
147
F. Glossary149

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Executive Summary
Overview
The hamlets of Bellmore and Merrick—with a combined land area of approximately seven square miles
and a population of over 38,000—are desirable
“bedroom” communities located along the south
shore of Nassau County in Long Island, New York.
These unincorporated hamlets within the Town of
Hempstead include of a mix of upland and waterfront
single-family home neighborhoods with a wealth of
community amenities, such as waterfront parks, a
golf course, easy access to Jones Beach, two Long
Island Rail Road (LIRR) stations, and numerous local
retail and commercial businesses. Both hamlets lie
immediately adjacent to the East Bay, an embayment
of the South Shore Estuary, and are composed of
peninsulas and canals that allow access for boats
and maritime activity.
On October 29, 2012, life changed dramatically for
many community residents and business owners.
New York and the tri-state region were devastated
by Superstorm Sandy, the largest storm of the 2012
Atlantic Ocean hurricane season. The south shore of
Long Island, including Bellmore and Merrick, suffered
massive storm damage, power outages, and utility
and transportation disruption. Superstorm Sandy’s
destruction came on the heels of Hurricane Irene,
which struck the community just a year prior on
August 26, 2011, causing significant flooding, wind
damage, and power outages. Directly or indirectly,
the lives and well-being of virtually everyone in the
region were, and continue to be, affected by the
aftermath of both storms.
In response, the NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Program was established by the New York
State (NYS) to provide rebuilding and revitalization
assistance to communities severely damaged by
Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical
Storm Lee. This program empowers communities to
identify resilient and innovative reconstruction projects that consider current damage, future threats,
and economic opportunities—all of which are contained in the NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Plan (NYRCR
Plan). For the purposes of this planning effort,
Bellmore and Merrick were combined to create the
NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Community (Community).

The geographic scope of the NYRCR Plan includes the
entirety of both hamlets, bordered by Meadowbrook
State Parkway and the Village of Freeport to the
west, Camp and Beltagh Avenues to the north, the
hamlet of Wantagh to the east, and the South Shore
Estuary to the south. The Community is eligible to
receive up to $12.1 million ($5.7 million for Bellmore
and $6.4 million for Merrick) of U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community
Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery
(CDBG-DR) funds for the implementation of projects
proposed in its NYRCR Plan.
Residents, business owners, first responders, and
local employees from the Community actively participated in the NYRCR Program over a period of
seven months beginning in September 2013. These
stakeholders considered their goals and aspirations
for the future to develop an NYRCR Plan that honors
the unique qualities and assets of the Community,
that seeks to creatively reduce potential storm- and
climate change-related impacts, and that leverages
these investments to support other needs and opportunities that can ultimately benefit the Community as
a whole. The result of these efforts is this NYRCR
Plan, which presents a series of strategies and projects that respond to critical issues, and contribute to
building a more resilient, safer, and sustainable future
for the NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Community.
Storm Impacts
Recent storm events brought significant damage to
homes, businesses, infrastructure, and the natural
environment. The two most powerful of these storms
had different impacts on the Community in terms of
both type and magnitude. In August 2011, Hurricane
Irene’s heavy rain and wind caused flooding and
felled trees resulting in impassable roads and power
outages. Flooding was concentrated in the residential neighborhoods south of Merrick Road, while
heavy winds and power outages affected the entire
Community.
In October 2012, Superstorm Sandy caused a storm
surge at high tide of over ten feet, which inundated
waterfront neighborhoods that generally lie between
five and ten feet above sea level. Large swaths of
land were flooded and the Community faced severe
problems with power outages, heavy debris, and
Executive Summary

1

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

immobility due to damaged and flooded roads and
compromised power lines. More than 3,000 housing
units were reported to be damaged, and although
the degree of damage varied, many homes were
inundated by several feet of water. Major roads
and evaluation routes were blocked by felled trees
and flooding, preventing access by residents and
first responders. Power outages for many residents
lasted 16 days and also caused disruption to cellular communications. Some business establishments
were directly impacted by flooding and storm damage while others suffered due to power outages and
reduced commercial activity as a result of the storm.
Gas stations could not pump fuel without backup
power. The Town of Hempstead’s Norman J. Levy
Park and Preserve in Merrick was badly damaged by
surge and flood waters washing away paths and dislocating fishing pier pilings. The Town of Hempstead
Department of Sanitation facility and nearby Merrick
Senior Center suffered over $3 million in damage
from flooding.
Critical Issues
The recent storm events uncovered a variety of critical issues with the natural and built environment in
the Community, along the south shore of Long
Island, throughout vast utility service areas, and in the
broader region. These issues directly and indirectly
impact homes; businesses; sanitary sewer, stormwater, and energy infrastructure; public facilities; and
natural resources. The following critical issues were
identified during the NYRCR planning process, which
directly informed the formulation of the strategies and
projects of the NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Plan:
• Flooding and Drainage;
• Energy Infrastructure;
• Housing in High Risk Areas;
• Information, Education, and Communication;
• Regional Connections;
• Resilient Planning, Design, and Construction; and
• Shoreline Protection.
While local issues are paramount, it is important to
recognize the Community’s relationship to its neighbors and to the region beyond. Communities on

2

Executive Summary

Long Island’s south shore have similar patterns of
development, interconnected infrastructure systems
and road networks, overlapping municipal service
provision areas, and a common shoreline. Weaving
local and regional efforts together allows for building
back in ways that are stronger, better and smarter
than before. The plan is tailored to the specific needs
of the Community but contains projects of regional
interest and also identifies actions or projects that
benefit the Community and adjacent neighbors.
More information about Storm Impacts and Critical
Issues can be found in Section I.
Community-Driven Process
The NYRCR Program provided the Community
with a unique opportunity to participate in a community-driven planning effort. The NYRCR Planning
Committee (Committee), composed of eleven community representatives, dedicated their time, passion, and expertise to guide the development of the
NYRCR Plan. The Committee played an integral role
in the planning process by: providing overall direction
and guidance; generating material; reviewing, revising, and responding to components of the plan; and
deliberating on the initiatives that will bring the greatest
recovery and resiliency value to Bellmore and Merrick.
The Committee held eight official meetings over the
course of seven months, from September 2013 to
March 2014. In addition, the Committee participated
in two joint Committee meetings with the neighboring
NYRCR Communities of Baldwin, Seaford/Wantagh,
Massapequas, and Freeport. These joint Committee
meetings explored shared issues and opportunities
for collaboration and cooperation.
Through a combination of input received from the
community during the Public Engagement Events
and the work of the Planning Committee, a Vision
Statement and list of goals were developed to reflect
the Community’s aspiration for the future. These
statements provide the foundation of the NYRCR
Plan, were used to guide the development of strategies and projects, as well as serve as an ongoing
reminder of what the Community aims to achieve.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Assessment of Risks and Needs
NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Plan Vision Statement
The NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Plan proactively
implements measures to make our south shore
community more resilient, now and in the future.
While being mindful of our natural waterways, we
will update infrastructure and invest in new projects
so that the whole community will benefit, protecting
our beloved communities and way of life. The Plan
strives to:
• Develop innovative and natural solutions to
coastal storm surges and erosion management;
• Ensure public safety during and after major
natural events;
• Ensure proper health and social services are
accessible to all residents, on a daily basis and
in emergency situations;
• Support local business resilience by encouraging
business continuity;
• Refurbish fresh water resources and improve
stormwater management;
• Enhance and maintain all accessibility and
maneuverability in all coastal evacuation routes;
and
• Enhance public open space so it serves multiple
purposes, such as recreation, resilience, and
refuge.

The strategies and projects outlined in the NYRCR
Plan will ultimately impact the quality of life for those
who live, work, and play in the Community. As
such, input from residents, business owners, and
community leaders has been an important component of the planning process. Community residents
and other stakeholders participated in three Public
Engagement Events to review the evolving work
of the Committee, and to contribute their ideas,
thoughts, and suggestions to the planning process.
In addition, a Community website was set up on the
NYRCR website (http://www.stormrecovery.ny.gov)
to post planning materials, including items from
Public Engagement Events and online surveys, to
give community members an opportunity to provide
feedback. A detailed summary of the communitydriven process can be found in Section V.

Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy exposed certain vulnerabilities related to the Community’s ability to
mitigate and respond to major storm events, climate
change, and sea level rise. As part of developing the
NYRCR Plan, an inventory of community assets was
compiled and evaluated to determine each asset’s
potential of being damaged or destroyed by a future
storm surge or flooding event. By analyzing potential hazards, as well as levels of exposure and vulnerability to possible storm impacts, a measure of
risk was calculated for each asset. In addition, the
community asset locations were combined with
NYS Department of State hazard maps that illustrate
a full range of coastal risks, and consider both the
frequency and impact of flooding. This quantitative
and spatial analysis, in addition to local knowledge
from stakeholders gathered throughout the NYRCR
process, helped to highlight assets and geographic
areas requiring attention, and served as a basis for
the generation of project ideas.
In Bellmore and Merrick, several assets in the community are located in high and extreme risk zones,
including two fire stations, four schools, three marinas, the Merrick Senior Center, two sanitary sewage
pump stations, a Town of Hempstead Department
of Sanitation facility, and sections of the Merrick
Road and Sunrise Highway commercial corridors,
including the section of Merrick Road adjacent to
the Meadowbrook State Parkway, which is a key
County evacuation route. In addition to these individual assets, over 4,200 residential parcels are
located in high and extreme risk areas. Detailed information of these analyses can be found in Section II:
Assessment of Risk and Needs.
The risk assessment was paired with an exploration
of resiliency-related needs and opportunities, many
of which were identified by Committee members
and the public at Committee meetings and Public
Engagement Events. Risk, needs, and opportunities were organized by six categories that relate to
all aspects of life in the Community: community planning and capacity building, economic development,
housing, health and social services, infrastructure,
and natural and cultural resources. The Community
identified the following key opportunities:

Executive Summary 3

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

• Upgrades to drainage systems to better mitigate
flooding from high tides and major storms;

Proposed and Featured Projects

• Improvements to communication, education
and access to resources in the Community;

The projects that resulted from this extensive planning
process support the Reconstruction and Resiliency
Strategies as well as the vision and goals for the
Community. The projects included in the NYRCR
Plan are organized into three categories, which are:

• Enhancements to parks, preserves and green
spaces that aid or develop storm protection,
stormwater management, community building,
and recreational opportunities; and

• Proposed Projects are discrete projects that
are affordable within the Community’s allocation of Community Development Block Grant
Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) assistance.

• Expansion of community education and
awareness programming around coastal
living, climate change, and sea level rise.

• Featured Projects are innovative projects
where an initial study or discrete first phase of
the project is proposed for CDBG-DR funding or
other funding resources. Featured projects also
may include regulatory reforms and other programs that do not involve capital expenditure.

• Increases to energy safety, resilience,
sustainability and independence;

Strategies for Reconstruction and Resilience
Strategies included here are designed to support
the two main goals of reconstruction and resiliency.
Reconstruction focuses on restoring, repairing,
or rebuilding what was damaged or destroyed by
Superstorm Sandy. Resiliency is about strengthening the ability of NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick to rebound
quickly when confronted with challenges of all kinds
in the future. These strategies address and balance
regional concerns, an analysis of problem areas,
community feedback on local issues, and iterative
development by the Committee. Reconstruction and
Resiliency Strategies for the Community are listed
below and described in detail in Section III of the
NYRCR Plan:
• Improve Stormwater Management
and Drainage Systems;
• Establish Programs and Policies for
Resilient Planning and Design;
• Enhance Communication,
Education, and Awareness;
• Improve Transportation Access and Connectivity;
• Invest in Resilience Enhancements
for Energy Infrastructure; and
• Plan for Business Continuity and Growth.

4

Executive Summary

• Additional Resiliency Recommendations are
resiliency projects and actions the Committee
would like to highlight and are not categorized as
Proposed or Featured Projects.
Table 01 on the following page includes the Proposed
and Featured Projects organized by strategy. The
projects have not been ranked or prioritized. Detailed
descriptions of each project can be found in Section
IV of the NYRCR Plan and Additional Resiliency
Recommendations can be found in Section V.

Figure ES-01: Geographic Scope

H
AG
LT

E
AV

MEA

BE

DOW

CA

MP

E
AV

VE
KA

IDGE RD

VE
DA

FOR

RE

MO

LL

BED

NEWBR

RIC

MER

Y
PKW
TATE
OK S

BE

BRO

AV
E

Bellmore LIRR

Merrick LIRR
AY
HW

HIG
ISE

R

SUN

BA

AD

BY

RI

CK

N

LO

R
ME

RO

KE

TP

EAST BAY

0

Legend

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Water

Long Island Rail Road

Main Roads

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

Local Roads

Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

This page intentionally left blank

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 01: Proposed and featured projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Regional

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Bellmore/Merrick
Stormwater Drainage,
Outfall, and Bulkhead
Repair

Assess the entire Bellmore/Merrick
drainage system south of Merrick
Road, including the 230 outfalls
and related bulkheads. Tidal check
valves will be installed on 25 critical
and appropriate outfalls.

Proposed

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems;
Establish Programs and
Policies for Resilient
Planning, Design, and
Housing

Southwest Merrick
Masterplan and Flood
Mitigation Pilot Project

Creation of a Masterplan to reenvision the Town of Hempstead
parcels. A newly reconfigured site
would provide enhanced flood
mitigation for the amenities onsite as well as for Merrick Road.
Shoreline stabilization or green
infrastructure pilot project upon
Masterplan completion.

Proposed

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Meadowbrook Corridor
Improvements Pilot Study

This project would include the
reconstruction of five stormwater
outfalls currently entering Freeport
Creek. And reconnecting the Creek
with the natural floodplain.
A floating wetland pilot and drainage
study would also be conducted
for East Meadow Pond to improve
water quality and reduce future
flooding.
A daylighting study for Freeport
Creek would examine the potential
benefits of uncovering the current
underground portion of the Creek.

Proposed

N

Enhance Communication,
Education, and
AwarenessImprove
Transportation Access
and Connectivity

Bellmore Merrick
Community Assistance
Centers

Community Assistance Centers
are places for residents to gather
information about emergency
preparedness under normal
conditions. During and after a
storm, these centers would become
a place to gather, collect and
distribute resources, charge cell
phones, access the internet/TV, and
seek comfort.

Proposed

N

Enhance Communication,
Education, and
Awareness

Public Communication
and Education Gap
Analysis

Evaluate existing communication
and educational processes and
uncover additional needs.
Identify public/private partnership
opportunities for ongoing
communication and education
needs.

Proposed

Y

Executive Summary 7

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 01 (cont’d) : Proposed and featured projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Regional

Enhance Communication,
Education, and
Awareness

Business Continuity
Program

Staff person to assist businesses in
creating business continuity plans.
Education for Chambers of
Commerce and other business
organization.
Identify business assistance funding.

Proposed

Y

Improve Transportation
Access and Connectivity

Lifeline Corridor Study
and Guidelines

Best practices and guidelines
for Resilient Streetscapes, such
as green infrastructure, drainage
practices, redundant and safe
power, resilient street trees and
street design.

Proposed

Y

Improve Transportation
Access and Connectivity;
Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for Energy
Infrastructure

Key Intersection
Street Light Retrofit

Installation of LED/PV streetlights
on utility poles along Merrick Road
in Merrick and Bellmore

Proposed

N

Establish Programs and
Policies for Resilient
Planning, Design, and
Housing

Downtown and
Commercial Corridor
Resiliency Plan

Study to address opportunities
for commercial and/or residential
redevelopment out of extreme and
high risk zones.
Identify microgrid opportunities with
alternative power distribution.
Identify stormwater and green
infrastructure opportunities for new
development.

Proposed

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

South Shore Stormwater
System Modeling and
Analysis

Hydrologic and hydraulic (H&H)
model to determine the causes of
localized flooding issues across the
catchment and identify measures to
prevent the flooding

Proposed

Y

Improve Transportation
Access and Connectivity;
Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for Energy
Infrastructure

Resilient Streetscape
Implementation

Underground 19 miles of utility lines,
install new PV/LED street lights and
new emergency evacuation signage

Featured

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Bellmore Road Raising:
Army, Navy, Marine and
Shore Road

Road raising and associated
drainage improvements at Shore
Rd, Walters Ct, Horace Ct, Army
Pl, Navy Pl, Marine Pl, Surf Dr,
Riviera La, Malibu Rd, Driftwood La,
Seaview La, and May Ct.

Featured

N

8

Executive Summary

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 01 (cont’d) : Proposed and featured projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Regional

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Bellmore Road Raising:
Kopf-Boundary Road
Area

Road raising and associated
drainage improvements at North Rd,
Kopf Rd, Clubhouse Rd, Alder Rd,
Beach Ave, Short St, Barbara Rd,
and Boundary Rd.

Featured

N

Establish Programs and
Policies for Resilient
Planning, Design, and
Housing

Marina and Dock
Resilience Guidelines

Emergency preparedness
guidelines, recommendations and
education

Featured

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Merrick Road Raising:
George Court to Leslie
Lane

Road raising and associated
drainage improvements at George
Ct, Helen Ct, Leonard La, Edward
La, Leslie La, and Julian La.

Featured

N

Executive Summary 9

Section I : Community Overview
The hamlets of Bellmore and Merrick are desirable “bedroom” communities
where residents value their quality of life, connection to the water, natural amenities, and high-quality schools. Located along the south shore of
Nassau County on Long Island, in the Town of Hempstead, they comprise
approximately seven square miles, most of which are devoted to a mix of
upland and waterfront single-family home neighborhoods. Both hamlets
benefit from a wealth of amenities, such as waterfront parks and a golf
course, easy access to Jones Beach, Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) stations,
and numerous local retail and commercial businesses. About 800 homeowners have direct access to Merrick and East Bays via canals at the rear of
their property, where boats are stored for personal use.3
Based on the 2010 census, the populations of Bellmore and Merrick were
16,218 and 22,097 respectively, with a combined population of 38,315 residents.4 The combined area of both hamlets is seven square miles, of which
approximately one-fifth is water, including canals and tributaries and parts
of Merrick and East Bay. At 5,423 people per square mile, the population
density is slightly higher than that of Nassau County as a whole, according
to the 2010 U.S. Census.
Both Bellmore and Merrick have an engaged and active citizenry and strong
community values. There are two elementary school districts — Merrick
Union Free School District and Bellmore School District. They share a school
system for middle and high school, known as the Bellmore/Merrick Central
High School District. The hamlets are collectively are referred to in this document as the NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Community (Community).
Though it is predominantly residential, the Community has a significant
number of commercial and retail establishments clustered around Sunrise
Highway, Merrick Road, Bellmore Avenue, and Merrick Avenue. Bellmore
has a traditional downtown cluster of retail businesses, known as Bellmore
Village. Similarly, Merrick has a traditional downtown area along Merrick
Avenue near the Merrick LIRR Station. The Community’s office uses are few
and generally scattered throughout the commercial corridors. Industrial uses
are also very limited and include some automotive businesses and marinas
along the waterfront.
Facing image: Cammanns Pond County Park (Source: Arup)

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The Meadowbrook State Parkway and Sunrise
Highway are two major thoroughfares serving the
Community. The Meadowbrook State Parkway traverses the western edge of Merrick to intersect with
Sunrise Highway and provides access to the south
shore barrier islands, which includes Jones Beach
State Park. Merrick Avenue, Bellmore Avenue, and
Newbridge Road are also heavily traveled local
routes. Bellmore and Merrick each have their own
station on the LIRR Babylon Branch, which runs from
Penn Station in Manhattan, through the borough of
Queens, to the Village of Babylon in Suffolk County.
Based on LIRR ridership statistics from 2006, a
combined 6,681 passengers traveled west from the
Bellmore and Merrick stations as part of their weekday morning commute.5

storm-related impacts that affect their Community
as a whole. The result of their efforts is this NYRCR
Bellmore/Merrick Plan (NYRCR Plan), which
assesses risk, determines needs and opportunities,
and presents a series of strategies and projects that,
when implemented, will respond to critical issues and
community aspirations, and contribute to building a
safer, and more resilient and sustainable, future for
these two hamlets.

The Community is directly adjacent to Merrick and
East Bays, embayments of the South Shore Estuary,
which is buffered from the Atlantic Ocean by the barrier islands. The South Shore Estuary stretches from
Nassau County’s western boundary to Southampton
in Suffolk County and is home to extensive coastal
habitats and a large number of wildlife. The
Community has a direct relationship with the Estuary
through peninsulas and inlets that allow access for
boats and maritime activity. Besides parkland, the
waterfront is almost entirely lined with single-family
homes, some of which are located along canals with
bulkheads and docks.

• Description of Storm Damage: Summarizes
the impacts of Superstorm Sandy and
Hurricane Irene on the lives of residents, their
homes, local businesses, community services,
and public and government facilities.

The Community has a significant amount of open
space and parkland. Parks and preserved areas
include Fraser Avenue Park, Meroke Preserve,
Norman J. Levy Park and Preserve, Newbridge Road
Park, Julian Lane Park, Cammann’s Pond Park, Illona
Lane Park, John Street Park, Merrick Road Park,
Randy Lane Park, and East Bay Park. Cedar Creek,
Cow Meadow, and Cammann’s Pond are operated
by Nassau County; all other parks fall under Town of
Hempstead jurisdiction.
With the introduction of the NYRCR Program, the
NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Planning Committee
(Committee), comprised of community representatives, came together to identify issues and develop
strategies geared at enhancing the long-term resiliency of the Community. More than 120 residents
and stakeholders from Bellmore and Merrick participated in Public Engagement Events to address
12

Community Overview

This section of the NYRCR Plan, Community
Overview, includes the following sub-sections
• Geographic Scope of the NYRCR Plan: Defines
the physical boundaries of the NYRCR Plan
and includes a description of NYRCR Bellmore/
Merrick to provide context for the planning effort.

• Critical Issues: Describes the key concerns
facing the community as they relate to major
storm events. These issues are further detailed
in Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs.
• Community Vision: Includes the Community’s
aspirations for a more resilient future.
• Relationship to Regional Plans: Describes
the regional perspectives considered in
the preparation of this plan to address
shared challenges and issues.
Thirteen Community representatives dedicated
their time, passion, and expertise as Committee
Co-Chairs and members to guide the development
of the NYRCR Plan from its inception. Residents
and business owners participated in three Public
Engagement Events and shared their opinions and
ideas through online platforms, business surveys,
and key informant interviews.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

A. Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan
The geographic scope of NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick
includes the unincorporated hamlets of Bellmore
and Merrick within the Town of Hempstead, located
in Nassau County on Long Island, New York. For
the purpose of this planning effort, the hamlets are
known as the Community. The scope was chosen
by the Committee with input by the public at the first
Public Engagement Event.
The NYRCR Plan area, as shown in Figure 01,
extends north from Merrick and East Bays to Camp
Avenue, which becomes Beltagh Avenue as it moves
east across Newbridge Road. The eastern boundary delineates Bellmore from the neighboring hamlet
of Wantagh, intersecting Sunrise Highway and the
LIRR Babylon Branch as it moves south back to
the bays. The area’s western edge runs east of the
Meadowbrook State Parkway until it intersects with
the Parkway near Merrick Golf Course, going north
along the Meadowbrook State Parkway and ending
at Smith Pond.

A historic home in Bellmore (source: Arup)

Within the greater New York metropolitan area,
the Community is approximately 24 miles east of
Manhattan, and 10 miles east of the Nassau-Queens
Line. The Community is located on the south shore
of Long Island between the Village of Freeport to the
west and the hamlet of Wantagh to the east, which
are also NYRCR Communities. To the north are the
hamlets of North Merrick and North Bellmore.
While the Committee discussed limiting the scope of
the project to the areas that are most vulnerable to
future storms and coastal flooding, it was ultimately
decided that the entirety of both hamlets should be
included, as both Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane
Irene either directly or indirectly affected all neighborhoods and business districts.

Waterfront homes in Merrick (source: Merrick
History - www.merrickhstory.com)

Community Overview

13

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

B. Description of Storm Damage
Hurricanes, tropical storms, and other weather
events can have wide and varying impacts on
coastal communities like Bellmore and Merrick. The
direct impacts experienced by the Community during Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy included
coastal flooding of homes and businesses; wind
damage to trees, utility poles, and other support
structures; localized flash flooding of streets; boats
and debris in homes, along streets, and in parks and
open spaces; backups and overflows of sanitary
and stormwater drainage systems; and damage to
bulkheads, soft shorelines, and coastal wetlands. It
is important, however, to acknowledge that these
weather systems continue to impact communities
long after the storm has passed. These secondary,
or indirect, impacts can be equally as damaging
as direct storm impacts and can further destabilize
recovering communities. Secondary impacts can
include:
• Fires from broken gas pipes and
exposed electrical wires;
• Contamination of natural environments, homes,
businesses and drinking water systems due
to fuel and hazardous material spills;
• Corrosion of electrical wires and
other utility infrastructure;
• Illnesses related to rotting and
molding building components;
• Diminished health from food, water,
and power shortages;

What causes coastal flooding?
Coastal flooding, or coastal inundation, is the
flooding of normally dry, low-lying coastal land,
primarily caused by severe weather events along
the coast, estuaries, and adjoining rivers. In
coastal communities like Seaford and Wantagh,
several factors can contribute to coastal flooding.
Storm Surge: Storm surge is an abnormal rise
in water level, over and above the regular astronomical tide, caused by forces generated from a
severe storm’s wind, waves, and low atmospheric
pressure.
Tidal Flooding: High tide levels are caused by
normal variations in the astronomical tide cycle
and occur twice a day in Seaford and Wantagh.
Approximately twice a month these daily high
tides are at their highest and have been known to
cause flooding in low lying areas in Seaford and
Wantagh.
Inundation Flooding: Intense periods of rainfall over inland areas may overflow into creeks
and combine with storm surge and high tides
to increase the flood severity along the coast.
Intense periods of rainfall can also cause flooding in inland areas where there is not sufficient
capacity for the water to infiltrate into the ground
or sufficient capacity for the water to be taken
away with drainage infrastructure.
Sea Level Rise: Global sea level has been rising since the end of the last ice age. This gradual
and permanent change in sea level increases the
odds of damaging floods from storm surges.

• Communication and transportation loss due to
extended power outages and fuel shortages; and,
• Job losses due to closed businesses.
This section reviews the direct and indirect damage
caused by Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy.

Hurricane Irene
Although Superstorm Sandy was the most destructive storm to make landfall in the Community in recent
history, Hurricane Irene caused significant damage
to the Community only 14 months prior. Starting on
Friday, August 26, 2011, Nassau County issued an
evacuation order for residents living in areas lying 10
feet and less above sea level.6 On August 28, 2011,
14

Community Overview

Downed trees after Hurricane Irene (source: Merrick Patch)

Figure 01: Geographic Scope

H
AG
LT

E
AV

MEA

BE

DOW

CA

MP

E
AV

VE
KA

IDGE RD

VE
DA

FOR

RE

MO

LL

BED

NEWBR

RIC

MER

Y
PKW
TATE
OK S

BE

BRO

AV
E

Bellmore LIRR

Merrick LIRR
AY
HW

HIG
ISE

R

SUN

BA

AD

BY

RI

CK

N

LO

R
ME

RO

KE

TP

EAST BAY

0

Legend

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Water

Long Island Rail Road

Main Roads

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

Local Roads

Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

Figure 02: Extent of Flooding

H
AG
LT

E
AV

MEA

BE

BR
DOW

CA

MP

AV
E

RE
MO

VE
DA

E
AV

FOR

IDGE RD
NEWBR

VE
KA

RIC

MER

BED

LL

BE

WY
E PK
STAT
OOK

Bellmore LIRR

Merrick LIRR
AY
HW

SUN

HIG
ISE

R

LO
BY
BA

AD

RI

CK

N

R
ME

RO

KE

TP

EAST BAY

0

Legend

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Water

Long Island Rail Road

Superstorm Sandy extent of storm surge

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

Hurricane Irene extent of storm surge

Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Hurricane Irene made landfall in the Community as a
Category 1 hurricane, quickly weakening to a tropical
storm. Heavy rain and storm surge caused extensive
flooding in Merrick and Bellmore, particularly south
of Merrick Road. It is estimated that the surge raised
the Atlantic Ocean by eight feet as it swept into Long
Island during high tide, sending saltwater spilling into
communities south of Merrick Road, which lie, on
average, 5 to 10 feet above sea level.7
Many local streets were impassable by car. High
winds felled trees, compromising power lines and
leading to widespread power outages. In Merrick,
more than 4,000 homes were without power.8 The
total cost for preparation, clean up, and damage
repair in Nassau County was approximately $12
million.9

Superstorm Sandy
On October 29, 2012, New York and the Tri-State
region were devastated by Superstorm Sandy, the
most destructive storm of the 2012 Atlantic Ocean
hurricane season. The Community, along with other
communities along the south shore of Long Island,
suffered massive storm damage, power outages, and
utility and transportation disruption, primarily as the
result of wind and storm surge, rather than the heavy
rain that was experienced during Hurricane Irene.
While initial recovery efforts were well-managed,
many residents were unprepared for the extent of the
storm’s impacts. Directly or indirectly, the lives and
well-being of many in the Tri-State region were, and
continue to be, affected by the storm’s aftermath.
Recovery and reconstruction in the Community
started immediately after the storm and continue to
this day at both the individual and community levels.
Emergency Response
An evacuation order issued by Nassau County went
into effect at 2:00 PM on October 28, 2012, a day
before Superstorm Sandy was expected to make
landfall. The order required the mandatory evacuation of all residents living in a flood or storm surge
zone, an area defined as south of Merrick Road from
Rockville Centre to the Nassau-Suffolk border.10 The
order instructed residents to utilize coastal evacuation routes, which include Peninsula Boulevard, Long

Beach Road, Meadowbrook State Parkway, and the
Seaford-Oyster Bay Expressway. It also instructed
those requiring public transportation to evacuate by
7:00 PM, when NICE Bus and the MTA would begin
shutting down public transportation. The Long Island
Rail Road (LIRR) also began suspending service on
October 28, 2012.11
According to community participants, the majority of
residents who followed the evacuation order chose
to stay with friends or family, in line with the Nassau
County Family and Friends Sheltering Plan. For those
who were not able to find an alternative place to stay,
public shelters were opened on October 28, 2012, at
1:00 PM by the American Red Cross, in partnership
with Nassau County at Nassau Community College,
Levittown Memorial High School, Locust Valley High
School, SUNY Old Westbury, and Manhasset High
School. At 3:00 PM, a Pet Shelter opened at Nassau
County Mitchel Athletic Complex in Uniondale. At
4:00 PM, a Special Needs Shelter opened at Nassau
Community College. At 7:00 PM, an Orthodox
Shelter opened at West Hempstead High School.
The evacuation order requested residents to evacuate prior to winds reaching 55 mph and reminded
all residents throughout Nassau County to tie down
and secure all items outside their homes. Some
residents chose not to evacuate prior to the storm,
which put their lives and those of first responders in
danger. Fortunately, no fatalities were reported in the
Community.
Superstorm Sandy made landfall at approximately
8:00 PM on October 29, 2012 and continued through
most of the following day, weakening as it moved
inland to Pennsylvania. Flooding from the storm
reached and surpassed the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s (FEMA) 100-year flood zones
in the Community. The 10-foot storm surge was
exceptional both because of the speed and motion
of the storm, as well as the storm’s arrival at high
tide.12 Large swaths of land were flooded and the
Community faced severe problems with power outages, heavy debris, and difficult travel conditions due
to damaged and flooded roads and compromised
power lines.

Community Overview

17

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Waterfront neighborhoods were most profoundly
affected by storm surges and stormwater, particularly
those on the bays or near canals. Superstorm Sandy
resulted in damage to more than 3,000 housing units
in the Community. Although the degree of damage
varied, many homes were inundated by several feet
of water. Due to the impacts of Superstorm Sandy,
over 90% of LIPA’s 1.1 million electricity customers
lost power, including Community customers. Power
was estimated to be restored within ten days, and
was ultimately restored within 16 days for all customers (except for those who could not safely accept
power).13
On October 30, 2012, the day after Superstorm
Sandy hit, a number of roads throughout Nassau
County were closed due to tidal flooding, debris, and
downed power lines, utility poles, and trees. The closure included Merrick Road at Loynes Avenue and
Old Mill Road. Local roads were also impacted, and
the lack of transportation access made it difficult for
emergency response services to effectively identify
areas of need and provide aid to community members affected by the storm.
“The storm ended with 145 calls in the first
48 hours—with not one loss of life in our
district and only one firefighter injury…It
should be noted that several members of
the Bellmore Fire Department experienced
severe flooding in their homes, for some,
this happened while they were responding
to help others. The key factor that allowed
them to respond was the early evacuation
of their families so they could concentrate
on the enormous task that confronted the
department.” - Volunteer Firefighter16
On November 2, 2012, food and drink distribution
centers and showers were opened for residents
affected by the storm and these continued to operate through the following weeks.14 On November 5,
2012, as temperatures dropped in advance of an
oncoming nor’easter, warming centers were opened
throughout the County.15 Resident feedback collected
at the Public Engagement Events indicated that the
Fire Department, Police Department, American Red
Cross, FEMA, the Town of Hempstead Department
of Public Works, and the Nassau County Office of

18

Community Overview

Emergency Management best served residents after
the Superstorm. This is remarkable considering that
two of Bellmore’s firehouses were inoperable during
the storm, one due to flooding and the other due to
lost generator power.
While there has been significant progress after
Superstorm Sandy, major gaps still exist in the restoration of many basic care services. Vulnerable
groups, including elderly adults, the developmentally
disabled population, immigrant families, adolescents,
and the homeless population, continue to face challenges accessing health and social services. The
Bellmore Jewish Center was closed for six months.
The Merrick Senior Center, which provides recreational services to more than 170 seniors, suffered
$500,000 worth of damage. It reopened April 8,
2013, five months after Superstorm Sandy struck
the area.
Homes
As the Community is predominantly residential
and many homes are on or near the waterfront,
Superstorm Sandy had the most profound impact on
housing. The Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene
inundation map in Figure 02 clearly illustrates the
neighborhoods that were most profoundly affected
by storm surges. Homes in southern Bellmore near
canals and the bay were inundated by an average of
three feet of water. While there were storm-related
impacts from strong winds, power outages, and
debris, relatively little damage was incurred from
flooding in inland areas, outside of the extreme and
high risk areas.
Superstorm Sandy resulted in heavy damage to
2,000 housing units in the Community, defined as
damage in excess of 50% or more of their value.
Another 1,260 units were damaged to between 20%
and 50% of their value, and 140 more had damage
less than 20% of their value.17 Damage was caused
mostly by flooding, which exceeded four feet in 350
units, ranged between one and four feet in over 1,100
units, and was less than a foot in hundreds of others.18 In addition, homes and other structures were
damaged by drifting vessels that broke free from their
docks during the storm.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

From claims registered under FEMA’s Individuals and
Households Program (IHP) by some 4,200 homeowners as of July 2013, FEMA assessed total damages to owner-occupied housing at $346.9 million
and approved assistance to nearly 2,350 property
owners. More than 400 renters filed claims and FEMA
assessed an undisclosed amount of rental housing
damage, providing assistance to little more than half
of those renters registered. 19

Some homes in the Community were heavily inundated by
the Superstorm Sandy storm surge (source: Hugh Mason)

Homeowner Assistance
Although damage to privately-owned homes was
extensive in some areas of the Community and was
a concern raised at NYRCR public engagement
events, direct assistance is not part of the NYRCR
Bellmore/Merrick Community Plan’s strategies and
projects. The NYRCR Plan focuses on communitywide resiliency initiatives that seek to mitigate the
effects of storm events on residents and neighborhoods. Other Federal and State programs are
assisting homeowners with reconstruction directly.
For example, the NY Rising Housing Recovery
Program, which like the NYRCR Program is a program of the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery,
provides housing assistance to help property owners recover, rebuild, or relocate after the devastation
of Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, or Tropical
Storm Lee.

As of July 2013, the total amount of approved funds
dispersed by FEMA was $19.3 million to homeowners and $1.2 million to renters.20 An additional
$41.4 million was distributed to homeowners by the
Federal Small Business Association (SBA) disaster
loan program, as of September 2013.21 Further funds
have been dispersed from the NYS Homeownership
Repair and Rebuilding Fund (HRRF), the Empire
State Relief Fund, the NY Rising Housing Recovery
Program, and the NY Rising Housing Acquisition program to supplement FEMA aid.
In Bellmore, the areas hit hardest by Superstorm
Sandy were predominantly residential; homes in
Southern Bellmore near canals and the bay were
inundated by several feet of water, according to local
residents at Public Engagement Events. Community
services in Bellmore were also seriously affected by
Superstorm Sandy. The Bellmore Jewish Center was
closed for 6 months, while the Bellmore Avenue fire
station was non-operational for 11 months. Students
and teachers had to be temporarily relocated from
Shore Road Elementary due to flooding. Businesses,
such as the Blue Water Marina, the South Bellmore
Veterinary Group, and the CVS Pharmacy on Merrick
Road, were also severely damaged by the storm.
Local Businesses
Many Community businesses were adversely
impacted by Superstorm Sandy, either by damage
from flooding, disruption or damage from power outages, and, in some cases, decreased business due
to the misperception that businesses were closed
when they were not. Most of the impacted businesses were located on Merrick Road, as nearby
tributaries acted as conduits for inflow of water from
East Bay. Damaged businesses on Merrick Road
include the South Bellmore Veterinary Group, a CVS
Pharmacy, and the Dakota Design Center building.
Community Overview

19

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Local businesses at the Dakota Design Center
remain closed due to damage from Superstorm
Sandy (source: Randy Shotland)

Additionally, Community marinas were significantly
damaged by the storm. Surge waters were strong
enough to twist piers and release boats stored on the
property into the surrounding residential neighborhoods. Recovery resources were allotted for marina
cleanup efforts but many of the facilities have not yet
been fully repaired. The inability to fully repair docks
and berths has led to further economic losses, as
marinas are unable to store vessels to their previous
capacities.
According to data from the U.S. Small Business
Administration (SBA), 105 Community businesses,
representing 314 employees, applied for disaster
management assistance after Superstorm Sandy.
These applications verified a total of $7.5 million
in real property damage, $1.2 million of machinery damage, an inventory loss of $409,722, and a
leaseholder improvement loss of $554,485. Of these
applications, only 37 (35.2%) were approved, for an
amount totaling just over $7.1 million, roughly three
quarters of the $9.6 million that was applied for in
verified damage assistance.22
Environmental Damage
Flooding during Superstorm Sandy caused the
release and dispersion of debris, oil, and other toxic
substances to various parts of the Community, with
the potential to cause health impacts. Superstorm
Sandy’s storm surge damaged parks and wetlands
throughout the south shore, and carried trash and
debris into local wetlands and waterways. Saltwater
20

Community Overview

marshlands off the Community’s waterfront remained
covered with debris for months after the storm.
Household chemicals, fuel from damaged boats, and
gas and oil tanks were carried away by flood waters
and deposited in wetland areas, coating the water
and wildlife in leaked fuel and other contaminants.
The Town of Hempstead’s Norman J. Levy Park and
Preserve was badly damaged by surge and flood
waters. Several sections of the park’s paths were
washed away and pilings at its fishing piers were lifted
out of place when the area was inundated. The park
remained closed for several months as repairs were
made. Newbridge Road Park was also briefly closed
as trash and debris were cleared from its ice rink and
sports fields. Seawater entered the park’s pool and
damaged pumps and valves, although repairs were
made in time for the 2013 summer season.
Infrastructure
Superstorm Sandy’s surge waters travelled as far
north as Sunrise Highway and left roadways flooded
throughout the southern portion of Community. Areas
of low elevation just south of Merrick Road were particularly affected, effectively turning the peninsulas
into temporary islands. Streets in low-lying areas
were completely inundated and receding floodwaters left roadways littered with heavy debris from
damaged buildings, trees, and trash. Heavy winds
knocked down trees, traffic signals, and utility lines.
While the New York State Police were able to reopen
Long Island’s major highways north of Merrick Road
within the day, several roads to the south needed to
be cleared of obstructions before they were opened.
Merrick Road, east of the Meadowbrook State
Parkway in Merrick, was one of the major roads
closed by Nassau County Police after Superstorm
Sandy.23
The LIRR suspended service the night before
Superstorm Sandy was expected to make landfall.
Substations feeding the train’s third rail had to be
powered off after being shut down to avoid damage.
Partial service was restored to the Babylon Branch on
Friday November 2, 2012, four days after the storm
hit. By Monday, November 5, 2012, trains were operating on a modified weekday schedule, and service
was nearly restored within the next week.24

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Barbara Road in Bellmore remained inundated after the
Superstorm Sandy storm surge (source: Eileen Casazza)

At the peak of Superstorm Sandy’s impact, more
than 90% of LIPA’s 1.1 million electricity customers
on Long Island lost power. The utility’s transmission
and distribution system sustained damage at over
40,000 locations, including 51 substations, 4,400
distribution poles, 2,500 transformers, and 400 miles
of power lines. Outages were expected to last no
longer than ten days. On November 7, 2012, however, Long Island was hit by a nor’easter and restoration efforts were set back several days. Service
was ultimately restored within 16 days for all customers, excluding those in flooded areas who could not
safely accept power.25
Power outages and storm surge waters affected
a number of other critical infrastructure systems.
Sewage pump stations that were flooded lost power
and failed, causing sewage to back up from the district system into private homes. Storm surge filled the
already over-capacity stormwater system, causing
localized flooding further inland. Some residents suffered natural gas outages, and damaged equipment
and lines created potentially dangerous situations.
Seawater entering residential fuel tanks displaced the
oil inside, forcing it out and into surrounding yards
and homes. Aboveground tanks were ripped off their
foundations and carried into nearby properties, and
in some areas flooding caused buried fuel tanks to
float up out of the ground.26

Fallen trees can knock out power lines and block
access for their repair (source: Paul Waterman)

Cellular communication networks were down for
days after the storm, as many cellphone towers
had insufficient backup power to maintain service.
Flooding also affected numerous cell towers and
internet switching centers. Facilities that did have
reserve power capacity were forced to go offline to
prevent damage. Above-ground communication lines
on shared utility poles were affected by heavy winds
and falling trees, and could only be accessed after
initial utility line repairs were made. Emergency notification systems were rendered ineffective for many
Community residents because of these outages.
Many gas stations throughout Long Island were
left without power for their pumps and the storm
prompted the shutdown of two east coast refineries. Although some gas stations did not lose power
and remained operational, many wholesale gasoline
suppliers did not, and were unable to pump fuel into
tanker trucks for distribution. Wholesalers that did
have power had difficulty keeping up with demand,
as service stations that were open had to be replenished more frequently.

Community Overview

21

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

C. Critical Issues
Recent storm events uncovered critical issues with
the Community’s natural and built environment. The
damages directly and indirectly impacted homes,
businesses, sanitary sewer, stormwater and energy
infrastructure, public facilities, and natural resources.
It is crucial that these issues be addressed in a way
that makes the Community more resilient, both on
a regular basis and in the wake of potential future
disasters. The strategies and projects that are
included in Sections II and III of the NYRCR Plan have
been designed to address the Community’s most
critical needs. The following are critical issues facing
the Community:
• Flooding and Drainage: Flooding and drainage issues caused by storm surges, heavy
rainfall, and tidal flooding were the most commonly cited issues raised at the first two Public
Engagement Events. Even though Superstorm
Sandy’s rainfall was only 0.84 inches as measured at Farmingdale, 8 miles northeast of the
Community, low elevation in southern parts of
the Community make storm surges a particular
threat, and can lead to extensive flooding, as was
the case during Superstorm Sandy.27 Hurricane
Irene’s heavy rainfall, measured as 5.14 inches
in Wantagh, inundated the Community’s antiquated drainage system and led to widespread
flooding south of Merrick Road.28 Had the winds
and surge of Sandy come ashore with the rains
of Irene, damage undoubtedly would have been
much worse in the Community.

estate market collapse in 2007, which led to
the Great Recession. In the future, the costs of
home ownership will continue to increase due to
increased repairs and maintenance needs, and
higher flood insurance premiums.
• Information, Education, and Communication:
Many home and business owners were not
properly prepared or equipped to handle an
event like Superstorm Sandy. Despite educational programs already in place, the Committee
commonly cited the need for better information,
education, and communication. Communication
was greatly hampered by the extended power
loss, which made cellular towers inoperable and
prevented access to the Internet.

• Energy Infrastructure: While flooding caused
the most obvious, extensive damage in the
Community, loss of power and natural gas was
a significant issue for local residents and businesses, and one that threatened life, health, and
safety. Much of the electric power loss was due
to fallen trees, which affected above-ground
power lines. The lack of power to streetlights left
residents with dark, flooded roadways.
• Housing in High Risk Areas: More than 4,300
homes in the Community are located within flood
risk areas, posing a significant risk to life and
property. Superstorm Sandy further decreased
and destabilized Community home values from
damage caused by Hurricane Irene and the real
22

Community Overview

Some Community residents in risk areas have
chosen to raise their homes to protect their property
from future flood damage (source: Urbanomics)

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

• Resilient Planning and Design: Existing
buildings, infrastructure networks, and marinas – many of which were planned, designed,
and built more than 50 years ago – are not well
suited to deal with changing climate and weather
patterns. They also do not reflect current best
practice with regards to land use planning, urban
design, green building, or sustainable infrastructure. Many support centers designated to provide shelter and assistance to storm victims were
ill-equipped, lacking reserve power or other necessary services to support displaced residents.
• Shoreline Protection: As with many nearby
communities on the south shore, the Community
has seen a steady decline in natural wetlands
as decades of development have replaced the
ecological systems along the Bays. Channeling
and bulkhead construction have created a hard
shoreline that resists regular tidal movement, but
does little to soften the blow of major storms.
This hardening has also prevented natural water
filtration. Moreover, inconsistent bulkhead height
and irregular maintenance have allowed water to
seep in at sporadic intervals, which cannot be
removed without pumping and other efforts. A
softer shoreline would allow for natural protections from storm surge, while consistent bulkhead heights would more effectively protect
areas now affected by regular tidal flooding.
• Shared Regional Issues: South shore coastal
communities on Long Island feel similar impacts
during storm events, particularly due to similarities in topography, such as low coastal elevations and the presence of canals and tributaries
that serve as pathways for flooding from storm
surges. Due to Long Island’s development patterns and government structure, many communities’ infrastructure networks and service districts are closely interconnected and/or overlap.
Most communities do not have the autonomy
to address local issues and, in many cases, a
shared or regional approach could be more
effective.

Community Overview

23

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

D. Community Vision
Bellmore and Merrick are quiet, residential communities that value their quality of life, connection to nature,
and high-quality schools. These two hamlets have come together during the planning process for the NYRCR
Plan to envision a more resilient future, which is captured in the Vision Statement and Goals below. These
statements have been used to guide the development of the NYRCR Plan’s strategies and projects and should
serve as an ongoing reminder of what the community aims to achieve.

Community Vision
Vision for a Resilient Future
The NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Plan proactively implements measures to make our south shore community more
resilient, now and in the future. While being mindful of our natural waterways, we will update infrastructure and
invest in new projects so that the whole community will benefit, protecting our beloved communities and way of
life. The NYRCR Plan strives to:
• Develop innovative and natural solutions to coastal storm surges and erosion management;
• Ensure proper health and social services are accessible to all residents, on a daily basis and in emergency
situations;
• Support local business resilience by encouraging business continuity;
• Refurbish fresh water resources and improve stormwater management;
• Enhance and maintain accessibility and maneuverability in all coastal evacuation routes; and
• Enhance public open space so it serves multiple purposes, such as recreation, resilience, and refuge.

24

Community Overview

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

E. Relationship to Regional Plans
Regional plans and studies previously conducted
raise many of the issues and challenges expressed
by Committee Members and the public in the
Community. The LI 2035 Visioning Initiative (2009)29
discusses the risks faced in coastal areas from hurricanes and major storms, while also documenting
infrastructure needs in the Community. The South
Shore Estuary Reserve Comprehensive Management
Plan (2001)30 deeply examines the needs of wetlands
and bay ecosystems. These plans and others formed
a foundation of needs and opportunities that were
then used to frame strategies, projects, and programs to respond to those needs.
What was learned from reviewing these plans is that
the communities along the south shore in proximity to NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Community share
common issues and concerns related to reconstruction, recovery, and resiliency. They inhabit one
natural ecosystem along the Great South Bay and
also share similar physical attributes. Further, these
communities share similar patterns of development,
interconnected infrastructure systems, common
road networks, overlapping municipal service provision areas, and a common coastline. This dynamic
demands a regional perspective on the challenges
facing the Community so local solutions take into
account and leverage regional considerations, as
well as to ground regional strategies in local context.
The NYRCR Plan is therefore informed by numerous
existing planning documents and efforts, several of
which offer relevant strategies, projects, and actions.
A list of the regional and sub-regional plans reviewed
can be found in Table 02. Although the geographic
scope covered by some of these documents is
beyond the boundaries of the Community, many of
the strategies identified can be applied at a local level.
In addition to the document review, there were two
Joint Committee Meetings held with the neighboring
communities of NYRCR Baldwin, NYRCR Seaford/
Wantagh, NYRCR Massapequas, and NYRCR
Freeport to promote understanding of regional issues
and develop shared projects. In March 2014, meetings were also held with Town of Hempstead.

The NYRCR Planning Committee and Consultant
Team have identified a set of key themes that outline
common issues and opportunities within the region.
Some of these issues apply to the Community in the
context of this planning effort, while others do not.
• Infrastructure Investment: Long Island’s aging
infrastructure is struggling to accommodate previous population growth while adapting to the
increasing threat of storm events and sea level
rise. Roads, bulkheads, and power and gas
lines have been particularly affected by flooding
and storm damage. For example, the Places to
Grow (2010)31 report notes that the transportation network no longer best serves Long Island’s
present-day commuting patterns and should
be re-evaluated to better accommodate both
regional and local mobility. Infrastructure investment has consistently been identified as critical
to the region’s growth and economic viability.
• Water Resources: Flood management, water
conservation, and environmental protection
have been recurring themes in many of the
documents studied including the South Shore
Estuary Reserve Comprehensive Management
Plan (2010),32 the NYS Coastal Management
Plan (2006),33 and the 2010 Draft Nassau County
Master Plan (2010).34
• Energy Rates: Electricity rates for Long Island
residents are among the highest in the nation
and much of its energy supply depends on
off-island resources. Many of the documents
reviewed, including the 2010 Draft Nassau
County Master Plan (2010)35 and the Cleaner
Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan
(2013),36 favored investment in energy efficiency
and conservation, renewable energy sources,
and distributed energy generation strategies to
increase energy independence and reduce ratepayer costs.
• Housing: Nassau County is dominated by single
family housing, with a majority of units more than
50 years old. Escalating home prices and property tax levels limit the stock of housing available
for the County’s young and aging population,
low-income residents, and those displaced by

Community Overview

25

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

previous storms. Several plans, including the
2010 Draft Nassau County Master Plan (2010),37
the Nassau County Consolidated Plan (2010),38
the Sustainable Strategies for LI 2035 (2010)39
the New Vision for the Long Island Economy
(2011),40 the Long Island 2035 Visioning Initiative
(2009)41, the Cleaner Greener Long Island
Regional Sustainability Plan (2013),42 the Strong
Island (2013) report,43 and the Nassau County
Infill Redevelopment Study (2013),44 have recommended an increase in smaller, affordable housing and rental developments.
• Governance: Long Island’s mesh of municipal
and administrative jurisdictions can reduce public sector efficiency and limit coordination, while
creating an inconsistent regulatory landscape
for its residents and businesses. Many of the
plans reviewed, including the 2010 Draft Nassau
County Master Plan (2010),45 incorporate recommendations for consolidating overlapping or
duplicated services, streamlining permitting processes, and establishing more comprehensive
land use regulations.
• Emergency Preparedness and Response:
To date, most emergency preparedness programs have been developed and implemented
at the regional level, either Town-wide or Countywide. For example, the Nassau County Office
of Emergency Management (OEM) is responsible for the County Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard
Mitigation Plan (2007).46 The Nassau County
OEM has also developed a Disaster Debris
Management Plan (2009)47 to facilitate and coordinate the management of debris following an
emergency or disaster, specifically a hurricane or
nor’easter event, establishing County-wide mitigation goals and providing strategies for implementation of a set of actions selected by each of
the participating jurisdictions. The experiences of
Community residents during Superstorm Sandy
have heightened their desire for greater access
to information and resources before, during, and
after a similar emergency.

26

Community Overview

• Equitable and Supportive Communities:
Providing equitable social, educational, housing, and workforce opportunities for all of Long
Island’s residents is essential to the long-term
sustainability of the Island. Long Island’s population is increasingly diverse: 24% of Long
Islanders are Black, Latino, or Asian. At the same
time, Long Island remains highly demographically concentrated, with the populations of many
communities over 90% White. According to the
LI 2035 Visioning Initiative (2009), 54% of the
population will be non-white by 2035.48 In addition, the population is also aging. It is therefore
important that Long Island welcome newcomers
and provide opportunity and a high quality of life
to all racial, ethnic and age groups, including
meeting the health needs of an aging, diverse
population.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 02: Existing regional plans, local plans, and other reports
Document Name

Date Published

Author

A New Vision for Long Island’s Economy
– The Strategic Economic Development
Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties

November 2011

Long Island Regional Economic Development Council

Blue Water Trail Master Plan

October 2013

Nassau County

Cedar Creek WPCP Facilities Masterplan

2009

Nassau County Department of Public Works

Cleaner Greener LI Regional Sustainability
Plan

April 2013

Regional Plan Association

Coastal Risk Assessment Areas

2013

New York State Department of State, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration Coastal Services Center,
Federal Emergency Management Agency

Community Profiles

2012

United States Census Bureau

Draft Nassau County Master Plan

October 2010

Nassau County

LI Comprehensive Economic
Development Strategy

August 2012

Long Island Regional Planning Council, Long Island
Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy
Committee

LI 2035 Visioning Initiative

December 2009

Long Island 2035 Study Team

Nassau County Consolidated Plan

2010

Nassau County

Nassau County Infill Redevelopment
Feasibility Report

September 2013

Regional Plan Association

Nassau County Stormwater Management
Program Plan

2009

Nassau County Department of Public Works

Nassau County Multi-jurisdictional Hazard
Mitigation Plan

February 2007

Nassau County Office of Emergency Management

Nassau County Debris Management Plan

January 2009

Nassau County

North Atlantic Coast Comprehensive
Study (NAACS) Draft

Document in
Process

United States Army Corps of Engineers

NYS Coastal Management Program

1982

New York State Department of State

Places to Grow – An Analysis of the
Potential for Transit-Accessible Housing
and Jobs in Long Island’s Downtowns
and Station Areas

January 2010

Regional Plan Association

Progress and Promise – Building a
Foundation for Long Island’s Future
(Update)

September 2012

Long Island Regional Economic Development Council

Community Overview

27

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 02 (cont’d) : Existing regional plans, local plans, and other reports
Document Name

Date Published

Author

Long Island’s Rental Housing Crisis

September 2013

Regional Plan Association

Significant Coastal Fish and Wildlife
Habitat Assessments Narrative

New York State Department of State

South Shore Estuary Reserve
Comprehensive Management Plan

2001

South Shore Estuary Reserve Council with assistance
provided by New York State Department of State

South Shore Estuary Reserve Workplan
Implementation- Estuary Public Use and
Tourism Study

September 2010

Cashin Associates for Town of Oyster Bay, New York State
Department of State

Strong Island – Recovery & Resurgence –
Strategic Economic Development Plan for
Nassau and Suffolk Counties (Update)

September 2013

Long Island Regional Economic Development Council

Sustainable Strategies for Long Island
2035

December 2010

Long Island Regional Planning Council

28

Community Overview

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

This page intentionally left blank

Community Overview

29

Section II : Assessment
of Risk and Needs
The assessment of risk and needs describes the assets that have been, or
could be, affected by hazards associated with coastal flooding. As part of
developing the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Bellmore/
Merrick Plan, an asset inventory and risk assessment process evaluated the
vulnerability of Community assets to future storm damage, specifically storm
surges and flooding, in NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick (Community). The assessment provides a quantitative risk analysis of community assets and systems
to supplement the qualitative information collected at Planning Committee
Meetings and Public Engagement Events.
An assessment of needs and opportunities provided a basis for the strategies and proposed projects for the Community – this includes lost economic
opportunities attributed to damages, opportunities for rebuilding or expanding the local economy, and opportunities for making new and existing assets
more resilient.

Facing image: Private docks and bulkheads in the Community (Source: Arup)

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

A. Description of Community Assets
and Assessment of Risk
Community assets are places or resources where
economic, environmental, and social functions of
communities take place. Assets may be part of the
built or the natural environment. Community assets
were initially identified through data collected from
New York State and Nassau County Geographic
Information System (GIS) databases. Using GIS
software, County and State data was filtered to
include only assets within the geographic scope of
the Community. Information contained within different datasets was used to separate individual assets
into asset class categories: Economic, Health and
Social Services, Housing, Infrastructure Systems,
and Natural and Cultural Resources, which could
ultimately be distilled into key assets to be included
in the asset inventory.
Asset Class Categories
Economic: Assets in this category include
office buildings, businesses and industrial parks,
manufacturing, warehouses, storage facilities,
grocery, restaurants, banks, lodging, storefronts,
downtown centers, and seasonal or tourism
destinations.
Health and Social Services: These assets
include schools, health care, day care, elder care,
emergency operations, government and administrative services, media and communications,
police, and fire and rescue.
Housing: Assets include single-family and multifamily dwellings, supportive housing or group
homes, senior housing, and affordable housing.
Infrastructure Systems: Includes pedestrian,
bicycle, and vehicular ways, transit, bridges, airports, rail, ferries, gas stations, water distribution
and supply, stormwater and wastewater systems,
and solid waste and recycling services.
Natural and Cultural Resources: Includes natural habitats, wetlands and marshes, recreation
facilities, parks, public open spaces, religious
establishments, libraries, museums, historic landmarks, and performing arts venues.

32

Assessment of Risks and Needs

Asset information was combined with New York
State Department of State (NYS DOS) hazard maps
to identify individual assets in each risk zone. Hazard
maps illustrate a full range of coastal risks and consider both the frequency and impact of flooding.
These maps, prepared for the NYRCR Program by
NYS DOS with assistance from the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration Coastal Services
Center (NOAA-CSC) and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), identify three levels
of risk based on aggregated information for multiple
hazards. These risk areas are described as subject
to extreme, high, and moderate risk from inundation
and erosion from future storm events and sea level
rise. Risk areas within the Community are identified
in Figure 03.
• Extreme Risk Areas: Areas currently at risk
of frequent inundation, vulnerable to erosion in
the next 40 years, or likely to be inundated in
the future due to sea level rise. This includes
FEMA designated Zone V Coastal High Hazard
Areas (CHHA), areas subject to Shallow Coastal
Flooding per the National Weather Service’s
(NWS) advisory threshold, areas prone to erosion or natural features susceptible to erosion,
and areas subject to future sea level rise.
• High Risk Areas: Areas outside the Extreme
Risk Area that are currently at infrequent risk of
inundation or at future risk from sea level rise.
High Risk areas include geography within FEMA
Zone V and Zone A Special Flood Hazard Areas
(SFHA), also known as 1% annual risk (100-year)
flood zones, and areas subject to future sea level
rise.
• Moderate Risk Areas: Areas that are outside
the Extreme and High Risk Areas but are currently at moderate risk of inundation from infrequent events or at risk in the future from sea level
rise. This includes areas within 0.2% annual risk
(500-year) flood zones and areas within NOAA’s
SLOSH (Sea, Lake and Overland Surges from
Hurricanes) category 3 hurricane inundation
zones.

Figure 03: New York Department of State Risk Areas

H
AG
LT

E
AV

MEA

BE

DOW

CA

MP

E
AV

VE
KA

IDGE RD

VE
DA

FOR

RE

MO

LL

BED

NEWBR

RIC

MER

Y
PKW
TATE
OK S

BE

BRO

AV
E

Bellmore LIRR

Merrick LIRR
AY
HW

HIG
ISE

R

SUN

BA

AD

BY

RI

CK

N

LO

R
ME

RO

KE

TP

EAST BAY

0

Legend

New York Department of State
Risk Areas

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Extreme

Long Island Rail Road

High

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

Moderate

Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

Figure 04: Economic Land Uses

H
AG
LT

E
AV

MEA

BE

BR
DOW

CA

MP

AV
E

RE
MO

VE
DA

E
AV

FOR

VE
KA

RIC

MER

IDGE RD
NEWBR

BED

LL

BE

WY
E PK
STAT
OOK

Bellmore LIRR
AY
HW

HIG
ISE

R

SUN

Merrick LIRR

LO
BY
BA

AD

N

I

KE

TP

RR

ME

CK

RO

EAST BAY

0

Legend

Land Uses

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Mixed-use

Industrial

Long Island Rail Road

Office

Other Land Use

LIRR Station

Retail

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS
Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

i. Description of community assets
The following presents a summary of community
assets, organized by asset class, that have been
affected by previous storms or are at risk from future
impacts. Assets were identified through a combination of research and data analysis, meetings with
local officials and Community representatives, and
Community member feedback, and then tagged
according to their classification. Asset information
was periodically reviewed at Planning Committee
Meetings, and residents were asked to annotate or
amend asset maps presented during the first two
Public Engagement Events. Table 03 and Table 04
at the end of this section identify the total number of
assets located in extreme, high, and moderate risk
zones in each asset class.
Economic
Economic assets include commercial and industrial
property, together with office, mixed use and retail.
The majority of commercial property value in the
Community (77.0%) is located in moderate risk zones,
with only 3.7% in extreme risk zones, 12.6% in high
risk zones, and 6.8% located outside of hazard areas.
Industrial land uses, which are mostly marinas (e.g.,
Whaleneck Marina Center and Open Bay Marina) are
most at risk, constituting 46% of the total assessed
property value in extreme (27.3%) and high (18.7%)
risk zones. Retail uses are also somewhat vulnerable,

with 2.9% in extreme risk zones and 15.1% in high
risk zones (e.g., Trader Joe’s, Waldbaum’s). Less
than 20% of property values associated with office
and mixed-use properties are within extreme or high
risk zones.
As shown in Figure 04, the Community’s primary
commercial areas include the commercial corridors
along Merrick Road and Sunrise Highway and concentrations of commercial uses surrounding the
Bellmore and Merrick Long Island Rail Road (LIRR)
stations. The Merrick Road business district was
largely without power in the aftermath of Superstorm
Sandy.
Health and Social Services
Health and social service assets encompass both
emergency and life safety assets, such as police
and fire stations, together with administrative assets,
such as schools, government facilities, libraries, and
community centers.
Two of the Community’s fire stations are located in
the high and extreme flood risk areas. Together with
the Merrick Senior Center, these assets were significantly impaired during Superstorm Sandy, with the
Senior Center suffering $500,000 of damage. The
majority of other Health and Social Service assets are
located farther north and facilities like the Bellmore
and Merrick Libraries have been relied on extensively
in emergency events to provide community support.
The Community has a number of schools located
south of Merrick Road, which are generally in
extreme and high risk zones. These include Norman
J. Levy Lakeside School (whose ball field was completely inundated during Superstorm Sandy), Shore
Road Elementary, Charles A. Reinhard School, and
the John F. Kennedy High School. These, however,
are all at slightly higher elevations than the surrounding areas and thus have reduced risk of flooding,
although access to these assets is often still restricted
by inundation of the surrounding roads.
Housing

Sandy caused extensive interior damage to this CVS
Pharmacy on Merrick Road (source: Neil Yeoman)

The Community’s land use is predominantly residential and consists of 12,955 units.49 The housing stock
is dominated by detached single-family homes,
much more so than other communities in Nassau
Assessment of Risks and Needs 35

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

County as a whole, with 95% of all housing units
being detached and attached single-family homes.
Over half of these homes were built between the
1950s and 1960s on land created by infilling the fingers of marshland that reached into the East Bay and
creating canals within the residential areas. Due to
the infilling of marshland, many of the Community’s
southern homes have been historically susceptible to
storm surge and tidal inundation.
Over the five-year period for which data are available,
from 2007 to 2011, only 330 units were vacant in the
Community, which is extremely low at 2.5% of total
units. The Community has no public housing or shelters, with approximately 8% of all housing stock being
available for renters. As shown in Figure 05, renters
are concentrated around the Merrick and Bellmore
LIRR stations, as well as in parts of Bellmore south
of Merrick Road that are at an extreme risk for flooding, such as Bellmore Avenue, Shore Road, Legion
Street, and Lee Place.
Infrastructure systems

The Community’s housing stock is dominated by
detached single-family homes (source: Arup)

Almost all of the Community’s critical infrastructure
assets lie outside of the extreme and high risk flood
zones. The only key infrastructure assets which
lie within these zones are two sewage pump stations operated by Nassau County, and a Town
of Hempstead Department of Sanitation facility,
which is designated by the Town as an Emergency
Operations Center. The LIRR skirts the northern edge
of the moderate risk zone, although it runs through
two high risk zones where it intersects Meadowbrook
Parkway and north of Nassau County’s Meroke
Preserve.
The Meadowbrook State Parkway (a Countydesignated evacuation route) borders the Community
and runs through an extreme flood risk corridor.
During both Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene
the combined effects of coastal flooding and stormwater runoff temporarily obstructed access to the
Parkway at the Merrick Road exit ramps. In the same
area, the Town of Hempstead sanitation facility was
also inundated and consequently unable to function
in both Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene.

36

Assessment of Risks and Needs

Figure 05: Rental Housing

H
AG
LT

E
AV

MEA

BE

DOW

CA

MP

E
AV

VE
KA

RIC

MER

IDGE RD

VE
DA

FOR

RE

MO

LL

BED

NEWBR

Y
PKW
TATE
OK S

BE

BRO

AV
E

Bellmore LIRR
AY
HW

HIG
ISE

R

SUN

Merrick LIRR

BY

BA

AD

CK

N

LO

RI

KE

TP

R
ME

RO

EAST BAY

0

Legend

US Census Blocks, 2010

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

< 6 Renter Housholds

50 - 149 Renter Housholds

Long Island Rail Road

6 - 19 Renter Housholds

150 - 218 Renter Housholds

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

20 - 49 Renter Housholds

No Data

Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

This page intentionally left blank

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Natural and Cultural Resources
In addition to providing significant coastal protection
and natural ecosystems, which support wildlife habitats and water filtration, NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick’s
bay and tidal marshlands are important recreational
assets. Over the last 80 years, significant areas of
coastal wetland have been lost to residential development. This infill of marshland to provide housing for
an increasing population has resulted in the degradation and loss of wetland areas and natural habitats.
Subsequently, this has reduced the Community’s
natural protection against storm events, which has
been further exacerbated by the dredging of canals
for boat access to waterfront homes.
The Community also has a number of parks, several of which are located south of Merrick Road
in the extreme and high risk flood zones. Town of
Hempstead’s East Bay Park is on slightly higher
ground, but Cammann’s Pond County Park and
Newbridge Road Park both abut creeks that render
them prone to flooding. The Norman J. Levy Park
and Preserve and the adjacent Merrick Road Park
(which includes Merrick Golf Club) fronts onto the
East Bay, but also runs adjacent to the Meadowbrook
Parkway corridor, which is an extreme flood zone.
Like Cammann’s Pond Park, it experienced severe
flooding, in parts, during Superstorm Sandy. Nassau
County’s Meroke Preserve sits north of Merrick Road,
but is at extreme risk of flooding due to the combined
effects of coastal inundation and stormwater runoff.
The Preserve was flooded in both Hurricane Irene
and Superstorm Sandy.

Asset inventory

Many homes in the Community abut canals or creeks,
such as Simmond Creek in Merrick. (source: Arup)

Waterfront homes in Merrick (source: Charles Brown)

With more than six thousand at-risk assets in the
Community, the inventory used for risk assessment was refined to consider only key assets,
which were identified using the critical asset criteria
established by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), or were highlighted through NYRCR
Planning Committee (Committee) feedback and
Public Engagement Events.
Assets identified by the Committee included economic assets, such as marinas, and retailers that
provide food and/or medication, like Trader Joe’s and
CVS, together with the Bellmore and Merrick libraries,
Assessment of Risks and Needs 39

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 03: Community assets located in risk areas
Asset Class

Asset Sub-Class

Moderate

High

Extreme

Health and Social

Assisted Living Facilities

1

0

0

Community Center

6

0

0

Day Care Facilities

14

1

0

Emergency Services

15

2

0

Government

7

0

2

Hospital

1

0

0

Library

3

0

0

Other Medical

8

0

0

Pharmacy

5

1

0

School

25

3

0

Veterinary

4

2

0

Cultural

3

0

0

House of Worship

20

5

0

Parks

3

4

8

Recreation

13

2

0

Wetlands (acres)

28

50

20

Rail Bridges

6

0

0

Rail Stations

2

0

0

Roads (miles)

76

29

9

Road Bridges

2

0

1

Sewer Pump/Treatment

1

0

1

Water Treatment Plants

1

0

0

Water Wells

2

0

0

Natural and Cultural

Infrastructure Systems

40

Assessment of Risks and Needs

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 03 (cont’d) : Community assets located in risk areas
Asset Class

Asset Sub-Class

Moderate

High

Extreme

Housing

Low Density Residential

6,222

2,643

1,620

Medium Density
Residential

300

75

42

High Density Residential

30

0

20

Assisted Living Facilities

1

0

0

Commercial Parcels

111

8

30

Industrial Parcels

14

2

3

Mixed Use Parcels

91

29

6

Retail Parcels

131

23

1

Bank/ATM

25

5

0

Industrial Facility

5

1

1

Lodging

1

0

0

Marina/Boat/Pier

1

2

6

Office

9

0

1

Post Office

3

0

0

Restaurant/Food/Caterer

60

12

3

Retail

101

16

3

Economic

Table 04: Summary of community assets located in risk areas
Asset Class

Moderate

High

Extreme

Total

Health and Social

89

9

2

100

Natural and Cultural (wetland acres)

39 (28)

11 (50)

8 (20)

58 (98)

Infrastructure (road miles)

14 (76)

0 (29)

2 (9)

16 (114)

Housing

6,553

2,718

1,682

10,953

Economic

552

98

54

704

Assessment of Risks and Needs 41

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

senior centers, and parklands. Critical assets defined
by FEMA guidelines include buildings, infrastructure,
and facilities deemed essential to the health and welfare of the community’s population (e.g., police and
fire stations), the protection of which is important
during and following hazardous events.50 The 41 key
asset locations identified through this methodology
are shown in Figure 06.
For each key asset, a community value was assigned
based on Committee Member input and feedback
from Public Engagement Events. A designation of
high, medium, or low community value was ascribed
to each asset or groups of assets, based on a number of qualitative measures. These could be applied
individually or collectively, and it is important to note
that similar assets in different communities may vary
as a result. Qualitative measures for establishing
community value include economic benefits (e.g., a
key business or employer), services provided (e.g.,
a grocery store, medical office, pharmacy, or gas
station), or a function provided during emergencies
(e.g., a library or parkland used for food distribution).
Generally, community value is identified as:
• High: Assets that provide multiple important services or functions and which could not be easily and quickly replicated in whole or in part, or
assets whose loss would impact both long and
short term community function.
• Medium: Assets whose function could be duplicated or replaced by similar assets in in adjacent areas, or whose loss could be temporarily
tolerated.

ii. Assessment of risk to
assets and systems
Risk is the potential for an asset or system to be damaged or destroyed in some future event. The asset
inventory provided a baseline to identify the most
critical assets in the Community to be advanced
through the risk assessment tool for further analysis.
The Risk Assessment process utilized a quantitative
risk tool provided by the State to assess the risk (primarily flood risk) to each of the key assets identified
for the Community.51 The three factors that contribute to the measure of overall risk for each asset are:
• Hazards: Hazard is a measure of the likelihood
and magnitude of future storm events. The hazard score is based on a standard storm scenario:
the chance that a 1% annual risk storm (100 year
flood event) would occur within a 100 year planning horizon.
• Exposure: Local topographic and shoreline
conditions can increase or decrease the effect
of hazards on assets. The exposure score is a
combination of the risk area in which the asset
is located (from NYRCR risk area maps) and the
landscape attributes.
• Vulnerability: Vulnerability reflects the level of
impairment or consequences that assets may
experience during and after a storm event. The
vulnerability score is selected from a chart in the
NYRCR Program Guidance, based on an estimate of the length of time an asset would be
disabled by a flood event.

• Low: Assets which play an important role in the
community, but whose loss could be tolerated in
the short to medium term.

The Risk Assessment Tool calculates a risk score
based on the following formula:

Additionally, each key asset was also screened
based on its importance to the Community’s socially
vulnerable populations.

The risk score represents the relative risk of community assets to one another. The scores can range
from 1.5 to 75. Assets with risk scores greater than
53 are considered at severe risk, assets with scores
24 to 53 are considered at high risk, assets with
scores 6 to 23 are considered at moderate risk, and
assets with scores lower than 6 are considered to
have residual risk.

The complete key asset inventory is located in
Section V: Community Asset Inventory.

42

Assessment of Risks and Needs

Risk = Hazard × Exposure × Vulnerability

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Asset risk scores and groupings were used to
develop projects for the NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick
Plan (NYRCR Plan). It should be noted that Risk
Scores include some subjective analysis and rely
on previous experience to determine future risk. The
location of at-risk assets and their respective risk
scores can be seen in Figure 07. The scoring of these
assets helped to inform, focus, and provide context
for the development of needs and opportunities and
the types of resiliency strategies and management
measures considered by the Committee. Risk scores
for each asset are included in Section V: Community
Asset Inventory.

Findings
There is a moderate to extreme risk of flooding
throughout almost the entire Community; only the
residential neighborhoods on the northern edge of
both hamlets, close to Camp and Beltagh Avenues,
lie outside of a risk area. There are more than 4,500
assets in the Community’s high and extreme risk
areas, most of which are parcels with single-family
homes, but also include a significant number of commercial parcels, primarily concentrated on Merrick
Road.
As shown in Figure 07, extreme and high risk areas
are concentrated in an east-west band just south of
Merrick Road, roughly representing the former coastline prior to the expansion of the peninsulas with
infill during the post-World War II residential housing boom. These low-lying areas, with elevations
as low as two feet, are largely residential, but also
include publically-owned land devoted to the Town
of Hempstead Department of Sanitation facility, Four
Towns Fireman’s Training Center, Nassau County
Traffic Control Division garage, Merrick Road Park,
Cammanns Pond County Park, and Fire Department
Station #2. Due to their low elevation, these key
assets are at risk from both storm surges and heavy
rainfall.
When flooded, this band of extreme and high risk
areas creates a barrier dividing the southern and
northern parts of the Community. Flooding can reach
levels rendering many roads impassable, as was the
case during and after Superstorm Sandy, but which
also happens during more minor storms where

evacuation is not mandated by Nassau County’s
Office of Emergency Management. The peninsulas
to the south of the flooded roads effectively become
islands, creating a safety risk for local residents who
are unable to access medical services. This “island
effect” was an issue often mentioned by local residents at Public Engagement Events. Important
access roads to the neighborhoods south of Merrick
Road, including Bellmore Avenue, Shore Road,
Hewlett Avenue, Frankel Boulevard, Whaleneck
Drive, and Lindenmere Drive, all have segments that
are at an extreme risk for flooding.
Other areas of extreme and high risk include residential neighborhoods in the southern sections
of the peninsulas in eastern Merrick and Bellmore,
three marinas along the shoreline in Merrick and
Bellmore, the Meadowbrook Corridor adjacent to the
Meadowbrook State Parkway in west Merrick, and
the Meroke Pond and Preserve, which flank either
side of Sunrise Highway along the border of Merrick
and Bellmore. All of the Community’s areas of extreme
and high risk are south of Sunrise Highway, except
for Meroke Pond and sections of the Meadowbrook
Corridor, a system of retention ponds and tributaries that run north-south along the western border of
Merrick.
Of particular concern is the water system that connects Meroke Pond with the East Bay, which is a
frequent source of flooding in the Community. The
10-acre Meroke Pond, which is fed by Cedar Swamp
Creek, connects with Meroke Preserve through a
concrete channel under the LIRR tracks and Sunrise
Highway.52 Water flow continues via Whaleneck Creek
to the East Bay. This system, which collects water
from the larger Bellmore Creek-East Bay watershed,
floods during heavy rains and can also serve as a
channel for water from storm surges to travel north
into the community. CVS Pharmacy, which is directly
adjacent to the Meroke Preserve on Merrick Road,
was severely damaged during Superstorm Sandy
due to flooding. The Bellmore residential neighborhood directly south of Merrick Road and the Meroke
Preserve floods regularly during high tides and is
inundated by water during even modest storms.
Flooding on the Meadowbrook Corridor is an equally
important issue, as the Meadowbrook State Parkway
that runs north-south down the middle of the corridor
Assessment of Risks and Needs 43

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

is an evacuation route. The access ramps to the
Parkway at Sunrise Highway are in a high risk area,
while the Merrick Road access ramps are within an
extreme risk area and flooded heavily during and
after Superstorm Sandy. The Meadowbrook Corridor
is also adjacent to several key community assets,
including the Town of Hempstead Department of
Sanitation facility, Four Towns Fireman’s Training
Center, Nassau County Traffic Control Division
garage, Merrick Road Park, Merrick Golf Course,
Merrick Senior Center, and Norman J. Levy Park and
Preserve, which puts these assets at further risk as
water from storm surges can funnel up the Corridor
and flood adjacent areas.
The risk assessment identified eight assets with
severe risk scores, including Fire Department
Station #2, Nassau County DWP pumping station,
Cammanns Pond County Park, Newbridge Road
Park, three marinas, and a yacht club. Not surprisingly,
these assets all incurred damaged from Superstorm
Sandy. Assets with high risk scores are more prevalent in the Community —these 18 assets are scattered throughout the two hamlets and include four
Fire Department facilities, several food and pharmacy
retailers, the South Nassau Hospital Annex, Meroke
Preserve, Merrick Road Park, a pumping station, the
Town of Hempstead Department of Sanitation facility,
and Chatterton School. The remaining 15 key assets
were assigned a medium risk score. These assets
include several schools, the Merrick and Bellmore
libraries, Norman J. Levy Park and Preserve, and
East Bay Park.

44

Assessment of Risks and Needs

Figure 06: Community Assets

H
AG
LT

MEA

Bellmore Senior
Center

E
AV

BE

Seneca
Fuel Oil
Company

DOW

CA

MP

RE

MO

E
AV

VE
DA

KE

Norman J Levy
Park & Preserve

LIPA

CVS

Rite Aid
Winthrop
Avenue School

Bellmore LIRR
Bellmore
Library

Rite Aid

South Nassau
Hospital Annex
Club House Marina

Fire Department
Station 3
District Office

D
OA

R

Fire Department
Station 2

ME

Newbridge
Road Park

Trader Joes
Waldbaums
Merrick
Senior Center

LL

TP

CK

I
RR

BE

N

LO

BY

Fire Department
Station 3 Empire
Birch
Elementary
School

EMS
Station 2

King Kullen

Y

Merrick
Library

FOR

BA

Four Towns Fireman’s
Training Center
Merrick Road Park
Sanitation

South Shore
Dialysis

A
USPS Mail
HW
HIG
E
S
I
Inspection UNR
S
Service
Facility
Meroke
Preserve
MTA Police
Station
CVS

Merrick LIRR
Gulf Gas Station

NCDPW Garage
Traffic Control
Division

EMS Head
Quarters

Stop and
Shop

Fire Department
Hook & Ladder Co 1

Pumping
Station

Fire Department
Headquarters

IDGE RD

Grand Avenue
Middle School

BED

Doctors
Office
Center

NEWBR

Water Treatment
Plant

Keezac Pharmacy
NCPD Booth E

Chatterton
School

VE
KA

RIC

MER

Y
PKW
TATE
OK S

BRO

Fire Department
Station 2
Friendship

AV
E

Pumping
Station

Cammanns Pond
County Park

Norman J
Levy Lakeside
School

Shore Road
Elementary
School

Merrick
Golf Course

Charles
A Reinhard
School
John F
Kennedy
High School

East
Bay Park

Whaleneck
Marina Center
Open
Bay
Marina
Blue Water
Yacht Club

EAST BAY

0

Legend

New York Department
of State Risk Areas

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Parks /Precincts

Extreme

Long Island Rail Road

Retail /Commercial Corridor

High

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

Downtown Core

Moderate

Created March 2014

Identified Asset

0.5

1
Mile

Figure 07: Risk Assessment Map

H
AG
LT

MEA

Bellmore Senior
Center

E
AV

BE

Seneca
Fuel Oil
Company

BR
DOW

CA

MP

RE
MO

LL

E
AV

VE
DA

LIPA

CVS

Rite Aid
Winthrop
Avenue School

Bellmore LIRR
Bellmore
Library

Rite Aid

South Nassau
Hospital Annex
Club House Marina

Fire Department
Station 3
District Office

D
OA

R

Fire Department
Station 2

ME

Newbridge
Road Park

Trader Joes
Waldbaums
Merrick
Senior Center

BE

KE
TP

Norman J Levy
Park & Preserve

CK

I
RR

EMS
Station 2

King Kullen

AY

Merrick
Library

FOR

Fire Department
Station 3 Empire
Birch
Elementary
School

N

LO
BY
BA

Four Towns Fireman’s
Training Center
Merrick Road Park
Sanitation

South Shore
Dialysis

HW
USPS Mail
HIG
SE
InspectionSUNRI
Service
Meroke
Facility
Preserve
MTA Police
Station
CVS

Merrick LIRR
Gulf Gas Station

NCDPW Garage
Traffic Control
Division

Fire Department
Headquarters

EMS Head
Quarters

Stop and
Shop

BED

VE
KA

Grand Avenue
Middle School

Fire Department
Hook & Ladder Co 1

Pumping
Station

Doctors
Office
Center

Chatterton
School

RIC

Water Treatment
Plant

Keezac Pharmacy
NCPD Booth E
IDGE RD
NEWBR

MER

WY
E PK
STAT
OOK

Fire Department
Station 2
Friendship

AV
E

Pumping
Station

Cammanns Pond
County Park

Norman J
Levy Lakeside
School

Shore Road
Elementary
School

Merrick
Golf Course

Charles
A Reinhard
School
John F
Kennedy
High School

East
Bay Park

Whaleneck
Marina Center
Open
Bay
Marina
Blue Water
Yacht Club

EAST BAY

0

Legend

New York Department
of State Risk Areas

Asset Risk Scores

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Extreme

Long Island Rail Road

High

Medium Risk Score (6-23)

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

Moderate

Residual Risk Score (<6)

Created March 2014

Severe Risk Score (>53)
High Risk Score (24-53)

Asset Not Assessed

0.5

1
Mile

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 05: Key asset risk assessment
Asset Name

Risk Zone

Asset Class

Critical Facility

Community Value

Bellmore LIRR

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Blue Water Yacht Club

Extreme

Economic

No

High

Cammanns Pond County Park

Extreme

Natrual & Cultural

Yes

High

Chatterton School

Moderate

Health & Social

No

High

Club House Marina

Extreme

Economic

No

High

CVS Pharmacy

High

Economic

Yes

Medium

EMS Headquarters

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

High

EMS Station 2

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

High

Fire Department Chiefs Office

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire Department District Office

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire Department Headquarters

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire Department Hook & Ladder Co 1

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire Department Station 2

High

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire Department Station 2 Friendship

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire Department Station 3

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire Department Station 3 Empire

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire DepartmentDistrict Office

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire DepartmentStation 1

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Four Towns Fireman’s Training Center

High

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Meroke Preserve

Extreme

Natrual & Cultural

No

Medium

Merrick LIRR

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Merrick Road Park

Moderate

Natrual & Cultural

No

Medium

MTA Police Station

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

High

NCDPW Garage - Merrick

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

NCPD Booth E

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

High

Newbridge Road Park

Moderate

Natrual & Cultural

No

Medium

Assessment of Risks and Needs 47

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 05 (cont’d) : Key asset risk assessment
Asset Name

Risk Zone

Asset Class

Critical Facility

Community Value

Open Bay Marina

Extreme

Economic

Yes

Medium

Pumping Station - Merrick & Clubhouse
Rd

High

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Pumping Station - Newbridge Rd

High

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Retail Corridor - Merrick Rd

High

Economic

Yes

Low

Town of Hempstead Department of
Sanitation

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Shore Road Elementary School

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

Medium

South Nassau Hospital Annex

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

High

South Shore Dialysis

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

High

Town of Hempstead Traffic Control
Division

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Trader Joes

High

Economic

No

Medium

Waldbaums

High

Economic

No

Medium

Water Treatment Plant - Thelma &
Sherman St

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Whaleneck Marina Center

Extreme

Economic

No

High

48

Assessment of Risks and Needs

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
The needs and opportunities identified in this section provide a basis for the strategies and proposed
projects for the Community. Needs and opportunities
were identified through a combination of research,
analysis, NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee)
feedback and Community Member feedback from
Public Engagement Events. These issues have
been organized into FEMA’s National Disaster
Recovery Framework’s Recovery Support Functions
(Community Planning and Capacity Building,
Economic Development, Health and Social Services
Housing, Infrastructure, and Natural and Cultural
Resources), which combine traditional repair efforts
with long-range planning for recovery and growth.

Community Planning and
Capacity Building
The community planning and capacity building RSF
concerns the Community’s ability to implement recovery actions while planning for future storm events.
They address the need for public education and
preparedness, legislative and regulatory reform, and
building code and land use regulations that reflect
current vulnerabilities and recent storm experience.
Community Planning and
Capacity Building Needs
Because of the regional nature of planning for a more
resilient community, there is a need for more communication amongst the Town of Hempstead, Nassau
County, and the State of New York, as well as Federal
agencies, such as the United States Army Corps of
Engineers. Long-term policy guidance about infrastructure investment, regional approaches to flood
mitigation, and the possibility of retreating from the
shoreline needs to be coordinated at all levels of
government.
Many Community residents and business owners had never experienced storms as severe as
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy. Despite living with frequent flooding from high tides or heavy
rainfall, they were unprepared for the risks related
to Superstorm Sandy’s storm surge, particularly
those living in extreme and high risk areas. Home
and business owners may still not understand that
severe storms are predicted to increase in severity

Recovery Support Functions
Needs and opportunities were categorized
in accordance with the six Recovery Support
Functions (RSFs) established by President
Barack Obama through the National Disaster
Recovery Framework (NDRF). The NDRF focuses
on how best to restore, redevelop, and revitalize
the health, social, economic, natural and environmental fabric of the community. The six RSFs are:
Community Planning and Capacity Building:
Addresses the Community’s ability to implement
recovery actions while planning for future storm
events, including public education and preparedness and building code and land use regulations
that may influence future rebuilding and recovery.
Economic Development: Addresses the needs
of local businesses and institutions to recover or
relocate following a storm event, and identifies
investment opportunities that can provide both
economic growth and greater resilience in the
community.
Health and Social Services: Addresses strategies and management measures needed to
ensure that health care facilities and essential
social services are accessible to all residents.
Housing: Identifies needs and opportunities
relative to housing in the Community, prioritizing
damaged and at-risk areas.
Infrastructure: Addresses the current needs
pertaining to the Community’s essential systems
and services, from energy supply and distribution
to transportation routes. Infrastructure opportunities focus on strategies to rebuild in a way that
decreases vulnerability to future impacts.
Natural and Cultural Resources: Addresses
damage to natural and cultural resources, and
the actions that should be taken to preserve,
rehabilitate or restore these assets or services to
their initial state. Natural systems also can provide offer significant environmental and commercial benefits such as stormwater management
and recreational opportunities.

Assessment of Risks and Needs 49

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Community Needs

Community Opportunities

Community Planning and Capacity Building

Community Planning and Capacity Building

• Enhanced communication between different
levels of government about planning for
resiliency.

• Better leverage the Internet or other electronic
methods to increase awareness about sea
level rise, climate change, and emergency
preparedness.

• Greater awareness about the threats related
to sea level rise and climate change.
• Increase understanding of why evacuation is
important to the safety of both residents and
first responders.
• More emergency preparedness education for
residents and business owners.
• Plans for communicating during power
outages.

and frequency.53 Greater education is needed to help
stakeholders understand that storms are a real threat
and preparation is crucial.
Despite the efforts of Nassau County’s Office of
Emergency Management, which mails an emergency preparedness brochure to property owners
and occupants once a year, many residents and
business owners had not properly prepared for
Superstorm Sandy. Nassau County’s Evacuation
Order was widely heard by the Community, however,
many opted not to evacuate, putting first responders
at risk. A better understanding of the importance of
evacuation is needed.
Home and business owners who chose to obey the
Evacuation Order reported that they did not know
what to do to secure their properties against damage prior to leaving. Homeowners were unaware of
protective measures, such as unplugging electrical
devices or turning off energy systems. Boat owners
reported following instructions from their insurance
companies, which recommended removing their
boats from the water; in some cases, however, this
resulted in greater damage to their boats because
they were knocked over or hit by debris. Similarly,
residents were unsure where to move their cars
during the storm. Better information about how to
secure homes, boats, cars, and other personal property prior to storms is necessary. Nassau County

50

Assessment of Risks and Needs

• Empower community members and
community organizations to educate public
about preparing for future storms and better
support the Community during and after storm
events.
• Better utilize public buildings as gathering
places after storms where residents can use
the Internet, charge phones, share supplies,
and see neighbors
• Create an ongoing governmental task force or
other organization that coordinates resiliency
efforts across multiple jurisdictions.

OEM and the Town of Hempstead Waterways and
Conservation confirmed the need for more education
related to the protection of personal property.54
Extended power outages inhibited Internet and cell
phone usage, making connecting with neighbors,
family, and friends difficult. This lack of communication impeded the ability of residents and homeowners to know what to do when returning to their
homes and made the distribution of emergency supplies difficult. Committee Members discussed having
supplies to share with others, but not knowing who
was in need or where to bring the supplies.
Community Planning and Capacity
Building Opportunities
Since Superstorm Sandy, residents have become
more interested in protecting themselves and their
communities against future storms. A more comprehensive public education program could educate
community members about both the risks they face
during a storm event and the benefits of mitigation
measures. This includes safety measures for property owners during and after major storm events, and
the circulation of risk zone maps identifying potential
evacuation zones.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Community members are often the best resource
for allocating emergency response resources, but
are rarely utilized to their greatest effectiveness. A
program to facilitate communication amongst local
residents could supplement existing outreach and
coordination measures and facilitate faster recovery.
Neighborhood organizations could assist residents
before, during, and after storms and provide a point
of contact between communities and government
officials.
The Community has a number of community assets,
such as libraries and public schools, that could be
retrofitted for emergency use. These facilities could
also be used as sites for public outreach and education, and central locations for all resiliency-related
information services following a disaster, when executive evacuation orders are lifted.

Community Needs
Economic Development
• Many local business owners experienced
storm damage to both their homes and
businesses and may lack sufficient resources
to rebuild and repair both properties.
• Local businesses may not have incorporated
resilience measures in their rush to rebuild
and reopen, leaving them vulnerable to future
storms.
• Lack of commercial development and the
prevalence of tax exempt properties limit
property tax revenue, increasing tax rates for
all property owners.
• More options need to be explored for
commercial development outside of extreme
and high flood risk areas.

Economic Development
A disaster can severely disrupt economic and business activities and hinder the development of new
economic opportunities. This section reviews the
economic damage caused by Superstorm Sandy
and the associated needs and opportunities tied to
future economic prosperity.
Economic Development Needs
Despite damage from Superstorm Sandy, very few
businesses in the Community permanently closed
their doors. However, many small businesses that
worked quickly to restore operations and recover
revenue flows may not have considered measures
for resilience when rebuilding. Rebuilding and redevelopment plans with a focus on mitigation activities
are necesary to protect the Community’s commercial
businesses from future storm damage. Additionally,
a number of local business owners have also lost
homes to storm damage and are in need of financial assistance to recover from concurrent property
losses.
Non-residential parcels in the Community number 813 (5.9%), accounting for 48.9% of the total
assessed value in the area. Unfortunately, the largest and most valuable of these properties are either
institutional properties or open space use properties,
which are exempt from property taxes. Subsequently,

over half of the non-residential assessed value does
not contribute to municipal tax rolls. Retail, industrial,
mixed-use, vacant commercial, and vacant industrial
properties constitute 635 of the Community’s nonresidential parcels. While these properties represent
4.1% of all parcels within the community, they provide 9.8% of assessed land value and 8.3% of total
assessed value.55 Promoting the support and expansion of the Community’s existing commercial areas
can bring new commercial properties to municipal
tax rolls and increase economic resiliency.
Most local residents work outside the Community in
high paying service industries, such as finance and
insurance. These residents were largely unaffected
by the recessions from 2002 to 2005 and again
from 2007 to 2008, although the number of working
residents dropped during both of those periods. The
Community has experienced a long-term decline in
the number of working residents overall, losing 227
workers (1.8%) over the period from 2002 to 2011,
which may be the result of the Community’s aging
population.56 A drop in the number of working residents can have a negative impact on local retailers,
although at this point in time the loss in workers is
not significant.

Assessment of Risks and Needs 51

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Economic Development Opportunities
In 2012, the Community’s businesses reported
$512.3 million in retail sales, around $116.3 million
less than expected given its population and disposable income.57 This signifies that local residents travelled elsewhere to do their shopping. The Community
has an un-met demand for grocery stores, restaurants, health and personal care, sports and apparel,
and book and music stores, indicating an opportunity
for further commercial development in these categories.58 This potential demand for more retail uses in
the Community can be used to attract new development to the area, which can assist in strengthening
the tax base and supporting the economic resiliency
of the Community.
Any new commercial development should be located
and constructed in a more resilient manner to reduce
further risk to Community assets. Development
should focused out of extreme and high risk areas,
along commercial corridors such as Sunrise Highway,
Newbridge Road, Bellmore Avenue, and Merrick
Avenue, and near the Merrick and Bellmore LIRR stations. Both stations are located in close proximity to
each hamlet’s respective downtown areas and represent an opportunity for redevelopment to include
a mix of uses. Compact commercial and mixed-use
development around the station areas and commercial corridors could create needed growth and
expand the commercial tax base without intruding
into existing single-family residential areas. Local
demand for restaurants is particularly promising, as
full service restaurants located at train stations have
been successful in other parts of the region.
Some of the Community’s demand for restaurants
may be met along its waterfront. Merrick’s marinas
provide an opportunity for a small water-focused
entertainment destination, as the area is well connected and residential properties are located at
a sufficient distance to mitigate noise or parking
issues. The marinas have hosted a small number of
waterfront dining establishments in the past, some
of which are still in operation. Any plans for further
development along the waterfront would need to
include measures for resilient building design.

52

Assessment of Risks and Needs

Community Opportunities
Economic Development
• Provide technical and financial assistance for
businesses to reopen after storms.
• Redevelop parcels in lower risk areas, such
as around the Bellmore and Merrick LIRR
stations or along Sunrise Highway, to expand
and diversify the commercial tax base.
• Re-design streets on commercial corridors
and near stations to improve walkability and
attract more customers.
• Create a small waterfront entertainment
destination along Merrick’s waterfront to meet
existing demand for restaurants. Planning
must incorporate resilience measures.
• Leverage potential demand for more retail
business through commercial redevelopment.

Health and Social services
The health and social services RSF addresses the
strategies and management measures needed to
ensure that the Community’s healthcare facilities and
essential social services can meet the needs of all
Community members. This includes the immediate
and long-term needs of socially vulnerable populations and individuals affected by previous disasters,
as well as opportunities to promote health and well
being for all members of the Community.
Health and Social Service Needs
The damage caused by Superstorm Sandy has
increased cases of unsafe living environments for
Community residents. Community members living
in storm-damaged homes are susceptible to health
issues caused by exposure to mold. Construction
and maintenance workers are also more susceptible
to toxic exposure, in addition to heat and air quality
issues. During Public Engagement Events, residents
cited the need for more home inspections to identify
potential health issues, such as sinkholes or mold.
One in four residents in the Community are seniors,
aged 65 and older.59 Older adults have encountered
many challenges accessing health and social services, homecare, food, and social support in the

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

aftermath of Superstorm Sandy. The storm’s effects
on the informal home care and home service economy have disadvantaged seniors, especially those
who are homebound or require minor assistance
to perform daily living activities. Prior to Superstorm
Sandy, 93% of all Long Island seniors reported their
car as a primary mode of transportation. Physical
and mental in-home health services are needed for
elderly populations who are unable to travel. At the
second Public Engagement Event residents cited the
Community’s seniors as the population in greatest
need of assistance. The need to support senior centers as a base for socialization and health programs
was discussed during key informant interviews as
part of the public outreach process.
The caregiving workforce, both formal and informal,
will need support to continue their important role in
recovery efforts. The stress and chaos resulting from
Superstorm Sandy has put a strain on local families,
in particular those with developmentally disabled
children. In addition to the financial challenges of
rebuilding and repair, these families are faced with
the challenge of caring for their loved ones. Direct
caregivers are especially challenged to meet the
increasing needs of their clients, as the workforce is
especially vulnerable to stress-related health risks.
Direct support workers make relatively little and many
take two jobs to support themselves and their own
families. With limited financial resources, and faced
with the expense of travel in the region, this population is struggling to move forward.
Better communication is necessary to ensure that
the healthcare needs of the Community are met.
Many residents are not aware of the resources
available to them, despite the efforts of healthcare
organizations to ensure effective outreach across
all population groups. Sources of accurate information can be difficult to identify, and may be not be
updated regularly. Although public health information
is distributed in multiple languages, the current lack
of participation signifies that this information is not
reaching its intended audience. Stronger connections
with underserved communities, through both formal
and informal networks, such as religious institutions
and their constituencies, are needed to provide all of
Community residents with the right information.

Community Needs
Health and Social Services
• Senior community members who are unable
to travel lack access to health care and social
interaction. Better transportation options are
needed for those unable to use a car.
• Caregivers lack resources and are struggling
to manage client demands with their own
recovery needs.
• Community residents are not aware of
available health and social service resources
and outreach programs have had difficulty
connecting with underserved populations.
• Commercial areas are not pedestrian friendly
and residents are dependent on their cars.
• Loss of heat in homes following Superstorm
Sandy was a significant issue, especially for
socially vulnerable populations.

Replacing a veterans memorial tree at Bellmore
Senior Center that fell during Superstorm
Sandy (source: Bellmore Patch)

Assessment of Risks and Needs 53

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Community Opportunities
Health and Social Services
• Provide shuttle services or taxi vouchers
to elderly residents to assist those without
access to a car.
• Incorporate resilient building techniques
and support emergency preparedness
programming at Merrick and Bellmore Senior
Centers.
• Support energy resiliency measures to
prevent power loss at medical facilities and
pharmacies.

Extended loss of power in the Community became a
safety concern, as temperatures dipped well below
40 degrees in the week after Superstorm Sandy
and many homes were still without heat.60 Nassau
County advised people to go to shelters, but for
many seniors moving to a shelter is particularly arduous as they struggle with everday activies, such as
packing and travel. The CVS on Merrick Road was
closed following the Superstorm due to flood-related
damage, making access to prescriptions more difficult for some residents.
Health and Social Service Opportunities
As the senior population in the Community expands,
programs to foster social connection and physical activity become more important. Nutritional and
meal-preparation programs will need to be expanded,
especially for homebound seniors. In-home services
such as shopping, laundry assistance, light housekeeping, and grooming will become more important
as the current population ages and family support
declines. Social support programs to provide live
and/or telephone contacts and safety checks to
residents who live alone will be necessary to maintain
the emotional and physical well being of older community members.
The Merrick and Bellmore Senior Centers present significant opportunities to expand emergency
preparedness education to seniors, as well as
become gathering places after major storm events.
Reconnecting with other seniors after traumatic
54

Assessment of Risks and Needs

events like Superstorm Sandy can be critical to mental health and the ability of local seniors to rebound
from disasters. A program is needed to investigate
and address post-storm health issues and provide
support for households and community members
that are vulnerable to post-storm health impacts.

Housing
This section considers the impact of recent storm
damage to housing stock and the trends or events
which may affect housing stock in the upcoming
years. The type and location of housing needs considers current and expected demand, as well as the
availability of housing units and the range of housing
types available to the community relative to demographic factors, such as age and income level. The
effects of previous storm events are also significant
to the planning and identification of future housing
opportunities.
Housing Needs
Despite the number of Federal and State sources
of recovery funding, it is unknown if these programs
have provided sufficient aid to meet the needs of
recovering property owners in the Community. It
is likely that a significant fraction of the costs were
borne by homeowners, as many residents are not
covered by disaster assistance or private insurance.
Furthermore, damage estimates and subsequent
payouts may not accurately capture the extent of
repair work needed. FEMA provides assistance
based upon the estimated costs to make critical repairs, not the cost to fully restore a property
to its prior condition. Compared to SBA estimates
for real property damage in New York State, FEMA
dramatically under-reports the value of damages to
homeowners.61
As FEMA aid is directed primarily to owner-occupied
properties, its estimates under-represent damage to
rental housing stock. There are approximately 615
units (4.9%) of rental housing in the Community.62 Of
this population, 58% are low-income occupants.63
In high and extreme risk zones, where inundation during Superstorm Sandy was highest, rental
housing comprises 143 units, or 25% of all housing
stock.64 The rental units that received FEMA aid for

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Community Needs
Housing
• Displaced residents didn’t have anywhere to
stay during Superstorm Sandy or during the
many months following.
• Funding from public disaster relief programs
and private insurance proceeds may not be
adequate to repair and restore damaged
properties to pre-storm conditions.
• A significant number of rental units (143) are
located in extreme or high risk zones, and a
large portion of rental units are occupied by
low-income tenants with limited means.
• Several homes in Bellmore/Merrick are now
abandoned, as observed by neighbors, but
actual data about where vacancies exist is
unavailable.
Community homes are still being repaired from
Superstorm Sandy damage (source: Urbanomics)

Superstorm Sandy recovery represented 8.6% of
the Community’s FEMA-assisted housing stock.65 It
is not known how many affected households relocated temporarily to rental stock in the Community,
or left the community to stay elsewhere, during
reconstruction.
The Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery currently
operates the NY Rising Housing Recovery Program,
which issues housing reconstruction assistance to
eligible owners of homes that suffered substantial
damage during Hurricane Irene or Superstorm Sandy.
Homeowners receive grants to repair or reconstruct
homes to minimum standards and receive certain
improvements to increase resiliency. This grant
also pays for home elevation for properties located
within 100-year floodplains. As of March 11, 2014,
$201 million had been distributed to 4,650 Nassau
residents.66 The deadline for all applications was April
11, 2014.
In the 18 months since Superstorm Sandy, the
Community housing market has seen a decline in
asking prices, a rise in vacancies, an increase in
housing foreclosures, and the demolition of innumerable properties.67 Although some houses in
have been raised, others remain damaged and

• A weakened housing market has eroded
the community’s tax base and put financial
strain on individual property owners already
burdened with repair costs.
• Despite a drop in home prices in many
neighborhoods, many young people still can’t
afford to buy homes in the area.
• Growing demand for owner-occupied housing
for a predominantly middle-aged and elderly
population will need to be met with options
that support community resilience.

uninhabitable. In 2013, the median price of singlefamily housing in Bellmore was $63,500 below or
nearly 15% less than the asking price in 2008, at the
peak of housing sales nationally, while the median
price in Merrick was $98,600 below or nearly 20%
less.68 69 Housing prices fell by roughly $40,000 in
Merrick between 2008 and 2010, likely due to the
national recession, but recovered in Bellmore when
the asking prices declined again. Now, the median
asking price is $366,000 in Bellmore and $400,000
in Merrick, according to Newsday’s database. The
impact of Superstorm Sandy can be approximated
as causing a further $30,000 to $65,000 decline in
single-family housing prices between 2012 and 2013.

Assessment of Risks and Needs 55

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Housing Opportunities
For homeowners with unmet repair or rehabilitation
needs, public disaster funding and insurance proceeds may not be sufficient. Need-based local funding could cover the cost of repair for damaged property, including environmental hazard mitigation costs.
Prioritizing low-income homeowners in extreme and
high risk zones would help residents pay for raising
their homes, thus significantly reducing their flood
insurance premium costs. Funding could also be
made available for homeowners and owners of rental
properties to implement green building measures,
such as HUD’s Green Building Standards, for repairs
and retrofits.
A residential street in Bellmore flooded during
Superstorm Sandy (source: Bellmore Patch)

After the storm, foreclosures rose to encompass 291
homes, above the prior (financial crisis) peak, with a
mortgage value of $109.9 million.70
At Public Engagement Events, many residents were
concerned about vacant homes, which pose a risk
to the health and safety of residents and can negatively impact neighborhood property values. The
Community’s tax base has lost value and residents
have lost equity in housing assets, which, coupled
with repair costs, has severely constrained their budgets. It is clear that with another very severe storm
many homeowners would not have the resources to
recover again.
The Community is expected to grow modestly over
the next five years, increasing in population by 1%
to 39,051 residents.71 An additional 151 households
are anticipated, consisting mostly of families, with
a decline in the number of children between 5 and
19 years of age and a rise in the number of elderly
aged 55 and over. Consequently, the median age
of Community residents will rise to 44.4 years. With
a growing elderly population, the Community’s per
capita income is expected to increase from $50,770
in 2013 to $59,996 by 2018.72 Both age and income
trends suggest that the demand for new housing may
increase or remain at current levels, despite potential
damage from future storms. As new housing is built,
it is critical that development is guided by strategies
for resilience.

56

Assessment of Risks and Needs

For properties damaged beyond repair, an incentivized housing acquisition program could be implemented to return residential land in extreme risk
areas to a natural undeveloped state. The existing
NY Rising Acquisition Programs could be further
promoted and leveraged to acquire houses that are
still substantially damaged and are at high risk due to
repeated flooding.73 Currently, Nassau County participates in HUD’s HOME Investment Partnerships
Program (HOME), which enables municipalities to
buy and/or rehabilitate homes to provide decent and
affordable housing.74 However, the program could be
amended to offer acquisition of housing at above prestorm values for demolition of damaged structures
and retention of land as a coastal buffer zone. An
additional incentive to encourage the acquisition of
clusters of contiguous properties could be included.
These opportunities are likely to increase the flood
resilience of the overall Community while providing
recreational and tourism opportunities. In high risk
zones, property acquisitions could be offered at
pre-storm value for redevelopment as resilient green
housing.
Plans for new housing should target land within walking distance, considered to be a quarter-mile, to the
Bellmore and Merrick LIRR stations. Potential parcels
would need to be rezoned for higher intensity multifamily or mixed-use development and incentives and
financing could be offered to attract private investment. Future residents would have the advantage of
frequent and relatively fast rail service to Manhattan,
as well as access to a variety of local commercial and

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Community Opportunities
Housing
• Support additional funding for repair and
reconstruction costs not covered by public
disaster funding or private insurance
proceeds.
• Educate homeowners about how to retrofit
homes to be more resilient and discourage
dangerous situations.
• Incentivize property owners in extreme and
high risk zones to rebuild in accordance with
green building standards.
• Expand coastal buffer zones by converting
residential uses in extreme risk areas to open
space and active parkland
• Encourage redevelopment around the
Bellmore and Merrick LIRR stations to provide
multifamily housing for young people who
would like to commute into New York City,
seniors, and low- and moderate-income
residents.
• Provide continuing care residential
development for elderly residents, located
outside of risk zones and paired with
incentivized buyout and relocation services.

community services. Offered at market competitive
rates, these units could attract and retain younger
households in the commuter workforce.
Multi-family housing development could be encouraged in upland areas outside of risk zones as opportunities for relocation, especially for the elderly,
attracting growth. The Community is forecast to
expand by more than 150 households over the
next decade, a majority of which will be headed by
elderly persons. Younger residents can be attracted,
however, especially if growth is linked to transit oriented development in the Community’s center and
low-income renters may need to be relocated from
storm-damaged apartments.
Prior to Superstorm Sandy, almost 600 households
in extreme and high risk zones were headed by older
community members. The impact of Superstorm
Sandy on these areas and the subsequent cost

of recovery and repair not only weakened financial
resources, but the physical challenge of remaining
and pursuing reconstruction now poses a potential
health risk to aging residents. Increasingly, elderly
households are moving to “continuing care” environments that combine healthcare-intensive amenities
with community facilities in a clustered development.
A buyout and relocation program could be coupled
with incentives to develop such a facility in an upland
low risk area.

Infrastructure
Infrastructure issues include the rebuilding and recovery of essential infrastructure services, such as water,
wastewater, energy, drainage, and transportation,
which were damaged or destroyed by Superstorm
Sandy. This includes the need to both strengthen
and protect critical infrastructure assets in risk areas
and meet the Community’s current and projected
demand in a way that encourages resilience and
economic growth.
Infrastructure Needs
Flooding in the Community is not limited to major
storm events. It is a regular occurrence during
heavy rainfall and/or high tide in many areas south
of Merrick Road. Regular flooding has been reported
around Clements Brook, from Linden Street south
to Merrick Road, and along Shore Road. The area
surrounding Meroke Pond is also subject to regular
flooding and was severely affected during Hurricane
Irene. The portions of southern Merrick and Bellmore
directly south of Merrick Road are at elevations of two
to four feet above sea level. These areas frequently
flood and, during extreme events like Hurricane Irene
and Superstorm Sandy, the peninsulas to the south
become islands.
In these low-lying areas, streets can become impassable at times of flooding, impeding the transportation of people and goods. In major events like
Superstorm Sandy, flooded roadways prevent emergency responders from helping residents in need and
leave evacuating residents stranded. The Community
is predominantly auto-oriented, with residents relying primarily on their cars for transportation. Effective

Assessment of Risks and Needs 57

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

evacuation routes and safe, adequate parking areas
are needed to prevent damage and ensure the safety
of community members.
The large area of impervious surfaces in the
Community prevents stormwater from infiltrating the
ground naturally and creates the need for a substantial storm drainage system to manage flooding. The
drainage infrastructure is antiquated and, in many
cases, undersized, so the system’s ability to convey
water efficiently to Merrick and East Bays after storm
surges or heavy rainfall is compromised. The limited
provision of outflow check valves on storm drain
outfalls into the canals and Bays does little to mitigate backflow into the storm sewer system and the
devices must be regularly checked to ensure they are
properly working. During heavy rainfall events storm
sewers are often overwhelmed, causing stormwater
to accumulate and ultimately flood the area. These
situations can be exacerbated by inadequate maintenance, as trash and debris blocks stormwater from
flowing through the system.
Aging and non-functional bulkheads present another
source of flooding in the Community. Many bulkheads in the community have exceeded their maximum lifespan, while some older bulkheads are too
low, allowing water to pass over them and cause
damage to adjacent properties. Many of these older
bulkheads have not been raised to current code
requirements, causing significant erosion, property
damage, and increased flood levels. Height regulations are typically enforced when bulkheads are new
or are being replaced, but uniform enforcement is
necessary to make bulkhead structures effective at
mitigating flooding and erosion.
The Cedar Creek Water Pollution Control Plant
(WPCP), located in the neighboring hamlet of
Wantagh, receives and treats wastewater from the
Community. While the plant remained in operation during the Superstorm Sandy, it is located in a
moderate risk zone and is at risk of damage from
future storm events. Future upgrades to Cedar Creek
WPCP are within Bellmore and Merrick. Unmanaged
vegetation around streets and power lines can damage energy and transportation infrastructure during
major storms. Wind-damaged and felled power lines
result in outages and can create hazardous environments if still energized. Customers in affected areas
58

Assessment of Risks and Needs

Community Needs
Infrastructure
• Low-lying streets suffer from routine flooding
during high tides and/or heavy rainfall, and
can become impassable during major storm
events.
• Large areas of paved and impermeable
surfaces in the community prevent stormwater
from infiltrating the ground naturally and storm
sewers do not have the capacity to manage
runoff.
• Different roads, as well as surface and
subsurface stormwater systems, have
different jurisdictions, making implementation
of projects and maintenance difficult.
• Aging and non-functional bulkheads
exacerbate coastal flooding and erosion
issues.
• Most bulkheads in Bellmore/Merrick are
privately-owned, making it difficult to
implement consistent bulkhead protection.
• Transportation infrastructure is primarily
automobile-oriented and lacks alternative
options for residents who do not have access
to a vehicle.
• Trees damaged power lines during
Superstorm Sandy, resulting in loss of power
throughout the community.
• Damaged power lines during storms caused
significant life safety hazards and jeopardize
homes and buildings following Superstorm
Sandy.
• Street lights did not function after Superstorm
Sandy due to power failure.
• Energy needs cannot be met by local
resources. Additional generation capacity
combined with energy efficiency measures will
be necessary to meet future demand.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

must wait for damaged assets to be identified and
serviced before their power is restored, a process
that typically takes up to several days. Likewise,
streets can become blocked and impassable until
municipal and/or private repair crews can clear the
way. Road and utility rights-of-way in the Community
are owned and managed by a number of private and
public entities across multiple jurisdictions.
Storm mitigation initiatives have been proposed by
LIPA/PSEG to protect assets from future damage.
Temporary emergency flood barriers are protecting
substations at risk of flooding and mobile generators
and switchgear will be used to carry customer load
as substations are individually rebuilt and elevated.
The utility plans to increase vegetation management
efforts, shortening time between trimmings and
expanding clearance zones around power lines to
prevent damage from surrounding trees. Upgrades
to strengthen utility poles and wires are also planned
for high risk areas. Enhanced technology will be used
to allow rerouting around damaged equipment and
to expedite the damage assessment and restoration
process by providing outage detection and location
capabilities.75
Other critical assets and systems require enhanced
protection from flooding or power loss. Two of the
Community’s pumping stations are vulnerable to
outages caused by flood-damaged equipment. The
Nassau County Department of Public Works Garage
in Merrick is located in an extreme risk zone and is
likely to become incapacitated in a flood event. Public
infrastructure systems, such as street and traffic
lights, are also vulnerable and protective measures
are needed to ensure their continued function in the
face of another disaster.
The Town of Hempstead Sanitation Department
operates a Waste Transfer Station at 1600 Merrick
Road that was heavily damaged during Superstorm
Sandy. Garbage and environmental pollutants were
washed into the bay and the office was damaged.
Its location in an extreme risk zone makes it vulnerable to future disasters and threatens the health of
the wetlands in the adjacent Norman J. Levy Park
and Preserve.

Between 2001 and 2013, LIPA/PSEG has contracted for the addition of more than 2,000 MW
of supply capability to meet projected electricity
demand throughout Long Island, as well as meet the
reliability requirements established by the New York
State Contract Reporter (NYSCR) and the New York
Independent System Operator (NYISO). This includes
the addition of 13 new generating stations on Long
Island and two submarine transmission cables that
connect the local grid to surrounding power markets, through which additional capacity can be purchased. LIPA/PSEG plans to have sufficient capacity
to meet demand through 2020, primarily through
energy efficiency measures that are currently being
implemented.76
Without energy efficiency investments, LIPA/PSEG
expects peak load to increase an average of 144
MW (2.2%) annually. Energy efficiency and demand
response measures would reduce growth to 1.4% on
average per year. It is likely, however, that the utility will eventually need to add additional generation
resources on the island. The utility has historically
relied on short-term purchases from the statewide
capacity market to meet demand within the required
reserve margin. Given the current surplus of energy
and cost-effective capacity on the market, it is likely
that LIPA/PSEG will continue to pursue this strategy
as necessary.
Much of the electric power loss during Superstorm
Sandy was due to fallen trees, which affected aboveground power lines. A lack of switches within the
electrical grid meant that more homes and businesses were impacted when other parts of the grid
were down. Many critical public and private facilities
were not equipped with emergency backup power
supplies. The lack of power to streetlights left residents with dark, flooded roadways. Upgrades to the
energy infrastructure will be a crucial component of
creating a more resilient community. Sanitary sewer/
wastewater systems caused extensive damage to
residences during Superstorm Sandy and should be
upgraded; significant sewage backup in homes.
Infrastructure Opportunities
While upgrades to the existing stormwater system
will not prevent flooding from a major storm surge,
it can help to address some of the Community’s
Assessment of Risks and Needs 59

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Community Opportunities
Infrastructure
• Upgrade stormwater system, including pipe
repair, replacement, or installation of check
valves.
• Elevate critical roadways in risk areas to
maintain transportation access during flood
events.
• Better maintenance of storm drains;
installation of netting at openings should be
pursued.
• Require more permeable surfaces or other
green infrastructure improvements in upland
areas.
• Designate emergency parking areas so
evacuating residents can safely store their
vehicles.
• Implement street improvements in conjunction
with repair and recovery work to increase
pedestrian access, specifically in downtown
commercial areas.
• Focus on improvements that address safety,
such as evacuation routes and an efficient
transportation network.
• Pursue funding for infrastructure damage
restoration and damage mitigation projects.
• Upgrade electric poles and power lines
to better withstand storm events and
underground lines where feasible.
• Consider natural gas or propane generators
for residential use.
• Explore reducing dependence on LIPA/PSEG
• Use solar, or other energy source, for
streetlights.
• Coordinate utility-related construction so
multiple stormwater and electrical upgrades
are done in tandem.
• Pursue any sewer-related upgrades to prevent
future backup and support upgrades at Cedar
Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant.

60

Assessment of Risks and Needs

routine nuisance flooding issues and expedite drainage following a large storm. Since very few of the
outfalls in the Community are equipped with tidal
check valves, there are opportunities to explore the
effectiveness of this technique to reduce flooding.
Given the high amount of impervious surfaces in the
Community, there are opportunities to augment the
existing stormwater system using “green infrastructure” techniques, discussed in more detail in the following section.
To ensure the Community’s southern neighborhoods
are accessible in storm conditions, critical roadways
can be elevated to reduce the impact of flooding on
mobility. Raised roadways should be coordinated
with local evacuation routes and identified for debris
removal following emergency weather events; these
roadways should also be well publicized to residents.
Routes should be clearly marked and provide directions to higher ground, as well as connection to community resources, such as safe parking areas and
emergency shelters. Traffic signals along emergency
routes should incorporate backup power to maintain
function in the event of an outage.
Transportation recovery and reconstruction efforts
should be coupled with street improvements to
make the Community more accessible to pedestrian
activities. Many streets in the community do not have
sidewalks and downtown areas, including those
around the Bellmore and Merrick LIRR stations, are
not well designed for pedestrian use. Increasing
sidewalk connections and introducing traffic-calming
measures, such as medians and curb extensions,
can improve driver and pedestrian safety, making
walking more attractive and enjoyable for residents
and visitors. Street improvements in downtown commercial areas can help local businesses attract more
customers by increasing visibility and access.

Natural and Cultural Resources
Natural and cultural resources include the impact
of Superstorm Sandy on the Community’s natural
systems and the services these systems provide.
They address the need for the repair and restoration of both natural assets, such as preserves and
wetlands, and cultural amenities, such as parkland.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Additionally, these issues present opportunities for
the use of natural systems to reduce vulnerability and
foster increased resilience.
Natural and Cultural Resource Needs
Wetlands include swamps, marshes, and bogs, and
are often found alongside waterways and in flood
plains. They are a critical part of the local ecosystems where there are present, helping to reduce
erosion and decrease wave energy created during
storm surges. Approximately 284 acres of tidal wetlands have been lost in Nassau County’s south shore
over the past five decades.77 Erosion and the growth
of phragmites, also known as the common reed,
are primarily responsible for today’s wetland loss,
although the south shore’s history of development
has also significantly contributed to their disappearance. The popularity of waterfront homes peaked
after World War II (1945), when hundreds of acres of
marshland were filled and built on, such as the peninsulas in southern Merrick and Bellmore. With the
passage of the Water Quality Act of 1965, the Town
of Hempstead stopped granting permits for shoreline development, but the shoreline had already been
almost entirely hardened, leaving the community
without an important natural barrier against coastal
flooding. Today, tidal wetlands are limited to Norman
J. Levy Park and Preserve and Legion Street; fresh
water wetlands are limited to Meroke Preserve and
Cammann’s Pond.
These development patterns have also resulted in
an increase of overland flooding, as the stormwater
drainage system is unable to manage the increase in
stormwater runoff from parking lots and roadways.
Impervious surfaces prevent stormwater from infiltrating the ground naturally, preventing groundwater
recharge. As stormwater runs over these surfaces,
it collects pollutants, such as gasoline and motor
oil, and excess nutrients from fertilizers before being
channeled into sewers and eventually the bay.
The wetlands in and adjacent to the Norman J.
Levy Park and Preserve in southwest Merrick were
damaged during Superstorm Sandy. Other “soft”
shorelines in the Community include the Merrick Golf
Course and Newbridge Park, which were also damaged. There is a need to restore and stabilize these
remaining soft shorelines to reduce damage during

Community Needs
Natural and Cultural Resources
• Hardened shorelines in Bellmore/Merrick have
resulted in loss of natural protection from
storm surges.
• Many storm protection measures conflict
with creating healthy ecological systems—a
balanced approach is critical.
• Cammann’s Pond, Merrick Road Park,
and Newbridge Park are located along the
shoreline in extreme risk areas, so further
resiliency measures are needed.
• Ecological systems are under threat from
climate change and further study of the bay’s
natural systems is needed.
• Community needs better protection and
maintenance of green and open space.
Parks and recreational spaces are ready for
upgrades.

future storm events and explore ways to better mitigate flooding. Committee members and the general
public also cited the need for better maintenance of
natural open spaces, such as those which line the
Meadowbrook State Parkway.
Natural and Cultural Resource Opportunities
Natural systems can provide a natural solution to
storm management and can include restoration and
expansion of wetlands and marshlands. It is estimated
that an acre of wetland can store approximately 1
million gallons of water, equal to about three-quarters
of a football field covered in three feet of water.78
Trees and other vegetation in wetland areas help to
slow the speed of flood water, resulting in lower flood
heights and, ultimately, less flood damage. Wetlands
in coastal areas are especially important, as the flat
coastal terrain leaves land and property exposed
to hurricanes and other storms. Coastal wetlands
protect these assets from storm surge and provide
a sustainable buffer against storm-generated wave
action.79 The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) has stated that wetland preservation, along
with other natural flood control measures, provides

Assessment of Risks and Needs 61

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

typically at reduced cost to the landowner.81 There
are opportunities for marsh nourishment adjacent to
Norman J. Levy Park and Preserve.

Levy Park windmill (source: Charles Brown)

Merrick Golf Course (source: Charles Brown)

more effective and less costly flood protection than
engineered defenses.80 Because few wetlands
remain in the Community, opportunities for wetland
restoration and expansion is limited unless some
residential parcels are returned to open space.
Traditionally, bulkheads, rip-rap, or other engineered structures have been used to control coastal
erosion and protect property from storm damage.
However, these measures can potentially increase
erosion in adjacent areas. Wave energy from boat
wakes, wind and storm events create scouring in
front of these structures, resulting in the loss of
vegetated shallow areas to open water. Marshland
protection not only provides erosion control, it also
improves water quality, creates or restores habitat,
and increases the aesthetic value of the property,

62

Assessment of Risks and Needs

Restoration and protection measures should be
pursued to further preserve and enhance the function of the Community’s limited natural shoreline.
Natural bank stabilization techniques, such as “Living
shorelines” utilize plants, sand, and a limited amount
of rocks to provide shoreline protection and maintain habitat. Seagrass restoration entails either the
transplant of adult shoots from existing meadows or
the seeding of previously damaged seagrass beds.
Oyster or mollusk species bed reef restoration may
also be considered as a means to protect shoreline
areas from erosion, and its potential use is currently
under study by the Town of Hempstead Department
of Conservation and Waterways.
In addition to these measures, the use of green infrastructure presents an opportunity for the Community
to increase resilience while enhancing the community’s cultural resources. Green infrastructure
approaches use engineered systems that mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evaporate, retain, and
reuse stormwater runoff. There are a variety of types
of green infrastructure measures, including stormwater ponds and constructed wetlands, which contain
and naturally treat runoff on a large scale, as well
as localized installations, such as bioswales, which
naturally filter sediment and pollutants from stormwater as it enters the ground. Materials such as permeable paving can be used to allow for stormwater penetration into the ground, capture pollutants,
and improve runoff quality. These approaches can
mitigate flood issues by diverting stormwater from
the Community’s already overloaded stormwater
drainage system. The most effective type of green
infrastructure measure for a given area depends on
a number of factors, such as topography, land use,
the presence of aquifers or wells, soil type, ground
water levels, and existing natural resources. Based
on a preliminary assessment of these factors, potential locations for the installation of green infrastructure
in the Community were identified, as illustrated on
the following page.
While Green Infrastructure measures are commonly
used on public property, such as parks, medians,
and sidewalks, there are opportunities to increase

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

awareness of green infrastructure techniques for
residential and commercial property owners as well.
Homeowners can install rain barrels to capture rainwater, use permeable pavers for driveways, and generally increase the amount of landscaping on one’s
property, while commercial businesses can install
green roofs and use permeable pavers for parking
lots.
The need and opportunities discussed above were
the basis for developing recovery and resiliency strategies, which then, in turn, guided the creation of
projects that align with the strategies. This alignment
ensures that needs are addressed and opportunities
are realized through the rebuilding and recovery effort
discussed in the sections to follow.

Community Opportunities
Natural and Cultural Resources
• Long-term plans to protect Cammann’s Pond,
Merrick Road Park, and Newbridge Park
should be pursued, with an emphasis on
natural methods.
• Emphasize storm protection measures that
enhance, rather than degrade, the local
ecological system.
• Create plans for protected green space to
manage stormwater and provide wildlife
habitat.
• Develop process for acquisition of severely
damaged properties for use as public open
space, flood mitigation, stormwater retention,
and wildlife habitat.
• Educate public about ecological issues and
how resilience can be addressed using natural
systems. Raise awareness of the co-benefits
of ecological preservation, for example, the
role the marshes and barrier beaches play
in storm protection and the role inland parks
and preserves play in mitigating runoff and
pollution.
• Restore and clean wetlands at Norman J.
Levy Park and Preserve.
• Create a holistic plan for enhancing resiliency
at the Town of Hempstead Department of
Sanitation properties at and adjacent to 1600
Merrick Road.
• Restore and clean wetlands at Norman J.
Levy Park and Preserve.
• Create a holistic plan for enhancing resiliency
at the Town of Hempstead Department of
Sanitation properties at and adjacent to 1600
Merrick Road.

Assessment of Risks and Needs 63

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

E

V
CK A

WY

H
ISE

D
IDGE R
NEWBR

RI
MER

R
SUN

BY

BA
N

LO

BELLMORE
KE

TP

CK

RI

R
ME

RD

MERRICK

Green Infrastructure
Opportunity Area

Preliminary green infrastructure assessment for the NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Community (source: Arup)

64

Assessment of Risks and Needs

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

This page intentionally left blank

Assessment of Risks and Needs 65

Section III : Reconstruction
and Resiliency Strategies
The process of identifying the needs and opportunities of NYRCR Bellmore/
Merrick Community (Community) discussed in Section II informed the
NYRCR Planning Committee’s (Committee) development of the reconstruction and resiliency strategies. The reconstruction and resiliency strategies
put forward in this plan address pre-existing needs in the Community, while
also responding to the needs and risks revealed during Hurricane Irene and
Superstorm Sandy and their aftermath. In considering the long-term recovery of the hamlets, the strategies create opportunities for the Community to
conceive and implement projects that facilitate rebuilding in a safer and more
resilient, sustainable manner, addressing vulnerability and risk exposure in
order to achieve a better future for current and future residents.
As described in Section II, the Community is largely comprised of singlefamily residential homes with community-oriented retail businesses and limited industrial uses. Over 4,263 residential parcels and 152 commercial and
industrial parcels, most of which are concentrated south of Merrick Road,
are in extreme and high risk areas. Publically-owned land in extreme and
high risk areas includes the Town of Hempstead Department of Sanitation
facility, Four Towns Fireman’s Training Center, Nassau County Traffic Control
Division garage, Merrick Road Park, Cammanns Pond County Park, and
Fire Department Station #2.
The risks to these areas come from proximity to water and water features,
including shorelines, canals, creeks and watersheds, that rise during major
storm events. While proximity to these natural features presents a flood
risk, it also offers access to excellent natural resources and to natural and
Community assets prized by local residents. The Committee has recognized
that keeping the water out is impossible, but that making improvements to
both hard infrastructure, like drainage systems, and soft infrastructure, like
wetlands, can reduce damage from storm events and allow water to drain
more efficiently during and after storms. Energy resiliency was also identified
as a primary concern, as power loss after Superstorm Sandy was a significant hardship. Common themes in the analysis of needs and opportunities
also included issues related to education, communication, and business
continuity.
Facing image: Single-family home in Merrick (Source: Arup)

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

A. Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
The Reconstruction and Resilience Strategies
described below were developed to achieve rebuilding goals, increase resilience, and promote economic
stability within the Community. These strategies
address regional concerns, problem areas, community feedback on local needs, and iterative development by the Committee and Consultant Team. Each
strategy is meant to fulfill one or more of the Recovery
Support Functions (RSFs) while addressing risks and
needs to resolve critical Community issues. These
resiliency strategies are then addressed through the
projects identified by the Committee and Community
members as important for consideration in the NY
Rising process.
The projects represent actions, plans, and projects
that offer a higher degree of flood protection, a greater
degree of preparation, enabling the area to bounce
back quicker after the next event, and stronger physical and natural networks around the Community to
allow for a higher level of support before, during, and
after a storm event. These same projects improve the
day-to-day functioning of the local infrastructure and
strengthen and enhance community characteristics,
contributing to the quality-of-life identified by local
Community members as being vital. The strategies
on the pages to follow have been organized into the
following areas:
• Improve Stormwater Management
and Drainage Systems;
• Establish Programs and Policies for Resilient
Planning, Design, and Housing;
• Enhance Communication,
Education, and Awareness;
• Improve Transportation Access and Connectivity;
• Invest in Resilience Enhancements
for Energy Infrastructure; and
• Plan for Business Continuity and Growth.
A description is provided for each strategy, followed by tables presenting Proposed Projects
and Featured Projects (see sidebar for definitions)
that would contribute to its implementation. A full
description of each project can be found in Section
IV: Implementation – Project Profiles. Additional
Resiliency Recommendations are included in Section
V: Additional Materials.

68

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Project Types
Proposed Projects: Projects proposed for
funding through Community Development Block
Grant (CDBG-DR) funding.
Featured Projects: Innovative projects where an
initial study or discrete first phases of the project
is proposed for CDBG-DR funding but additional
funding is required, an important a project where
other identified funding opportunities exists, and
regulatory reforms and other programs that do
not involve capital expenditures.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations:
Resiliency projects and actions the Committee
would like to highlight that are not categorized as
Proposed or Featured Projects.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Improve Stormwater Management and Drainage Systems
Improvements to the Community’s stormwater management and drainage systems are critical to reducing
regular flooding caused by tidal and precipitation events. This strategy addresses both the Infrastructure and
Natural and Cultural Resources Recovery Support Functions with projects to improve stormwater drainage
capacity and enhance natural assets, incorporating green infrastructure initiatives and storm sewer upgrades.
The Bellmore/Merrick Stormwater Drainage, Outfall, and Bulkhead Repair project includes the evaluation of
230 coastal outfalls along the Community’s shoreline. Tidal check valves will be installed at 25 locations where
they are deemed to be an effective option for addressing tidal flooding. Three projects, two in south Bellmore
and one in south Merrick, address flooding by raising roads and upgrading existing stormwater infrastructure.
Better information about the flow of surface and subsurface water is needed to effectively address flooding
issues. The South Shore Stormwater System Modeling and Analysis project uses a hydrologic and hydraulic
simulation model to identify the causes of flooding throughout the south shore region. This model allows the
Community to be strategic in its use of funds to mitigate flooding by ensuring future projects will be informed
by a more accurate understanding of the issues.
The enhancement of wetlands and other natural drainage features can help reduce flooding and improve water
quality. Green infrastructure initiatives within the Town of Hempstead (Town) parcels near Merrick Road and
Clubhouse Drive will help reduce the risk of flooding to several key assets, such as Merrick Senior Center, the
Town’s Department of Sanitation facility, Merrick Golf Course, Merrick Road Park, and the Norman J. Levy
Park and Preserve. Addressing flooding on these parcels can also help prevent flooding along the adjacent
stretch of Merrick Road, which flooded during Superstorm Sandy, preventing access to the Meadowbrook
State Parkway evacuation route. Flooding in this area will also be addressed through green infrastructure pilot
projects within the Meadowbrook Corridor.
The Downtown and Commercial Corridor Resiliency Plan project will identify flooding issues along Sunrise
Highway, which result from an unused subsurface conduit that obstructs the flow of water from the north
of Sunrise Highway to areas to the south of the highway. It will also identify potential for green infrastructure
improvements along existing corridors and as part of new development.

Table 06: Strategy: Improve Stormwater Management and Drainage Systems
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Bellmore/Merrick
Stormwater
Drainage and Outfall
Repair Repair

Assess the entire Bellmore/Merrick drainage system
south of Merrick Road, including the 230 outfalls
and related bulkheads. Tidal check valves will be
installed on 25 critical and appropriate outfalls. Four
publically-owned bulkheads will be replaced.

$4,150,000

Proposed

N

Southwest Merrick
Masterplan and
Flood Mitigation Pilot
Project

Creation of a Masterplan to re-envision the Town
of Hempstead parcels. A newly reconfigured site
would provide enhanced flood mitigation for the
amenities on-site as well as for Merrick Road.
Shoreline stabilization or green infrastructure pilot
project upon Masterplan completion.

$2,400,000

Proposed

N

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

69

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 06 (cont’d) : Strategy: Improve Stormwater Management and Drainage Systems
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Meadowbrook
Corridor
Improvements Pilot
Study

Hydrologic and hydraulic (H&H) model of Freeport
Creek watershed.
East Meadow Pond drainage study.
Green infrastructure pilot projects, potentially
including: creek restoration, regenerative storm
conveyance outfall retrofits, and floating wetlands.

$1,800,000

Proposed

Y

South Shore
Stormwater System
Modeling and
Analysis

Hydrologic and hydraulic (H&H) model to determine
the causes of localized flooding issues across the
catchment and identify measures to prevent the
flooding.

$725,000

Proposed

Y

Downtown and
Commercial Corridor
Resiliency Plan

Study to address opportunities for commercial and/
or residential redevelopment out of extreme and
high risk zones.
Identify microgrid opportunities with alternative
power distribution.
Identify stormwater and green infrastructure
opportunities for new development.

$500,000

Proposed

N

Bellmore Road
Raising: KopfBoundary Road Area

Road raising and associated drainage
improvements for North Rd, Kopf Rd, Clubhouse
Rd, Alder Rd, Beach Ave, Short St, Barbara Rd, and
Boundary Rd.

$2,950,000

Featured

N

Bellmore Road
Raising: Army, Navy,
Marine and Shore
Road

Road raising and associated drainage
improvements for Shore Rd, Walters Ct, Horace
Ct, Army Pl, Navy Pl, Marine Pl, Surf Dr, Riviera La,
Malibu Rd, Driftwood La, Seaview La, and May Ct.

$3,150,000

Featured

N

Merrick Road
Raising: George
Court to Leslie Lane

Road raising and associated drainage
improvements for George Ct, Helen Ct, Leonard La,
Edward La, Leslie La, and Julian La.

$1,250,000

Featured

N

70

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Establish Programs and Policies for Resilient Planning, Design, and Housing
Resilient planning and design initiatives include programs and policies that support and incentivize resilient
building and reconstruction. This strategy addresses the RSFs of Infrastructure, Housing, Natural and Cultural
Resources, and Economic Development.
The Southwest Merrick Masterplan and Flood Mitigation Pilot Project will implement resilience strategies
across a collection of Town-owned properties near Merrick and Clubhouse Roads. This includes the Town
Department of Sanitation Waste Transfer Station and the Norman J. Levy Park and Preserve. The Masterplan
will recommend resilient building strategies to upgrade Town-owned facilities, as well as introduce green infrastructure measures to alleviate flooding in and around site areas.
The Downtown and Commercial Corridor Resiliency Plan will explore potential for redevelopment and revitalization opportunities in the Community’s commercial areas, with an emphasis on beautification, flood mitigation,
and energy resiliency. Marina and Dock Resilience Guidelines, developed in partnership with marina operators,
will provide recommendations to assist boat owners in preparing for future storms, as well as recommend dock
design and siting and evacuation procedures.

Table 07: Strategy: Establish Programs and Policies for Resilient Planning, Design, and Housing
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Southwest Merrick
Masterplan and
Flood Mitigation Pilot
Project

Creation of a Masterplan to re-envision the Town
of Hempstead parcels. A newly reconfigured site
would provide enhanced flood mitigation for the
amenities on-site as well as for Merrick Road.
Shoreline stabilization or green infrastructure pilot
project upon Masterplan completion.

$2,400,000

Proposed

N

Downtown and
Commercial Corridor
Resiliency Plan

Study to address opportunities for commercial and/
or residential redevelopment out of extreme and
high risk zones.
Identify microgrid opportunities with alternative
power distribution.
Identify stormwater and green infrastructure
opportunities for new development.

$500,000

Proposed

N

Marina and
Dock Resilience
Guidelines

Emergency preparedness guidelines,
recommendations and education.

$100,000

Featured

N

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

71

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Enhance Communication, Education, and Awareness
Improved communication, education, and awareness will assist the Community in better preparing for emergencies, as well as enhancing communication abilities during and after storm events. This strategy addresses
the RSFs of Community Planning and Capacity Building and Infrastructure with projects that address emergency communication, preparedness, and awareness.
The Community Assistance Centers (CACs) project proposed in this strategy would establish two public buildings where residents can find emergency preparedness information and education throughout the year, and
which will also serve as places to find resources and aid after major storm events. CACs will be equipped with
on-site generation capacity to ensure that power is available during outages. Possible locations include the
Bellmore and Merrick Libraries.
The Public Education and Communication Gap Analysis will study Nassau County’s existing emergency management efforts to identify opportunities to create a single, user-friendly source for comprehensive emergency
assistance information collected from a variety of public agencies. It will identify gaps in the existing communication network and find ways to more effectively link the local government, emergency management agencies,
residents, businesses, and faith-based groups, as well as non-profit organizations that direct aid and recovery
efforts to the Community’s socially vulnerable populations.

Table 08: Strategy: Enhance Communication, Education, and Awareness
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Bellmore Merrick
Community
Assistance Centers

Community Assistance Centers are places for
residents to gather information about emergency
preparedness under normal conditions. During and
after a storm, these centers would become a place
to gather, collect and distribute resources, charge
cell phones, access the internet/TV, and seek
comfort.

$1,265,000

Proposed

N

Public
Communication
and Education Gap
Analysis

Evaluate existing communication and educational
processes and uncover additional needs.
Identify public/private partnership opportunities for
ongoing communication and education needs.

$20,000

Proposed

Y

Business Continuity
Program

Staff person to assist businesses in creating
business continuity plans.
Education for Chambers of Commerce and other
business organization.
Identify business assistance funding.

$40,000

Proposed

Y

72

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Improve Transportation Access and Connectivity
Storm damage during Superstorm Sandy resulted in flooding, loss of power and an impaired transportation
system. This strategy addresses the Infrastructure RSF with projects that address transportation infrastructure.
Prolonged power outages after Superstorm Sandy left streetlights and signals inoperable, making it difficult for
residents to navigate their way to safety. Flooding during Superstorm Sandy also made key roads impassable.
Projects to address the resiliency of the transportation network are included in this strategy.
The Lifeline Corridor Study and Guidelines and Downtown and Commercial Corridor Resiliency Plan projects will identify improvements to drainage, streetscape, streetlights, and traffic flow in order to make the
Community’s commercial and local streets more resilient. Infrastructure improvement projects include the
installation of solar-powered streetlights with battery backup at key intersections and the implementation of a
signage system to guide residents to Community Assistance Centers and other emergency services. Burying,
or “undergrounding”, power lines would prevent damage from adjacent vegetation and could be combined
with regular road maintenance work or scheduled improvements.

Table 09: Strategy: Improve Transportation Access and Connectivity
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Lifeline Corridor
Study and
Guidelines

Best practices and guidelines for Resilient
Streetscapes, such as green infrastructure, drainage
practices, redundant and safe power, resilient street
trees and street design.

$120,000

Proposed

Y

Key Intersection
Street Light Retrofit

Installation of LED/PV streetlights on utility poles
along Merrick Road in Merrick and Bellmore.

$4,630,000

Proposed

N

Downtown and
Commercial Corridor
Resiliency Plan

Study to address opportunities for commercial and/
or residential redevelopment out of extreme and
high risk zones.
Identify microgrid opportunities with alternative
power distribution.
Identify stormwater and green infrastructure
opportunities for new development.

$500,000

Proposed

N

Resilient Streetscape
Implementation

Underground seven miles of utility lines.
New PV/LED street lights.
New emergency evacuation signage.

$58,000,000

Featured

N

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

73

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Invest in Resilience Enhancements for Energy Infrastructure
Investing in energy infrastructure enhancements can help improve the reliability and efficiency of the electrical
grid, benefiting Community members and customers throughout the region. This strategy primarily addresses
the RSF of Infrastructure by introducing plans to update and expand energy distribution and generation assets.
Because a reliable energy grid is critical to sustaining businesses, this strategy also incorporates measures
that support the Economic Development RSF by advocating the installation and distribution of generation
resources in commercial districts.
The Downtown and Commercial Corridor Resiliency Plan project will evaluate the potential for microgrids in
downtown Merrick and Bellmore, potentially connecting to the LIRR power supply or leveraging alternative
power generation. The Key Intersection Streetlight Retrofit and Resilient Streetscape Implementation projects
include the installation of photovoltaic streetlights equipped with battery backup.

Table 10: Strategy: Invest in Resilience Enhancements for Energy Infrastructure
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Key Intersection
Street Light Retrofit

Installation of LED/PV streetlights on utility poles
along Merrick Road in Merrick and Bellmore.

$4,630,000

Proposed

N

Downtown and
Commercial Corridor
Resiliency Plan

Study to address opportunities for commercial and/
or residential redevelopment out of extreme and
high risk zones.
Identify microgrid opportunities with alternative
power distribution.
Identify stormwater and green infrastructure
opportunities for new development.

$500,000

Proposed

N

Resilient Streetscape
Implementation

Underground seven miles of utility lines.
New PV/LED street lights.
New emergency evacuation signage.

$58,000,000

Featured

N

74

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Plan for Business Continuity and Growth
Business continuity and economic resiliency is crucial as the Community continues to face severe weather
risks in the future. While most business owners affected by Superstorm Sandy were able to rebuild and
resume operations, the loss of revenue and cost of repairs represented a significant financial loss. This strategy addresses the Economic Development RSF through projects that increase the physical and operational
resilience of Community businesses.
The Business Continuity Program will provide assistance for businesses to maintain operations under adverse
conditions, such as a major storm event. New resilience guidelines for marinas would protect these businesses and neighboring properties from storm damage, unsecured boats, and debris from destroyed waterway structures.
Excess demand for retail in the Community was identified in the housing needs analysis and indicates a potential for business growth. The Downtown and Commercial Corridor Resiliency Plan project will evaluate how
new commercial development would be incorporated into downtown Merrick and Bellmore, as well as along
the commercial corridors, in a resilient manner.

Table 11: Strategy: Plan for Business Continuity and Growth
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Business Continuity
Program

Staff person to assist businesses in creating
business continuity plans.
Education for Chambers of Commerce and other
business organization.
Identify business assistance funding.

$40,000

Proposed

Y

Downtown and
Commercial Corridor
Resiliency Plan

Study to address opportunities for commercial and/
or residential redevelopment out of extreme and
high risk zones.
Identify microgrid opportunities with alternative
power distribution.
Identify stormwater and green infrastructure
opportunities for new development.

$500,000

Proposed

N

Marina and
Dock Resilience
Guidelines

Emergency preparedness guidelines,
recommendations and education

$100,000

Featured

N

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

75

Section IV : Implementation
– Project Profiles
The New York Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program has
allocated to the NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Planning Committee (Committee)
up to $12.1 million (Bellmore: $5.7 million; Merrick: $6.4 million). Funding is
provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
program. While developing projects and actions for inclusion in the NYRCR
Bellmore/Merrick Plan (Plan), Planning Committees took into account cost
estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees also considered the potential likelihood that a
project or action would be eligible for CDBG-DR funding.
The projects and actions set forth in the NYRCR Plan are divided into three
categories. The order in which the projects and actions are listed in the
NYRCR Plan does not indicate the Community’s prioritization of these
projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding through the Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding. Featured
Projects are projects and actions that the Planning Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in depth,
but has not proposed for funding through the NYRCR Program. Additional
Resiliency Recommendations (see Section V) are projects and actions that
the Planning Committee would like to highlight, but that are not categorized
as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects.

Facing image: Residential street in Merrick (Source: Arup)

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The total cost of Proposed Projects in the NYRCR
Plan exceeds NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Community’s
(Community) CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review, HUD eligibility,
technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation
of the projects and actions found in the NYRCR Plan
are subject to applicable Federal, State, and local
laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action
in the NYRCR Plan does not guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for CDBG-DR
funding or that it will be implemented.
This section provides a complete project profile for
each Proposed or Featured Project identified by
the Committee. Project profiles for the following
Proposed and Featured Projects include a description and information on two important elements to
evaluate the value of each project: a Cost-Benefit
Analysis and a Risk Reduction Analysis.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
A cost-benefit analysis (CBA) is a tool used to calculate and compare the benefits and costs associated
with a project. The CBA provides decision-makers
with a framework for comparing different projects
(i.e., anticipated cost of implementation against total
expected benefits) and determining whether the benefits of a particular project outweigh the costs. More
specifically, the value of the CBA is two-fold: (1) To
inform the Committee as they consider projects for
implementation; and (2) to help municipalities prepare grant applications for funding.
Because the NYRCR Program is a communitydriven process, the CBA has focused on identifying
project costs and benefits that easily relate to the
Community. Committee and Community input –
informed by a true understanding of local conditions,
needs, and community values – plays a crucial role in
the selection of projects to be implemented. With this
in mind, the CBA has used a mix of both quantitative
and qualitative factors in its analysis.

78

Implementation – Project Profiles

Project Costs
Project Profiles include a capital cost estimate. The
cost-benefit analysis cannot, however, project costs
or benefits with complete certainty; rather, it provides
the Community with a practical understanding of the
potential estimated costs of project implementation
and the potential benefits accrued to the Community
with the particular project in place.
The cost of implementing a project is just one
aspect of the justification for funding these Proposed
Projects. Conversely, another important variable is
the future costs of not implementing these Proposed
Projects, which has the potential to negatively impact
the long-term viability of both the Community and its
neighboring south shore communities.
While these costs are more difficult to quantify, they
are no less important to our analysis, and are therefore addressed qualitatively. These costs include:
• Extensive, repetitive damage to personal property, including vehicles and residences, and public infrastructure resulting from frequent recurring
flooding and future storm events;
• Economic loss to residents and to local and
regional employers as a result of the inability to
work; and
• Hindrance in the provision of life safety and
emergency services, resulting in repeated inability to access vast areas of the community.
For five Proposed Projects that are more regional in
scale, the Community is partnering with neighboring
NYRCR communities to fund these projects. When
the estimated project cost is a portion of a shared
project, it is noted in the Project Profile.
Project Benefits
The projects listed offer a number of benefits, which
have been grouped into the following categories:
• Risk Reduction: The extent to which a project
reduces the risk of damage to a Community
Asset from a future storm event (discussed
below under “Risk Reduction Analysis”).

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

• Economic Resiliency: The project’s potential
to help minimize economic costs and reduce
the time it takes the local economy to rebound
from a storm event. Economic data included,
where applicable, an estimate of permanent
jobs secured/added; relationship to, and/or furtherance of, Regional Economic Development
Plan goals; potential for additional economic
activity; and the net effect on local municipal
expenditures.
• Health, Social and Public Safety Services:
Qualitative information was provided on the
overall population benefits of improved access
to health and social service facilities and public
safety services, type and size of socially vulnerable population secured, and degree to which
essential health and social service facilities are
able to provide services to a community during a
future storm or weather event as a result of the
project.

level rise). A risk reduction score is then assigned to
each project scenario. This helps communities and
decision-makers understand the potential environmental, social, and economic outcomes associated
with each scenario.
A full list of Proposed and Featured projects can be
seen in Table 12 on the following page. Table 12
includes a “Key” column that references the project
map in Figure 08, which provides the geographic
location of projects included in the NYRCR Plan
(note: project numbering is used for location purposes and does not indicate prioritization). Some
projects are not included on the map as they cover
a larger geographic area, or require additional analysis and study to determine the appropriate location.
When possible, project locations will be specified in
the individual project profiles.

• Environmental Protection: Benefits include
the protection of crucial environmental assets or
high-priority habitat, threatened and endangered
species, migration or habitat connectivity; any
clean-up resulting from the action; and creation
of open space or a new recreational asset.
Risk Reduction Analysis
A Risk Reduction Analysis estimates the extent to
which Proposed and Featured Projects will reduce
storm damage (environmental, social, and economic)
and flooding risk to specific Community Assets when
the project is in place. (The extent to which a project reduced such risk is also considered as a benefit
in the Cost Benefit Analysis – see “Project Benefits”
above.) Risk “reduction” is different from the risk
“assessment” in the previous section in a very important way – risk assessment looks at storm and flood
risks to Community Assets before the project is
implemented; risk reduction looks at the reduced risk
after the project is in place.
The Risk Reduction Analysis uses a tool called
“Scenario Planning.” Scenario Planning measures
a project’s potential to reduce risk under a variety/
range of potential future environmental conditions
or scenarios (e.g., different levels of projected sea
Implementation – Project Profiles

79

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 12: Project list and location key
Key

Category

Project Name

P1

Proposed

Bellmore/Merrick Stormwater Drainage, Outfall, and Bulkhead
Repair

P2

Proposed

Southwest Merrick Masterplan and Flood Mitigation Pilot Project

P3

Proposed

Meadowbrook Corridor Stormwater System Modeling, Analysis,
and Pilot

P4

Proposed

Bellmore/Merrick Community Assistance Centers

P5

Proposed

Public Communication and Education Gap Analysis

Not shown, Community-wide

P6

Proposed

Business Continuity Program

Not shown, Community-wide

P7

Proposed

Lifeline Corridor Study and Guidelines

Not shown, Location TBD

P8

Proposed

Key Intersection Streetlight Retrofit

Not shown, Community-wide

P9

Proposed

Downtown and Commercial Corridor Resiliency Plan

P10

Proposed

South Shore Stormwater System Modeling and Analysis

F1

Featured

Resilient Streetscape Implementation

F2

Featured

Bellmore road raising: Army Place, Navy Place, Marine Place and
Shore Road

F3

Featured

Bellmore Road Raising: Koft-Boundary Road Area

F4

Featured

Merrick Road Raising: George Court to Leslie Lane

F5

Featured

Marina and Dock Resilience Guidelines

80

Implementation – Project Profiles

Notes

Not shown, Location TBD

Figure 08: Proposed and Featured Projects

H
AG
LT

E
AV

MEA

BE

DOW

CA

MP

R

E
AV

P9

AY
HW

SUN

RE

VE
DA

P4

Merrick LIRR

HIG
ISE

MO

LL

IDGE RD

VE
KA

Bellmore LIRR

P9

P3

FOR

P9

BED

NEWBR

RIC

MER

Y
PKW
TATE
OK S

BE

BRO

AV
E

RICK

MER

P4

D

ROA

BY

BA

F1
LO

P9
F3

N

P8

KE

TP

F2

F4

P2

PROJECTS THROUGHOUT
COASTAL AREAS

P1 P10 F5

EAST BAY

0

Legend
NYRCR Boundary

Data Sources
Proposed Project

Long Island Rail Road

Proposed Project Area

LIRR Station

Featured Project

Refer to Table 12 for Project
list and location key

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS
Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

This page intentionally left blank

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Lifeline Corridor Study and Guidelines

Artist’s impression of Merrick Road as a “green street” (source: Arup)

Throughout the NYRCR Communities of Baldwin,
Bellmore/Merrick, Freeport, Massapequas, and
Seaford/Wantagh, conditions on various roads after
Superstorm Sandy compromised life safety and
impeded the ability of first responders and residents
to access certain destinations. Issues, such as lack
of power to traffic lights, lack of street lighting, flooding, downed power lines, damaged trees, and debris
all contributed to disruptions to the road network.
By strategically focusing infrastructure investments to
key streets within the five areas, a “Lifeline Network”
could be developed that would provide maximum
accessibility in and out of residential neighborhoods,
as well as in and out of the area in general. This
network of State, County, and local streets would

Merrick Road in Merrick (source: Arup)

Implementation – Project Profiles

83

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

integrate resilient streetscape design, such as redundant power and improved drainage systems, so it will
be more resilient to storm events and better able to
serve first responders and residents before, during,
and after a storm.
The project includes a study to determine the location
and specific objectives of the Lifeline Network streets,
followed by the creation of guidelines for increasing
the resiliency of Merrick Road and Sunrise Highway,
which traverse all five NYRCR Communities, and a
north-south street in each Community.
This study seeks to accomplish the following:
• Coordinate the needs and efforts of all
relevant jurisdictions and agencies;
• Identify a network of “Lifeline Corridors”; and
• Develop guidelines for street improvements
to be made to Lifeline Corridors.
The study will identify best practices and develop
design guidelines for resilient streetscapes. The
guidelines will include opportunities for:

Project Benefits
This project addresses the Infrastructure Recovery
Support Function (RSF). Developing streetscape
design guidelines that incorporate resiliency features,
green infrastructure, and complete streets principles
will provide the Communities with the information
needed to refit critical roads to function better in case
of major storm events.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
Green street design will improve stormwater drainage and reduce the amount of standing water on
roadways, allowing for safe vehicle operation during
all types of inclement weather. Managing/trimming
street trees will enhance energy security for NYRCR
Communities by removing threats to the electrical
distribution system.
Economic Benefits

• Redundant and safe power distribution
(stand-alone lighting and signaling,
undergrounding power lines);

This project also reduces government expenditures
by reducing the cost of power supply to public facilities. Enhancement of roadway corridors in this manner will increase the attractiveness of more areas in
the Community. This will provide economic benefit
by diversifying the less risk-prone areas to which
waterfront landowners could relocate within the
community.

• Resilient street trees (trees that are more
resilient to wind and saltwater); and

Health and Social Benefits

• “Complete Streets” design (flexible lanes,
bicycle capacity, sidewalk width, treatment and
amenities, and appropriate transit provision).

Introducing more tolerant and resistant street trees
will reduce the occurrence of downed trees and
limbs that may block roadway access.

The guidelines will also include cross-section designs
for Merrick Road, Sunrise Highway, and a northsouth street in each Community that integrates the
resilient streetscape methods listed above.

By maintaining a stable energy supply along key
roads, emergency response facilities will have a better chance of remaining operational during storm
events, reducing risk to the population through faster
emergency response. Buildings and homes throughout the Community, including those housing vulnerable populations, will have a better chance of retaining electricity and remaining habitable, reducing the
need for immediate emergency response or shelter.

• “Green Street” design (stormwater
management and green infrastructure);

Estimated Project Cost
This project has also been proposed in the neighboring NYRCR Communities of Baldwin, Freeport,
Massapequas, and Seaford/Wantagh. The approximate total project cost is $600,000, with an estimated
contribution of $120,000 by the NYRCR Bellmore/
Merrick Community.

84

Implementation – Project Profiles

Solar power and battery backup systems for streetlights will improve public safety at night. Access to
critical assets will be secured, including key routes
from coastal areas to Community Assistance

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Centers. Recovery efforts can be accomplished
at night, improving the pace at which access to
roadways and properties can be restored, which
has multiple benefits including improving access to
community facilities, reducing roadway congestion,
improving travel time and fuel efficiency, and improving local economic recovery. Complete streets will
improve walking, cycling, and transit infrastructure by
offering viable alternatives to automobile travel and
improving access for vulnerable populations.

and attract new residents. These functions, in turn,
protect public and private assets throughout the
Community by reducing flood risks and reserving
stormwater capacity to move excess water that cannot be stored or absorbed locally out of the area.
The public and private assets span all asset classes
throughout the vulnerable areas of the Community
and such systems will improve overall population
protection.
Risk Reduction Analysis

Environmental Benefits
The volume of stormwater being released into the
South Shore Estuary will be reduced and the water
that does reach the estuary will be filtered of toxins.
Tree trimming guidelines will enable the Community
to maintain the environmental benefits of trees,
including surface water retention, decreased soil erosion, shade, and air quality improvements. Complete
street guidelines can reduce the use of private automobiles, reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the
process.

Developing design guidelines for future roadway
improvements will reduce Merrick Road’s risk of
flooding and debris, which would block transportation access and might interfere with the electrical
distribution network. Independent streetlight power
sources, proposed for the pilot project, will improve
public safety along the road at night, reducing risk
to Community residents. Developing mechanisms
to improve transportation access and options can
reduce the risk of social isolation, which is exacerbated after disasters, for socially vulnerable
populations.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
The design guidelines represent a small investment
with multiple returns by changing how roads and
corridors are designed. These guidelines can be
integrated into normal maintenance, operations, and
capital programming activities. When applied to subsequent projects, the guidelines will transform singlepurpose roads into Community Assets serving multiple functions and offering local benefits, as described
above. The guidelines can also be used in an efficient
manner without disrupting normal operations for the
Town. Once developed, they can be applied during
standard maintenance cycles and as they become
manifest in the built environment, the Communities
that sit along them will become more resilient and
robust. Once installed, the new street designs will
increase the safety and reliability of the roadway system during and after any storm event, as the lighting
system will be independent from local power supply,
allowing for quick restoration of access after a storm.

General Timeframe for Implementation
The implementation of this project will take approximately 24 months from commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements related to this
project.
Jurisdiction
NYS Department of Transportation, Nassau County,
and Town of Hempstead.

Green infrastructure will enhance the attractiveness
and livability of the Community, while reducing and
filtering stormwater. Enhanced Community attractiveness and livability will help bolster home values
Implementation – Project Profiles

85

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Downtown and
Commercial Corridor Resiliency Plan

An artist’s impression of a resilient downtown streetscape (source: Arup)

Downtown Merrick and Bellmore are both home to
clusters of businesses, near their respective Long
Island Rail Road (LIRR) stations, that provide commercial and entertainment uses to local residents.
The economic health of these areas is crucial to the
appeal of living in Bellmore and Merrick. Similarly, the
key commercial corridors, such as Merrick Road,
Newbridge Road, and Sunrise Highway, provide
important retail services to the Community. Many
of these businesses were negatively impacted by
Superstorm Sandy, either by physical damage, loss
of revenues, reduced working hours for employees, or, in some cases, they permanently closed for
business.
The economic health of local residents has also been
negatively impacted by Superstorm Sandy. The cost
of raising and maintaining a home in the Community
has significantly increased, in an area where existing
86

Implementation – Project Profiles

The existing condition of Bedford Avenue in
downtown Bellmore (Source: Arup)

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

home prices were already high. Downtown Merrick
and Bellmore have been identified as an area where
housing opportunities could be created in the future.
This project includes a comprehensive planning and
resiliency study to re-envision the downtown and
commercial corridors in both Merrick and Bellmore.
The planning study will address the following:
• Opportunities for housing and commercial
business creation out of high and extreme risk
areas, close to LIRR stations, to expand the
tax base. New housing will diversify current
the housing mix, which is almost exclusively
single-family homes, and will assist young
people, seniors, and low/moderate-income
residents in being able to stay or move to area.
• Assess emergency needs related to
Downtown as a hub for major evacuation
routes (car, rail, mass transit).
• Evaluate demand for hotel uses that could
provide additional shelter during emergencies.
• Identify opportunities for use of existing
buildings/facilities for temporary
shelters in the downtown area.
• Identify microgrid opportunities with
alternative power generation.
• Identify stormwater management, including green
infrastructure, which could be incorporated by
new developments and existing property owners.
• Recommendations for new zoning,
building codes, and/or design regulations
to make downtown more resilient.
Estimated Project Costs
The Proposed Project will cost an estimated
$500,000.
Project Benefits
Creating a plan for the downtown area provides an
opportunity to create a safer, cleaner, more attractive, and more economically resilient Community. The
Downtown and Commercial Corridor Resiliency Plan
addresses all of the Recovery Support Functions.

Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
The Proposed Project will create a plan for downtown growth, allowing for the construction of new
residences and businesses outside of low-lying and
flood-prone areas. As a result, lower-risk options for
housing and commercial space will be available for
residents and businesses currently located in higher
risk areas. It would offer an opportunity to relocate
should a resident or business wish to move out of a
risk zone, yet still remain in the Community. The regulatory recommendations for resilient buildings will
ensure that the risk of flooding to newly constructed
buildings is adequately reduced. Lastly, the investigation of microgrid potential in the Community may
provide an opportunity for greater energy reliability
during future events and reducing the risk of unsafe
conditions following future disasters.
Economic Benefits
Implementation of the plan will help the Community
develop a more robust economy and potentially
increase tax revenues through development, commercial, and retail uses. In developing a microgrid,
energy costs can be reduced and capacity can be
increased to enable potential economic growth.
Greater economic continuity can be achieved if businesses can be located outside of risk areas, protecting a valuable revenue stream for local governments
should future storms occur.
Health and Social Benefits
Social benefits of the plan include access to more
affordable and diverse housing options. Providing
new housing, economic development, and recreation
opportunities in the downtown area can improve the
public realm and facilitate walkability. These areas will
also provide better transit access and improve access
to community services for socially vulnerable populations. Developing a central location with a cluster of
essential services that can effectively avoid power
loss through implementation of a microgrid is highly
beneficial to Community members’ ability to directly
access resources and information following a future
disaster. Diverting or delaying stormwater from entering the drainage system through the development of
green infrastructure systems can protect Community
Assets, homes, and businesses from flooding.
Implementation – Project Profiles

87

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Fostering vibrant, pedestrian-oriented downtowns
and commercial corridors encourages walking,
which provides health benefits to local residents and
employees.
Environmental Benefits
A walkable and attractive downtown area can also
reduce road congestion and vehicle emissions by
reducing the need for short car trips to the train station or shopping areas. Sustainable mobility options
may also reduce the amount of pollution from stormwater runoff from automobiles. The development of
a microgrid can also enable the generation of clean
energy, improving local air quality and reducing the
generation of greenhouse gases in the Community.
Green infrastructure can also provide numerous environmental benefits, including groundwater recharging, pollutant reduction in bays and wetlands, aesthetics, air quality improvements, and shade and
cooling on hot days.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Creating a plan for future resiliency and economic
development in the Community’s Downtown and
along commercial corridors would cost approximately $500,000. In the creation of opportunities
for growth, development, and possible relocation to
less risky areas, the plan and subsequent development can reduce both the exposure to harm and
the potential need to rebuild by creating opportunities to relocate within the Community to areas of
greater safety. The development that results from the
Downtown plan will generate construction jobs during the building phase and local jobs at retail or commercial establishments after the project(s) are built.
Finally, green infrastructure can reduce or eliminate
the costs of future stormwater drainage infrastructure
by dealing with stormwater on site. The additional
tax revenue that can be generated from attractive
commercial development and subsequent increase
in local spending can also help to justify the project
cost.

88

Implementation – Project Profiles

Risk Reduction Analysis
This Proposed Project will offer suitable areas for
relocation of businesses and residents who want to
move closer to Downtown and away from the shoreline or other high risk areas. The plan can lead to the
development of hundreds of new houses outside of
flood risk areas, reducing the risk to the overall housing market in the Community.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This proposed project can be implemented within 24
months of project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements related to this
project.
Jurisdiction
The Town of Hempstead has jurisdiction and permitting approval for property improvement projects in
downtown Merrick and Bellmore.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Bellmore/Merrick Stormwater
Drainage, Outfall, and Bulkhead Repair

Existing outfalls

Drainage outfall locations throughout the Community (source: Arup)

South of Merrick Road, the Community is characterized by peninsulas fronting the Merrick and East
Bays with several narrow waterways reaching as
far north as Merrick Road. The combination of the
area’s low elevation and high groundwater table has
led to a chronic flooding problem. Flooding occurs
during rainfall, storm surges, and high tide. During
Superstorm Sandy flood waters rose over bulkheads
and into neighborhoods, with seawater travelling
back up through stormwater drains, bringing with it
debris from the bay. During Hurricane Irene flooding
due to heavy rainfall overwhelmed the drainage system’s capacity.
There are approximately 230 drainage outfalls along
the coast of the Community that discharge storm
water collected upland from impervious surfaces,

such as building roofs and streets, into the bay. Most
of these outfalls do not have check valves, therefore
creating a direct path for tidal water to inundate the
drainage system and cause a reduction in the system’s capacity, as well as flood roadways with saltwater upstream of the outfalls.
This project proposes to survey and inspect the
location, condition, and elevation of the Community’s
drainage system south of Merrick Road, including outfalls, related bulkheads, underground pipes,
manholes, and catch basins. This information will not
only inform the appropriateness of the installation of a
check valve, but also help to focus the installation to
key locations that will be most effective at mitigating
flood risk. Tidal check valves of either the inline pipe
type or the slip-on duckbill type will be installed on 25

Implementation – Project Profiles

89

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

critical and appropriate outfalls. The chosen outfalls
will be the ones deemed most effective for preventing
upland flooding.

DUCK BILL TYPE
CHECK VALVE
CATCH BASIN
INSERT

A check valve at the end of an outfall prevents storm surge
of high tides from entering the drainage system. Catchbasin
inserts prevent debris accumulation (source: Arup)

DRAINAGE
OUTFALL

The project will include four phases, including an
area-wide system survey and inspection; an assessment of check valves; check valve installation; and
conveyance system cleaning and repair.
• Phase 1: Area-wide Survey and Inspection to
determine the condition of each outfall along
the coastline and any associated bulkheads; a
survey and inspection of drainage infrastructure
leading upland; and an assessment of the size,
type, and location of any check valves that may
be present.
• Phase 2: Check Valve Assessment will
assess and categorize all outfalls in need of
improvements.
• Phase 3: Check Valve Installation and
Conveyance System Cleaning will, based on
the Phase Two analysis, install check valves at
locations where valves are determined to be an
effective method of flood mitigation and where
the most critical need exists.

CATCH BASIN

Several outfalls do not have check valves,
allowing storm surge, high tide, and debris to
enter the drainage system (source: Arup)

• Phase 4: Bulkhead Replacement will replace a
limited number of bulkheads owned by the Town
of Hempstead (Town) where existing damage
would prohibit the upgrade of an outfall and/or
installation of check valve.
Estimated Project Cost
The total estimated cost of this project is $4,150,000.
Project Benefits
This area south of Merrick Road is subject to episodic flooding and has a high level of vulnerability
during a storm event. The featured project addresses
the Infrastructure, Housing, Economic Development,
and Natural and Cultural Resources Recovery
Support Functions (RSF) and provides risk reduction and resiliency, economic, environmental, and
health and social benefits. The Proposed Project
will increase the efficiency of the existing drainage
system by upgrading stormwater defense in critical
areas prone to flooding.

90

Implementation – Project Profiles

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Health and Social Benefits
In addition to reduced flood damages, the benefits
include reduced delays in accessing schools, parks,
and homes during tidal flooding events or after heavy
rainfalls. Local residents, including seniors, will benefit
from being able to access critical services on Merrick
Road, such as food stores and pharmacies. Health
risks related to exposure to contaminated water are
reduced.
Environmental Benefits

Horace Court in Bellmore, two days after
Superstorm Sandy (Source: Larry Eisenstein)

Installation of trash/bar screens will have an environmental benefit by reducing the amount of debris
reaching bodies of water where it could potentially
damage sensitive ecosystems.
Cost-Benefit Analysis

Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
The addition of tidal check valves and replacement
of bulkheads will provide coastal protection during moderate storms, reducing flood risk to assets,
including roadways, utilities, and property, as well as
residential properties located near outflows. These
improvements would offer more reliable performance
of infrastructure systems on a day-to-day basis by
ensuring adequate drainage of rainfall and preventing
the back flow of flood waters during a significant high
tide or storm surge. This, in turn, maintains access
to the local community, offers greater protection for
property in vulnerable areas, and reduces the potential for harm during storm events by reducing the volume and speed of floodwaters should they enter the
Community.

Stormwater and drainage issues are important to the
Committee and Community. There is regular flooding
throughout the Community and the current drainage
system is directly exposed to both tidal and storm
surge inundation events. For a cost of $4,150,000,
this investment will bring the current infrastructure
systems into a state of good repair and offer another
line of defense against flooding from rainfall, storm
surge, or high tide. It also protects Community
Assets, both public and private, reducing both the
risk of flooding and the potential costs for rebuilding
after a major event. The project will reduce flooding
to thousands of homes south of Merrick Road in the
Community, as well as several parks, schools, marinas, and fire department facilities.
Risk Reduction Analysis

Economic Benefits
By reducing the exposure to flood damage this project will reduce the risk for economic loss associated
with rebuilding and repair in future flood events. It
also reduces the likelihood that businesses in the
area would close by removing the risk for flood damage to both personal and public property and assets.
Finally, the project provides an information basis for
additional system improvements, better asset management, and reduced future costs associated with
deferred maintenance.

Because of the low-lying nature of the area and its
proximity to water, the risk of flooding is extremely
high during regular or extreme weather events,
as well as during regular high tides. This project
will reduce the risk to thousands of homes south
of Merrick Road, as well as the following assets:
Nassau County Department of Public Works Garage,
Four Towns Fireman’s Training Center, Town of
Hempstead Department of Sanitation facility, Merrick
Road Park, Merrick Golf Course, Merrick Senior
Center, Pumping Station (West Merrick), Norman
J. Levy Lakeside School, Cammann’s Pond County

Implementation – Project Profiles

91

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Park, Whaleneck Marina Center, Blue Water Yacht
Club, Open Bay Marina, Club House Marina, CVS,
Rite Aid, Trader Joe’s, Waldbaum’s, Fire Department
Station 3 District Office, Newbridge Road Park, and
Pumping Station, Shore Road Elementary School,
Charles A. Reinhard School, John F. Kennedy High
School, East Bay Park, Fire Department Station
2, and South Nassau Hospital Annex. The risk is
reduced by repairing bulkheads and closing off
outfalls to prevent storm surge or tidal waters from
inundating the drainage system and pushing water
into Community areas. By reducing or eliminating this
possibility, the Community assets in the surrounding
area have a higher degree of protection.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project has the potential for implementation
within 24 months of commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
This project will require permits and/or coordination with Nassau County, Town of Hempstead,
This project may involve coordination and approval
from the Town of Hempstead, Nassau County, NYS
Department of Environmental Conservation, the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and a Coastal Zone
Management coastal consistency concurrence from
NYS Department of State.
Jurisdiction
The Town of Hempstead Department of Conservation
and Waterways, Town of Hempstead Highway
Department, and Nassau County Department of
Public Works have jurisdiction over this project area.
Outfalls are owned by the Town, but many have been
built over by private property owners.

92

Implementation – Project Profiles

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Southwest Merrick Masterplan
and Flood Mitigation Pilot Project
The Town of Hempstead (Town) owns a collection of
parcels along the waterfront in Merrick, southwest of
Merrick and Clubhouse Roads, totaling approximately
180 acres. These properties are used for a variety
of public purposes, and include the Town’s Norman
J. Levy Park and Preserve, the Merrick Golf Course,
Merrick Senior Center, Merrick Road Park, Four
Towns Fireman’s Training Center and its Department
of Sanitation. The Department of Sanitation facility is
comprised of a waste transfer station, offices, and
a vacant structure previously used as an incinerator.
Due to its low elevation and close proximity to the
Merrick Bay and Mudd Creek, these sites are subject to regular flooding during storm surges and
severe precipitation events. Damage to these sites
during Superstorm Sandy was significant. The Town
Department of Sanitation Waste Transfer Station was
flooded, causing trash to enter the waterways, and
the Department’s office, garages, and operations
building suffered $2.8 million in flood damage.
The transfer station, previously deemed an Emergency
Operations Center by the Town, was not able to function during Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy. It
would have been an effective place to store debris
from Superstorm Sandy but flooding from the storm
prevented the site from being utilized. Other Townowned parcels in Southwest Merrick suffered damage during Superstorm Sandy, including $500,000 of
damage to the Senior Center. These Town-owned
parcels also suffered heavy flood damage during
Hurricane Irene.
The largest single use in this area is the Norman J.
Levy Park and Preserve, a nature preserve and recreational area constructed on a former landfill. This
landfill is the only area of relatively high elevation, as
the remaining parcels are at 4 to 18 feet above sea
level. The southern and eastern edges of the site are
surrounded by the East Bay, while the western edge
adjacent to the preserve is bordered by Mudd Creek,
which carries water from the East Meadow Pond to
Merrick Bay.
The Norman J. Levy Park and Preserve wetlands
provided protection from the Superstorm Sandy
storm surge, but were damaged in the process. The
shoreline of the Merrick Golf Course was similarly
damaged. Merrick Road, an emergency evacuation

MERRICK
ROAD PARK
TOWN OF
HEMPSTEAD
OFFICES
WASTE
TRANSFER
STATION

MERRICK
SENIOR
CENTER

MERRICK
GOLF
COURSE

NORMAN J
LEVY PARK
& PRESERVE

Town of Hempstead Parcels

The Town of Hempstead owns a collection of parcels along
the waterfront in Merrick that are subject to regular flooding
from storm surge and precipitation events (source: Arup)

route, was severely flooded, preventing access to the
Meadowbrook State Parkway. Additionally, inundation caused petroleum from an adjacent gas station
on Merrick Road to spill into the area.
Phase 1 of this project includes the creation of a
comprehensive Masterplan to re-envision the functions and use of these Town parcels as a showcase of resilient planning along the waterfront. Key
Masterplan concepts include:
• Repositioning buildings and outdoor amenities
within the site to increase their resiliency, as well
as reduce flood risk to Merrick Road.

Implementation – Project Profiles

93

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

• Identifying resilience-related upgrades to recreational facilities, golf courses and Preserves.
• Green infrastructure measures, including
enhanced wetlands, marsh nourishment or other
natural barriers along the shoreline.
• New open space and recreational opportunities,
including expanding the already popular Norman
J. Levy Park and Preserve.
• Evaluation and inclusion of future Town and
Department of Sanitation needs for the site.
Following the Masterplan development phase, a pilot
project which provides flood mitigation to the site and
to Merrick Road will be designed and constructed.
The pilot project will employ green infrastructure
measures, such as wetlands restoration, which was
identified by the initial green infrastructure opportunities assessment as a potential feasible location.

The Town of Hempstead Department of Sanitation
facility was badly damaged by Superstorm Sandy,
causing service disruptions and environmental
damage to the East Bay (source: Merrick Patch)

Estimated Project Cost
This Proposed Project will cost an estimated
$2,400,000 to implement. Phase 1 is estimated to
cost $250,000; the green infrastructure pilot project
is estimated to cost $2,150,000.
Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
With the incorporation of green infrastructure, as well
as resilient site planning and building techniques, the
vulnerability of the site’s many public assets to flooding and contamination is reduced. In addition, these
resiliency measures within the site will also reduce the
risk of flooding to the adjacent segment of Merrick
Road – a key access point to the Meadowbrook
Parkway evacuation route.
Economic Benefits
By reducing the risk of flooding to these key public assets, the Town will see an economic benefit associated with reduced future expenditures for
repairing and replacing these important structures.
Redevelopment of this site as a showcase for resilient planning and design, with the implementation of
modern, enhanced, open spaces and community
94

Implementation – Project Profiles

View of Merrick Golf Course from Norman P.
Levy Preserve (Source: Charles Brown)

amenities, has the potential to improve residential
and commercial property values, thereby increasing property tax revenues. The Town will also benefit
from the ability to keep the Department of Sanitation
facility at this site and avoid the difficulties associated
with truck traffic and aesthetic concerns which would
arise from relocating the facility.
Health and Social Benefits
Reduced flood risk will increase the overall attractiveness of the site as both a passive and active recreational asset in the Community. This will encourage
more social interaction and Community understanding of the value of parks and open spaces. In

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

addition, reduced flooding of nearby roads will
enable better disaster management, response, and
recovery, improving public health and safety in the
process. By reducing the amount of standing water
on adjacent roadways, such as Merrick Road, this
project will also improve traffic safety and minimize
road congestion, which in turn affects travel times
and vehicle operating costs. Enhancing the resiliency
of the Merrick Senior Center will provide educational,
social, and recreational benefit for a vulnerable segment of the population.
Protection of the Town Department of Sanitation
facility will allow the facility to operate to its intended
purpose as an Emergency Operations Center, which
benefits the health of local residents following a
disaster.

Risk Reduction Analysis
The project site lies entirely within extreme and high
risk areas and is therefore highly vulnerable to storm
events. This project will help protect Merrick Road,
which provides important access to the Meadowbrook
Parkway evacuation route, from future flooding. In
addition, risk to Community Assets will be reduced,
including Merrick Golf Course, Merrick Senior Center,
Merrick Road Park, Four Towns Fireman’s Training
Center, and the Town Department of Sanitation facility, comprised of a waste transfer station, offices, and
a vacant structure previously used as an incinerator.
It will also reduce environmental risk by enhancing
Norman J. Levy Park and Preserve and increasing
flood protections for the Town waste transfer station
and private Mobil and BP gas stations on Merrick
Road.

Environmental Benefits
Incorporating resiliency measures at the Town
Department of Sanitation facility will limit environmental damage caused when trash, debris, and environmental pollutants are washed from the facility into the
East Bay. By employing green infrastructure methods
for flood prevention, the site’s community value will
be maintained and enhanced. By diverting or delaying stormwater from entering the drainage system,
green infrastructure helps protect Community Assets,
homes, and businesses from flooding. It also provides numerous co-benefits, including groundwater
recharging, pollutant reduction in bays and wetlands,
aesthetics, air quality improvements, and improved
comfort in summer months.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
The proposed Masterplan and green infrastructure
improvements at the site would cost approximately
$2,400,000. The investment for this study and capital
improvements is low relative the significant benefits
of improved resiliency at this critical site. Protecting
important assets like the Town Department of
Sanitation facility, which is a designated Emergency
Operations Center, is critical to proper functioning of
the Town’s waste removal system.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project has the potential for implementation
within 36 months of commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
The project will require permits and/or coordination
with Nassau County, Town of Hempstead, and New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation
(NYS DEC). This will also involve the USACE and NYS
DOS. Coastal Consistency approval may be required
for any activity within the Coastal Zone.
Jurisdiction
The Town of Hempstead has jurisdiction within the
project area. Nassau County has jurisdiction over
Merrick Road.

Implementation – Project Profiles

95

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Meadowbrook Corridor
Stormwater System Modeling, Analysis, and Pilot

N
KE

TP

Implementation – Project Profiles

LO
BY
BA

96

Y

Information about the existing stormwater infrastructure within the Freeport Creek Watershed is limited
and a better understanding of how surface and
subsurface water moves through the area will be
used to provide insight into the most effective water

TE PKW
OK STA

The area is very low lying (2-4 ft.) above the water
table, and the soil types are mainly Udipsamments
wet substratum, Ipswich mucky peat, Udorthents,
refuse substratum at south end and Atsion loamy
sand at the north end. Within the Corridor, the East
Meadow Brook to the north of Freeport and Merrick
is polluted with pathogens from urban and stormwater runoff. The Freeport Reservoir and East Meadow
Pond, located in Freeport and Merrick, respectively,
are polluted with chlordane from contaminated sediments, which are currently carried into the Merrick
Bay.

WBRO

Due to its low elevation and connection with the
bay, the Corridor is vulnerable to flooding from storm
surges. The high number of stormwater outfalls
combined with runoff from the Meadowbrook State
Parkway leads to severe flooding. During and after
Superstorm Sandy, South Freeport, Merrick, and
Bellmore residents were restricted from using Merrick
Road where it meets the Parkway when Merrick
Road received floodwaters from the Corridor. In addition, on the Freeport-side of the Corridor, the storm
surge and the stormwater runoff converged between
Sunrise Highway and Merrick Road, exacerbating
flood damages in the area.

Y
HWA

E HIG

RIS
SUN
MEADO

The “Meadowbrook Corridor” is a large tributary system running south from Westbury to the Hempstead’s
Middle Bay and Merrick Bay. The Corridor tributaries
and system of retention ponds were originally part of
the Brooklyn Water Works reservoir system, which
was a water conveyance system built to provide
drinking water to the rapidly growing New York City
Borough of Brooklyn. Today, the corridor conveys
stormwater from the Freeport Creek watershed out
to the South Shore Estuary. The Corridor is divided
by the Meadowbrook State Parkway’s elevated roadway, which also serves as the border between the
hamlet of Merrick and the Village of Freeport. It is
a Nassau County-designated evacuation route serving the Community and the barrier islands. There are
more than 200 stormwater outfalls draining into the
Meadowbrook Corridor and sensitive tidal wetlands.

MERRICK

ROAD

Meadowbrook Corridor
Study Area

The Meadowbrook Corridor area (source: Arup)

management solutions along the Corridor. This project, therefore, includes both a comprehensive analysis of the existing system, as well as the identification
and implementation of five pilot projects using “green
infrastructure” methods to help mitigate flood risk
and improve water quality.
The project includes the following phases:
Phase 1: The location of the Meadowbrook Corridor
and Freeport Creek Watershed requires coordination across several jurisdictions and with numerous
stakeholders. An initial phase of key stakeholder
meetings will be used to collect and collate existing drainage sets from Nassau County, the Village

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

of Freeport, the Town of Hempstead, and the New
York State Department of Transportation (NYS DOT).
Other stakeholders may include the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation and
Department of State, as well as the Town of North
Hempstead.
Phase 2: This phase includes gathering data on the
existing stormwater system within the Freeport Creek
Watershed and the development of a hydrologic and
hydraulic (“H&H”) model to provide a detailed picture
of where runoff is coming from, how much there is,
whether the current system has adequate capacity,
and what improvements could be made.
A proportion of the drainage will be surveyed to inform
the model. The survey will include manhole inspections and connectivity surveys to give level, size, line,
and condition of the pipes. The survey assumptions
include one manhole every 300 feet, a drainage
length of 195,288 feet, and 651 manholes. The build
and verification of an integrated catchment model
will be undertaken to determine the contributors to
flooding as well as the most appropriate solutions

and the outfalls with the greatest discharges into
the impaired bodies of water. Using the latest highresolution LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) data
of the ground surface available, this stage will involve
processing the data, building, and calibrating the
model, as well as installing and collecting data from
four stream gauges.
This model will be capable of:
• Determining the causes of localized flooding
issues across the catchment and identifying
measures to prevent the flooding.
• Determining which outfalls are contributing
the most urban stormwater runoff to
the impaired watercourses, lakes, and
estuaries and identifying outfalls for the
implementation of green infrastructure to
reduce and treat stormwater runoff.
• Locating green infrastructure solutions
to provide the most effective investment
to reduce surface water flooding.

Example of resilient park design, including green infrastructure for stormwater management (source: Arup)

Implementation – Project Profiles

97

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Following development of the model, it will be used,
in combination with a GIS mapping study of the
physical ground conditions, to determine the most
appropriate location for green infrastructure in order
to maximize water retention, infiltration, and additional water quality benefits as well as select the most
appropriate green infrastructure solutions for the various sites.
Phase 3: Upon completion of the model and corresponding analysis, pilot projects will be conducted
to explore various methods of managing and treating stormwater runoff. A few pilot projects have been
conceived though an initial assessment of existing
conditions and issues and, contingent upon verification of benefits using the H&H model, will involve the
following five interventions:
• Regenerative storm conveyance retrofits at
five locations within Merrick: This involves
moving the storm drainage outfalls further away
from the road and constructing a staggered
regenerative storm conveyance system that
retains and cleans storm water. The following
outfall retrofits have been identified:
-- Babylon Turnpike: 180 foot
long conveyance system;
-- Webster Avenue: 93 foot long
conveyance system;
-- Camp Avenue: 99 foot long
conveyance system;
-- Michalicki Place: 171 foot long bioswale
along one side of the highway with three
crossing points for driveways and a
158 foot conveyance system; and,
-- Reid Avenue: 274 foot long bioswale
along one side of the highway with
three crossing points for driveways
and a 108 foot conveyance system.
• Creek Restoration: This project entails
reconnecting the creek with the natural
floodplain using a wetland seepage regime to
reduce wet-weather velocities, prevent further
erosion, and improve flood plain wetland area.
The restoration will involve filling the incised
channel (5,250 feet long) with sand and gravel

98

Implementation – Project Profiles

Ae example of a soft landscape treatment (source: Arup)

to raise the stream bed elevation, as well as
constructing a series of shallow pools and riffle
grade weir controls to encourage seepage.
• East Meadow Pond Drainage Study: This study
will seek to understand the capacity of the
two East Meadow ponds and the operation
of existing flow controls at the outlets of the
ponds. Additionally, it will investigate whether
any drain down regimes can be implemented at
the ponds to prevent flooding in these areas.
• East Meadow Pond Floating Wetlands
Restoration: Restoration of wetland along
Meadowbrook Parkway Pilot: This pilot project
will demonstrate the ability of a modular
floating wetlands system to both remove
excess nutrients from the pond, which
are deposited by stormwater runoff, and
improve the aesthetic quality of the pond.
• Freeport Creek Day-lighting Study: Freeport
Creek currently runs through a culvert under
industrial and retail properties between East
Meadow Pond and Mill Road for a length of
one-half mile. This study will assess whether
day-lighting the creek is feasible and assess
the costs and benefits of this project.
This project will be shared with the NYRCR Freeport
Community, which is located to the west of the
Meadowbrook Parkway corridor and is within a portion of the Freeport Creek Watershed. It will funded
in partnership with NYRCR Freeport.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Estimated Project Cost
The total project cost will be approximately $2.5
million. However, the cost would be shared with
neighboring NYRCR Freeport; given the weighting of
benefits toward Merrick, will cost the Community an
estimated $1,800,000.
Project Benefits
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
This project will yield several risk reduction benefits for the NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick and Freeport
Communities and the natural environment. As
noted, the volume of upstream stormwater that
drains through the area exacerbates flooding issues.
Through the proposed improvements, stormwater runoff will be better managed in the vicinity of
the Communities and subsequently reduce the
risk of flooding impacts for adjacent property owners. Flooding in these areas also impacted Merrick
Road and Sunrise Highway during Hurricane Irene
and Superstorm Sandy. Reducing stormwater runoff
impacts will also reduce the risk that Merrick Road
and Sunrise Highway will become impassable during and after future storms and flooding events. This
benefits residents and businesses owners who rely
on these roads to access goods and services, primarily through access to the Meadowbrook Parkway,
which is a regional gateway for freight deliveries and
emergency services.
Economic Benefits
Owners of businesses adjacent to the corridor will
benefit from reduced recovery costs following future
flooding events. The model that will be constructed
will provide future cost-savings benefits to the Village
of Freeport and the Town of Hempstead, as it can
guide agencies toward projects that are more costeffective, resilient, and co-beneficial, such those
that increase recreational space and add new green
spaces to commercial areas.
Health and Social Benefits
Through reducing the impacts of stormwater runoff,
the Proposed Project will enable emergency and
disaster response resources to be allocated to other

An example of a previously industrial landscape,
restored to a natural setting (source: Arup)

areas in future storm and flooding events. In addition,
the improvements can decrease flood damages and
increase the aesthetic value of existing green spaces.
The improvements can create an opportunity in the
future to develop pedestrian and bicycle paths along
the Meadowbrook Corridor, increasing property values for residents and businesses. Flooding impacts
can also be reduced at the ball fields owned by
Freeport School District. Finally, socially vulnerable
populations living at the Moxie Rigby Apartments will
also benefit from reduced occurrence and severity of
flooding impacts.
Environmental Benefits
The proposed project will create a system to retain
stormwater within the Meadowbrook Corridor so
that it can be filtered before it enters the South Shore
Estuary. The Estuary will benefit through improved
water quality and, subsequently, ecosystem health.
The Creek Restoration pilot project will improve
the quality of wetlands and restore a portion of the
natural systems, which have been heavily damaged.
Bird, fish, and other fauna, as well as several florae,
will benefit from the restoration. air quality, emission
reduction, and air temperature benefits may also be
realized by expanding green space and reducing
the use of hard infrastructure,. Finally, the proposed
model can help demonstrate the value of green
infrastructure solutions, furthering the justification
for improvements to the natural environment in the
future.

Implementation – Project Profiles

99

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Risk Reduction Analysis

Localized flooding at Meadowbrook Parkway in
August 14, 2011(Source: Merrick Patch)

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Modeling and analysis is necessary to help identify
and focus solutions for stormwater management,
which include initiatives for capital projects, updated
maintenance requirements, regulatory improvements, public awareness programs, and other property owner assistance measures. These initiatives will
improve the functionality of the stormwater system
and reduce flooding issues in the region, reducing
damage to buildings due to flooding and increasing
the chance that buildings will remain habitable.
This project will improve access to critical assets and
facilities during storms, as well as improving access
for fast and safe evacuation. By reducing the amount
of standing water on roadways, vehicle operation
becomes safer during all types of inclement weather
and road congestion will be reduced. During major
storms, improved drainage will increase the amount
of time that roads are available to emergency services at the storm’s outset, as well as help return a
flooded road to service more quickly.
Green infrastructure projects will help to clean
stormwater before it reaches the estuary, reducing
pollution effects on wetlands that, when healthy,
provide a natural barrier, helping to filter stormwater and attenuate storm surge. Additional benefits
of green infrastructure projects include localized air
quality improvements, habitat restoration, aesthetic
improvements, and potential savings of capital and
maintenance costs in expensive, traditional infrastructure improvements.

100

Implementation – Project Profiles

Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy brought the
various causes of flooding and flood damage to the
attention of the Communities. NYRCR Freeport and
NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick now understand that they
can improve the way stormwater runoff from upstream
areas is managed in order to more effectively protect
their Communities from flood risk. These initiatives will
increase the capacity of the stormwater system and
reduce flooding issues in the region. This reduces
risk to population and private and natural assets. The
various components of the Proposed Project will help
reduce the risks of flooding to homes, businesses,
parks and open spaces, civic institutions, and infrastructure systems. The ability to keep roads operating under more severe circumstances in the future
will also enable more effective disaster management,
response, and recovery, reducing the risks to public
health and safety in the Communities.
General Timeframe for Completion
The implementation of this project will take approximately 24 months from commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to the Project
Coordination on approvals and permits will be
required with NYS DOT and Nassau County
Department of Public Works. This will also involve
the NYS DEC, USACE, and NYS DOS. Coastal
Consistency approval may be required for any activity within the Coastal Zone.
Jurisdiction
The majority of drainage is under the jurisdiction of
the Town of Hempstead, NYS DOT, and the Village
of Freeport.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Bellmore/Merrick
Community Assistance Centers

A artist’s impression of a library retrofit to function as a Community Assistance Center
(charging stations and emergency alert monitors) (source: Arup)

Following Superstorm Sandy, Community residents
were without power for extended periods, making
it difficult to access the internet, make phone calls,
communicate about distributing aid, and gather with
their neighbors for support. Many residents cited the
need for more access to education information on
how to prepare for storm events.
This project proposes to establish two Community
Assistance Centers (CACs) as places that can provide
residents with assistance before and after storms.
Under normal conditions, residents will be able to
gather information about emergency preparedness.
After a storm, these CACs will become a place to
gather, collect, and distribute resources, including
emergency supplies (not funded by this project) and
access to electricity and the Internet.

This project will include the installation of an emergency backup generator, additional electricity outlets, wireless internet access, and electronic dynamic
signage at each location. The electronic dynamic signage will provide status updates in the community
and updates for emergency management, as well
as listing resources available at the CACs. Finally,
this project proposes the employment of a Local
Disaster Recovery Manager, working 20 hours per
week for the Town of Hempstead or Nassau County.
When combined with other Nassau County NYRCR
Communities, this could result in one to two full time
staff.

Implementation – Project Profiles

101

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Merrick Library (Source: Arup)

Responsibilities of the Local Disaster Recovery
Manager (LDRM) are defined as:
• Develop a Resiliency Education Program that
provides preparedness training sessions geared
towards businesses and Community members.
• Provide yearly workshops to the Community
on what types of assistance will and will not be
available in pre-disaster and post-disaster phases.
• Ensure all information is accessible
and understandable to all residents
(including bilingual materials).
• Establish a list of resiliency features to be
added to CACs (features not funded by this
project, except for natural gas generators).
• Install one natural gas generator at each CAC
location. The project cost estimate assumes
100 kW capacities at each location.
The Merrick and Bellmore libraries were chosen as
likely locations because they are outside of high or
extreme risk areas and are centrally located near the
Sunrise Highway and their respective LIRR stations.
Estimated Project Cost
The total estimate project cost is $1,265,000.

102

Implementation – Project Profiles

The Bellmore Memorial Library (Source: Arup)

Project Benefits
This proposed project seeks to establish locations
within the Community for residents to learn about
disaster preparation and response, as well as obtain
resources and information after a future disaster. This
project addresses the Recovery Support Functions
(RSF) of Community Planning and Capacity Building,
Health and Social Services, and Infrastructure.
Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
The installation of natural gas generators with battery
backup reduces the risk of power failure, providing
resiliency and continuity benefits to the CACs.
Economic Benefits
The project provides an economic benefit by reducing disaster relief and recovery costs through utilization of Federal- and State-level public grants for
preparation costs, as well as creating full-time positions through the creation of the LDRM positions.
Health, Social and Public Safety Services
Many residents at Public Engagement Events cited
the need for improved access to information about
happenings in the region as well as improved connectivity to family and friends. The CACs address
urgent human needs after a major storm event by
providing information and communication support

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

within local areas. The CACs will provide a year-round
educational benefit by increasing the Community’s
access to, and understanding of, emergency procedures and responsibilities. After an event, each CAC
will directly provide basic health and social services,
including food, water, electricity, and communication
services. Dynamic signage will provide updates and
information, keeping the public informed. In turn,
people whose basic needs are met will be able to
turn their attention to recovery, using information and
communication services available at the Centers to
minimize time needed to rebound from a storm event.
This project will also reduce the risk of power loss by
equipping each Center with a backup generator.
Socially vulnerable populations will benefit from the
employment of the LDRM, who will ensure that all
residents, despite English literacy, reduced mobility,
or diminished ability, understand disaster preparation
and recovery protocols. In addition, these residents,
who may be more likely to have insufficient access
to post-disaster comforts and necessities, will have
these resources available in the Community.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
The funding for this project provides an opportunity
for people who are in the local areas – storm-affected
or not – to learn how to be prepared before, and
how to respond during and after, an event. Greater
awareness of preparedness, as well as a response
plan for every home or business in the local area,
ensures people are ready to act when a storm is
approaching. People are more informed by the community education programs supported by the CAC.
This helps build support for following directives from
local, State, and Federal officials. It also reduces the
possibility that Community members will not know
what to do and, therefore, stay behind.
After an event, it provides a one-stop-shop to get
information about important matters, such as the
suitability of drinking water and the availability of
power, fuel, food, and medicines. This helps protect
the health and well-being of people in the area after
an event occurs. In the case of a significant event,
such as Superstorm Sandy, it also offers the opportunity for Community needs to be communicated to
support functions outside the area in the event clean

drinking water, medications, food, or other supplies
are needed locally. The CACs can tabulate the needs
and issue requests for support to the local areas.
This project cultivates preparedness in the local
area and allows a more informed population to take
appropriate actions before and after events occur.
The benefits of a more informed Community and the
potential for this information to prevent injury, illness,
or loss of life justify the cost of the project.
Risk Reduction Analysis
Lack of information was cited as a major issue in
the Community and a problem requiring a response
in this NYRCR Plan. The educational programming
associated with this project reduces risks by creating
a more educated and prepared public. Preparation
before a crisis occurs ensures people will be more
likely to respond appropriately when a disaster
occurs. On a day-to-day level, the CAC can distribute information about preparedness.
If downed communication lines or loss of power
restricts access to television, radio, or the Internet
during or after a storm event there is currently no
method of informing Community members of appropriate actions or activities to undertake. A CAC can
be an information clearinghouse, providing information to the local population so they can make
informed and safe choices. It also provides an opportunity for local populations to communicate news
and needs outward to friends, family, and support
organizations. The CACs can offer information about
health and safety risks and approved repopulation
zones, as well as dispense necessary supplies and
provide communication links between local populations and family or friends further away. This reduces
the risk that people will enter into hazardous areas or
undertake activities, such as drinking unsafe water or
entering a home, before knowing whether it is safe
to do so.
General Timeframe for Implementation
The implementation of this project will take approximately 24 months from commencement.

Implementation – Project Profiles

103

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory approvals required for this
project, however, consent to use the Bellmore and
Merrick Libraries as CACs will be required.
Jurisdiction
Coordination with Nassau County OEM will also be
required to ensure consistency of information and
that post-disaster responsibilities are complementary and not duplicated and to dispatch appropriate
agencies to each CAC after a disaster. The Merrick
and Bellmore School Districts have jurisdiction of
each of their respective libraries, however, each
library independently maintains and operates its
respective facility.

104

Implementation – Project Profiles

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Public Communication
and Education Gap Analysis
Currently, Nassau County Office of Emergency
Management (OEM) coordinates all Federal, State,
and local agencies to create and implement an
Emergency Operations Plan. OEM identifies vulnerabilities, mitigates disasters, provides public education, responds to all-hazard emergencies, and
protects Nassau County’s first responders. Nassau
County has identified enhanced communication and
education as ongoing needs critical to its ability to
respond effectively during a storm event.

in communication and education and will identify
potential public/private partnerships to implement
the study’s recommendations.
A next phase of work, not funded by this project, will
need to establish a centralized location, such as a
website, with consistent “branding” to make disaster
information identifiable, as well as regular updates to
keep information current. A further phase of work will

Despite warnings and orders from OEM before
Superstorm Sandy, many residents did not understand the severity of the storm and were unable to
evacuate after conditions became unsafe. According
to members of the Community, this resulted in a number of emergency distress calls to local police and
fire departments, putting themselves and emergency
responders at risk. Many residents were also unsure
how to access emergency information. Following the
storm, power outages and lack of cell phone service
left residents unable to communicate with friends
and family members and without the means to find
emergency resource information. Even those with
power stated they did know of a central place to go
online to share or find out about available emergency
supplies in their communities.
This project will study Nassau County’s existing
emergency management efforts to identify opportunities to create a single, user-friendly source for
comprehensive emergency assistance information
collected from a variety of public agencies. It will
identify gaps in the existing communication network
and recommend ways to increase the effectiveness
of local government, emergency management agencies, residents, businesses, and faith-based groups,
as well as non-profit organizations that direct aid
and recovery efforts to the Community’s residents,
including socially vulnerable populations.
This project will evaluate existing emergency communication systems and determine additional needs,
with an emphasis on coordination across multiple jurisdictions, allowing Community members to
communicate with each other, as well as providing
emergency readiness education. This initial study
will provide recommendations for addressing gaps

The City of New Orleans’ “NOLA Ready” hurricane
preparedness portal (Source: www.nola.gov/ready)

“Prepare SoCal” is a public awareness campaign
to prepare Southern California for major
earthquakes (Source: www.preparesocal.org)

Implementation – Project Profiles

105

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

need to include the creation of an educational component, using the website to promote educational
seminars on disaster planning.
Estimated Project Cost
This project has also been proposed in the neighboring NYRCR Communities of Baldwin, Freeport,
Seaford/Wantagh, and Massapequa. The approximate total project cost is $100,000, with an estimated
contribution of $20,000 by the NYRCR Bellmore/
Merrick Community.
Project Benefits
This project, which addresses the Community
Planning and Capacity Building Recovery Support
Functions (RSFs), will allow emergency response
agencies to coordinate efforts before, during, and
after storm events, focusing resources to the areas
of greatest need. Implementation of the project will
improve access to emergency preparedness information for all Community residents and businesses.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
The benefits of a well-prepared Community include
reduced risk of physical damage from storm events,
less social strain on the Community during and following disasters, and reduced risk of injury or death.
Economic Benefits
Post-disaster claims for financial assistance from
State and Federal programs may be reduced if
homes are retrofitted appropriately and if people are
safe from harm because they know when, where,
and how to evacuate.
Health and Social Benefits
Knowledge and understanding of emergency procedures, responsibilities, and resources will be
increased across the Community. An enhanced website that allows Community members, local organizations, and governmental agencies to communicate
with each other will benefit disaster recovery and aid
efforts, while enhancing social connections at a time
when they are needed the most.

106

Implementation – Project Profiles

Environmental Benefits
Better awareness and information on how to properly securing personal property, including fuel tanks,
household paint, and other toxic chemicals, prior to
a storm provides environmental benefits by reducing
the volume of harmful toxins entering the water during a flooding event.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
The project identifies and addresses gaps in communication and education needs to better prepare the community for emergencies. It also helps
the Community react quickly and appropriately to
notices, warnings, and orders, reducing the potential
for property damage as well as the potential for injury
or death. This project represents a low investment
of capital that would benefit the entire Community.
Given the high costs associated with damage to
homes and property, and medical costs associated
with injury or death, better emergency preparedness
equates to a savings for community members and
municipalities.
Risk Reduction
Risk to populations will be reduced by increasing access to educational materials and improving
knowledge of emergency procedures and resources.
Risk to vulnerable populations will be reduced, as
emergency response agencies will be better able
to focus resources to the areas of greatest need.
Population health risks will be reduced as public
access to up-to-date information on hazardous conditions is improved.
General Timeframe for Implementation
The implementation of this project will take approximately 24 months from commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements related to this
project.
Jurisdiction
Nassau County Office of Emergency Management

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Business Continuity Program
Superstorm Sandy significantly impacted Community
businesses; some were flooded and suffered substantial physical damage, while others were indirectly
effected by public misperception that businesses
were closed when they were, in fact, open. Working
hours were reduced in many cases, causing financial
hardship to employees.
According to data from the U.S. Small Business
Administration (SBA), 105 Community businesses,
representing 314 employees, applied for disaster
management assistance after Superstorm Sandy.
These applications verified a total of $7.5 million
in real property damage, $1.2 million of machinery damage, an inventory loss of $409,722, and a
leaseholder improvement loss of $554,485. Of these
applications, only 37 (35.2%) were approved for an
amount totaling just over $7.1 million, roughly three
quarters of the $9.6 million in verified damage assistance applied for by the Community.
According to testimony received from Committee
Co-Chairs and Members and from business owners
at the Public Engagement Events, some businesses
did not back up their files or were not able to access
and forward phone calls in order to quickly return to
business activities after Superstorm Sandy, leading
to increased loss of business. Challenges in the aftermath of the storm, such as the lack of power and
communications, displaced workers, fuel shortages,
and a lack of access to inventory, compounded
recovery challenges. Initial repairs were paid for
out-of-pocket using credit cards, family loans, and
personal savings. Operating losses have continued
long after reopening due to loss of customers and
incomplete repairs. Because of delays in access to
recovery funding, most businesses are not incorporating flood mitigation elements into their repairs.
Business continuity planning ensures that businesses have the capability to maintain essential functions during a range of potential emergencies and
could be implemented immediately. The assistance
provided by a Business Continuity Program would
include planning assistance, access to alternative
spaces or facilities, communications provisions,
and provisions for vital record backup and management. At the base of this program is the creation of
a part-time business continuity facilitator responsible
for educating the local business community in south

CVS Pharmacy on Merrick Road, which abuts
Meroke Preserve, had extensive interior damage
from Superstorm Sandy (source: Neil Yeoman)

The Dakota Design Center building on Merrick Road has
been vacant since Superstorm Sandy (source: Joe Baker)

shore Nassau County on crisis preparedness and
management, organizational structure, and policies
and procedures, as well as the following roles and
responsibilities:
• Educational sessions for the business community;
• Creation of a Risk Assessment
Checklist and audit assistance;
• Individualized business continuity
plan assistance; and
• Maintenance and monitoring through annual
exercises and continuous improvements.

Implementation – Project Profiles

107

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The program proposes working with Adelphi
University and the Business Continuity Institute to
lead training sessions for local business owners.
Through ongoing coordination with local Chambers
of Commerce and/or related business organizations,
the Business Continuity Program facilitator would
help small businesses to create their own plans for
continuing operations under adverse conditions,
such as a major storm, as well as being responsible
for identifying and assisting in the pursuit of future
funding opportunities. The Program will help business owners identify their backup power needs in
advance of an emergency, which will allow owners to
procure emergency power generation supplies.
Estimated Project Cost
This project has also been proposed in the neighboring NYRCR Communities of Baldwin, Freeport,
Seaford/Wantagh, and Massapequas. The approximate total project cost is $200,000, with an estimated contribution of $40,000 by NYRCR Bellmore/
Merrick Community.

it happened again. A business continuity plan would
assist business owners in knowing what the best
resiliency-related investments would be and how to
plan for their future. Program staff would also help to
connect business owners to grants, incentives, and
other funding sources, helping to strengthen the local
economy.
Health and Social Benefits
Businesses such as supermarkets, drug stores, and
gas stations are essential to the Community for the
supply of food, medicines, and fuel on a day-today basis. If these essential Community businesses
cannot reopen quickly enough after a storm, the
Community can be severely affected. The impacts
are even more severe for the local senior population
and those without access to a car, who may have
more difficulty in traveling a farther distance to get
prescriptions or food.
Environmental Benefits

This project addresses the Economic Recovery
Support Function (RSF). Given this is a shared project across multiple NYRCR areas, the Community
get the full benefits of the program at a lower level of
cost than if the project were undertaken solely at the
direction of the Community.

For businesses that handle environmentally hazardous material, flooding can cause widespread environmental damage. Better education about the risks
of flooding and how to plan for storm events can help
to prevent this type of environmental damage from
occurring by helping business owners adapt their
operations to store and operate hazardous materials
in a manner that removes the risk of contaminating
floodwaters.

Economic Benefits

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The Community’s commercial sector is largely comprised of retail businesses. When these businesses
close, even for a short period of time, it is disruptive to
the local economy and effects wholesalers and other
businesses in the supply chain. Loss in sales across
a number of businesses can lead to considerable
lost sales tax revenue for Nassau County. Employees
may lose wages or even their jobs. In addition, better
preparedness and education can lead to a reduction
in post-disaster business claims for financial assistance from state and federal programs.

Given this is a shared and programmatic project, the
costs are relatively low at $40,000, yet the benefits
can be tremendous in getting businesses back in
operation faster after a storm event. Benefits are
realized when business owners understand and mitigate against risks their businesses may present to
local areas should flood waters intrude the property
or building, such as securing fuel tanks, raising sensitive chemicals to higher floors, or dry or wet flood
proofing their operation.

Project Benefits

For many Community business owners, damage
caused by Superstorm Sandy was a serious financial
burden, one that owners could not rebound from if

108

Implementation – Project Profiles

Furthermore, the revenue losses to local, State, and
Federal governments when businesses are closed,
even temporarily, are significant. The benefit of

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

educating businesses to better prepare for storm
events, thereby reducing closure times and lost business revenue, far outweighs program costs.
Risk Reduction Analysis
Ensuring a stable economic base reduces the risk
of loss of jobs and loss of identity along commercial
corridors.
General Timeframe for Implementation
The implementation of this project will take approximately 24 months from commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements related to this
project.
Jurisdiction
None.

Implementation – Project Profiles

109

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Key Intersection Streetlight Retrofit
The
NYRCR
Bellmore/Merrick
Community
(Community) seeks to strengthen evacuation, transportation, circulation, and safety in case of another
major disaster. Following Superstorm Sandy,
Community residents were without power for up
to 16 days, which also impacted many of the local
streetlights, leaving many areas in complete darkness. The lack of functioning streetlights was reported
to be a safety hazard by Community members and
negatively impacted first responders’ ability to carry
out their duties. Resilient streetlights, powered independently and with battery backup, can provide the
Community with a source of light that improves the
safety of those traveling within the neighborhood by
car or by foot.
Streetlights in the Community are predominantly
mounted on utility poles. Freestanding streetlights in
the Community, such as those along parts of Merrick
Road, are maintained by the Town of Hempstead.
The pilot project proposes to retrofit streetlights on
existing streetlight poles at 60 key intersections with
LED lights that include a solar photovoltaic (PV) panel
and battery backup. To sufficiently light 60 intersections, the project assumes the installation of 480 kits,
which include a LED light, PV panel, and battery.
Backup batteries for these units can typically store
enough energy to function for three days. It is hoped
that future power outages will not last this long, given
the new power generation, distribution protections,
and revised response capacities being put into place
by utility providers as a result of Superstorm Sandy. If
future undergrounding of utility lines occurs and new
separate streetlights are installed, the LED/PV streetlight heads could be relocated to other parts of the
Community.
Estimated Project Cost

Installation of a solar and wind powered streetlight in
Blandensburg, MD (source: flickr.com - thisisbossi)

event. This project addresses the Recovery Support
Functions of Infrastructure, Community Planning and
Capacity Building, and Health and Social Services.
Economic Benefits

The total estimated project cost is $4,630,000.

This project reduces government expenditures by
reducing the cost of power supply to public facilities.

Project Benefits

Health and Social Benefits

This project will improve public safety at night for
emergency responders, officials, residents, and
businesses who may require access to shelter, supplies, or assistance after a storm event – be it a hurricane, wind storm, major rainfall, or winter weather

The solar power and battery backup systems for
streetlights will improve public safety at night for
emergency responders, officials, residents and businesses in the Community who may require access
to shelter, supplies, or assistance after a storm
event – be it a hurricane, wind storm or major rainfall.

110

Implementation – Project Profiles

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

These events often knock out power lines and render
entire areas dark, making movement after sunset difficult and treacherous. A lack of street lighting also
increases the risk of criminal activity, which is one of
the main reasons people choose not to leave their
homes during storms – they want to protect their
primary place of residence. With solar backup, nighttime movement of emergency responders, officials,
or local residents can be accomplished in a safe
manner. Access to critical assets will be secured,
including key routes from coastal areas to Community
Assistance Centers. Recovery efforts can continue
after daylight hours, improving the pace at which
access to roadways and properties can be restored,
which has multiple co-benefits, including improving
access to Community facilities, reducing roadway
congestion, improving travel time and fuel efficiency,
and expediting local economic recovery.
Environmental Benefits
Replacing grid-powered streetlights with a 100%
renewable power source reduces the Community’s
reliance on fossil fuels, which contribute to global climate change through the production of greenhouse
gases.

Risk Reduction Analysis
This project will reduce public safety risk to the population by illuminating the roads at night and by securing access to evacuation routes and Community
facilities during and after a storm. If it also lowers the
number of people who choose not to heed warnings
or evacuation orders to secure their private property,
it reduces the number of people in high risk areas
during a major storm event.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project has the potential for implementation
within 24 months of commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
The Town of Hempstead (Town) will need to coordinate with and obtain permission from utility proiver
LIPA/PSEG Long Island.
Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead Traffic Control and Street
Lighting Department, Nassau County Department of
Public Works, and LIPA/PSEG.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
The issues of street lighting, public safety, and mobility after both storm events were often cited as significant concerns and contributing factors in the
decision by some households to remain in place and
disregard the order to evacuate. This small investment has a significant return on the public safety of
the area where these streetlights are located and
allows for the protection of the key asset classes of
housing, public facilities, and infrastructure. The project will allow for emergency responders to move to
the necessary locations at night quickly and safety.
This would allow them to respond to calls for help,
fires, potential threats to personal property, and to
secure neighborhoods. It would also allow residents
to safely move at night once they are allowed to
return to an area and has the potential to reduce the
number of residents who stay behind to ensure their
home or business is secure.

Implementation – Project Profiles

111

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: South Shore Stormwater
System Modeling and Analysis
Massapequa
Creek
Bellmore
Creek East Bay

SEAFORD/
WANTAGH

BALDWIN

MASSAPEQUAS

BELLMORE/
MERRICK

South
Oyster
Bay
Milburn
Creek Middle Bay

Seaford
Creek

Watersheds that encompass NYRCR Baldwin, Bellmore/Merrick, Seaford /Wantagh and Massapequa (source: Arup)

During Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, the
stormwater systems within the NYRCR Communities
of Baldwin, Bellmore/Merrick, Seaford/Wantagh, and
Massapequa were overwhelmed by flooding from
rainfall and storm surge. In addition, localized flooding
is observed regularly after heavy rainfall or at monthly
spring tides. These four NYRCR Communities fall
within the following watersheds: Milburn CreekMiddle Bay Watershed, Bellmore Creek-East Bay
Watershed, Seaford Creek Watershed, Massapequa
Creek Watershed, and South Oyster Bay Watershed.
These watersheds encompass an area much
larger than the political boundaries of the NYRCR
Communities. This study would look at the portion of
these watersheds that fall within the four aforementioned NYRCR Communities.

112

Implementation – Project Profiles

There is currently limited information available about
the existing stormwater infrastructure. A hydrologic
and hydraulic (H&H) model would provide a catchment-wide understanding of where runoff is coming
from, how much there is, specific areas where the
current system is inadequate and what improvements could be made. This model could be used to:
• Determine the causes of localized flooding
issues across the catchment and identify
measures to prevent the flooding;
• Understand the impacts of stormwater runoff
on water quality and determine the benefits
of flooding mitigation measures in order to
identify implementation of projects; and
• Identify green infrastructure solutions to
provide the most effective investment
to reduce surface water flooding.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

This project will involve the following four phases:

Project Benefits

• Phase 1: An initial phase of key stakeholder
meetings, including Nassau County, Town of
Hempstead, Town of Oyster Bay, Village of
Massapequa Park, and NYS Department of
Transportation (NYS DOT), U.S. Geological
Survey, and other appropriate agencies and
organizations, to collate all the existing drainage
datasets.

This project addresses the Natural Resources and
Infrastructure Recovery Support Functions (RSF).

• Phase 2: Survey a portion of the drainage system to inform the model. The survey will include
manhole surveys and connectivity surveys to
determine level, size, line, and condition of the
pipes.
• Phase 3: An integrated catchment model will
be built, verified, and then used to determine
the cause of flooding and the most appropriate
solutions. These solutions can range from traditional drainage improvement projects to innovative green infrastructure projects. Using the
most recent high-resolution LiDAR data of the
ground surface available, this phase will involve
processing the data, building and calibrating the
model, and installing and collecting data from
four stream gauges for an eight-month period.

Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
Modeling and analysis is necessary to help identify
and focus solutions for stormwater management,
which will include capital projects, updated maintenance requirements, regulatory improvements, public awareness programs, and other property owner
assistance measures. These outcomes of modeling
and analysis would improve the functionality of the
stormwater system and reduce flooding issues in the
region, reducing damage to buildings from flooding
and increasing the chance that buildings will remain
habitable. An informed model can also predict and
estimate the costs and benefits of a proposed capital
improvement, providing more certainty that a project
will reduce flood risk. Subsequently, the risk of constructing a project that will not provide the anticipated
benefit will also be reduced.
Economic Benefits

• Phase 4: A geographic information system (GIS)
study of the physical ground conditions to determine the most appropriate location for green
infrastructure in order to maximize infiltration
and water quality benefits, as well as choose the
most appropriate green infrastructure solutions.
Potential green infrastructure solutions include
permeable paving, bioswales, green roofs,
stormwater ponds, and wetlands.

Stormwater drainage projects that would come out
of this tool would reduce the exposure to damages
from flooding, which will reduce the risk for economic
loss associated with rebuilding and repair in future
flood events. It also reduces the risk of economic
loss associated to road closure, which would affect
access to businesses in the area. The model also
offers a platform for improved coordination between
the multiple jurisdictions of ownership. It will encourage more proactive management of infrastructure
through preventative management, rather than reactive management, which relies on deferred, and often
more costly, maintenance.

Estimated Project Cost

Health and Social Benefits

This Proposed Project has also been proposed in
the neighboring NYRCR Communities of Baldwin,
Seaford/Wantagh, and Massapequa. The approximate total project cost is $2,900,000, with an estimated contribution of $725,000 by the NYRCR
Bellmore/Merrick Community.

This project will improve access to information on
critical assets and facilities during storms, while other
projects that result from this project will improve
access for fast and safe evacuation. By reducing the
amount of standing water on roadways, this project will improve vehicle operation during all types of
inclement weather, as well as reduce road congestion. During major storms, improved drainage will

Implementation – Project Profiles

113

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

increase the amount of time that roads are available
to emergency services at the storm’s outset and will
shorten the recovery time for road access after a
storm event.
Environmental Benefits
The modeling and analysis will help to identify and
optimize green infrastructure projects. Green infrastructure provides many environmental benefits to
the region by attenuating storm surge and helping to
reduce the quantity and improve the quality of stormwater that reaches the Estuary, reducing pollution
effects on wetlands, which, when healthy, provide a
natural barrier. This project has the potential to lead
to the reduction of pollutants carried by stormwater runoff entering tributaries and the South Shore
Estuary. The findings from the study can be used for
the next State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) General Permit for Stormwater Discharges
from Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems
(MS4s) managed by the NY State Department of
Environmental Conservation.82
Cost-Benefit Analysis
With the ability to focus drainage improvements
using a comprehensive and effective modeling
tool, the benefits of the expenditure will be realized.
Strategic drainage improvements that prevent flooding along key roadways will prevent any delays as
well as subsequent economic effects of impeding
movement of goods and labor. Better-informed and
strategic investments in drainage improvement projects can also lead to cost savings. Through supporting SPDES, this project has the potential to reduce
local government expenditures for future stormwater
improvement projects.
Risk Reduction Analysis
Undertaking the modeling and analysis will help to
identify key vulnerabilities in the storm drainage system, allowing Communities to develop and identify
projects that will ultimately reduce the risk of flooding
to the Community. In addition, the project can lead to
stormwater system improvements, which reduce the
risk of pollution to the South Shore Estuary.

114

Implementation – Project Profiles

General Timeframe for Implementation
The implementation of this project will take approximately 24 months from commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements related to this
project.
Jurisdiction
A multi-jurisdictional committee/consortium, consisting of municipalities, could be considered. This
form of governance and administration has proven
successful on Long Island, as represented by both
the Hempstead Harbor Protection Committee and
Manhasset Bay Protection Committee. Potential
actions of such a multi-jurisdictional committee/
consortium might include appointing a fiduciary
to be responsible for grant management, with the
committee/consortium itself responsible for project
management. The recent New York-Connecticut
Sustainable Communities Consortium, a program
funded by a HUD Sustainable Communities Regional
Planning Grant, used this structure and was successful in carrying out the planning program over a
wide geographic area and across numerous municipal boundaries.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Resilient Streetscape Implementation
This project comprises capital projects recommended in the Lifeline Corridor Study and Guidelines
(Proposed Project). The following resilient streetscape
amenities will be installed in the Community on
approximately seven miles of roadways, corresponding to the “Lifeline” roads identified in the previous
study:
• Move utility lines underground along
seven miles of road in the Community.
• Install new solar powered streetlights with battery
backup on seven miles of roads in the Community.
• Improved emergency evacuation
signage, assumes 30 new signs.
The Resilient Streetscape Implementation project
addresses the Infrastructure and Economic Recovery
Support Functions.
Estimated Project Costs
The proposed project will cost an estimated
$58,000,000.
Project Benefits
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
By maintaining a stable energy supply along key
roads through undergrounding, emergency response
facilities will have a better chance of remaining operational, thereby reducing risk to the population through
faster emergency response. Buildings and homes
throughout the community, including those housing
vulnerable populations, will have a better chance of
retaining electricity and remaining habitable, reducing the need for immediate emergency response or
shelter.
Solar power and battery backup systems for streetlights will improve public safety at night. Access to
critical assets will be secured, including key routes
from coastal areas to Community Assistance
Centers. Recovery efforts can be accomplished at
night, improving the pace at which access to roadways and properties can be restored, which has cobenefits of improving access to community facilities,
reducing roadway congestion, improving travel time
and fuel efficiency, and improving local economic

recovery. This project also reduces government
expenditures by reducing the cost of power supply
to public facilities.
Economic Benefits
Undergrounding of utility wires provides a substantial
aesthetic improvement that benefits adjacent property owners, particularly those in retail business districts where well-designed streetscapes and storefronts lead to increased business.
The economic benefit related to increased power
dependability is particularly pronounced when implemented on key commercial corridors like Merrick
Road and Sunrise Highway, as it assists businesses
in remaining open following storm events.
This project also reduces government expenditures
by reducing the cost of power supply for streetlights.
Health and Social Benefits
Improved power reliability reduces the risk of power
failure at food stores, pharmacies, doctor’s offices,
and a hospital annex within the Community, which
provides health benefits to residents.
This project will improve public safety at night for
emergency responders, officials, residents, and businesses who may require access to shelter, supplies,
or assistance after a storm event – be it a hurricane,
wind storm, major rainfall, or winter weather event.
These events often result in downed power lines,

Above-ground utility poles on Merrick Avenue (source: Arup)

Implementation – Project Profiles

115

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

rendering entire areas dark and making movement
after sunset difficult and treacherous. A lack of street
lighting also increases the risk of criminal activity,
which is one of the main reasons people choose not
to leave their homes during storms – they want to
protect their primary place of residence. With solar
backup, nighttime movement of emergency responders, officials, or local residents can be accomplished
in a safe manner. Access to critical assets will be
secured, including key routes from coastal areas to
Community Assistance Centers. Recovery efforts
can continue after daylight hours, improving the pace
at which access to roadways and properties can be
restored, which has co-benefits of improving access
to community facilities, reducing roadway congestion, improving travel time and fuel efficiency, and
expediting local economic recovery.
Environmental Benefits
Replacing grid-powered streetlights with a 100%
renewable power source reduces the Community’s
reliance on fossil fuels, which contribute to global climate change through the production of greenhouse
gases.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
The benefits of undergrounding power lines include
a substantial increase in power reliability during
storm events, more flexibility in streetscape design,
and improved aesthetics. These economic and
life safety benefits are commensurate with cost of
implementation.
Risk Reduction Analysis
Undergrounding power lines reduces the vulnerability
of all residential and commercial assets connected
with that particular grid, which could potentially suffer from blocked transportation access and debris
Independent streetlight power sources, proposed for
the pilot project, will improve public safety along the
road at night, reducing risks to the population.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project has the potential for implementation
within 12 months of commencement.

116

Implementation – Project Profiles

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements related to this
project.
Jurisdiction
The Town of Hempstead Traffic Control and Street
Lighting Department, Nassau County Department of
Public Works, and utility provider LIPA/PSEG Long
Island have jurisdiction.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Bellmore road raising: Army Place,
Navy Place, Marine Place and Shore Road
Army Place, Navy Place, Marine Place, and Shore
Road are a cluster of roads in western Bellmore
near Shore Road Elementary School. Elevations of
approximately two to four feet, combined with adjacency to the canals, have led to routine flooding during high tides or minor storm events. Tidal flooding
inhibits travel to and from Shore Road Elementary
and is therefore disruptive to local parents, children,
and homeowners. Superstorm Sandy heavily damaged homes in this area, and as a result several have
been raised.
Large portions of these streets are below four feet
above sea level, making them susceptible to varying
levels of tidal flooding from the adjacent Grandview
Canal and Baldwin Creek/East Bay. Such tidal flooding occurs on a monthly basis, along with significant
flooding when major rainstorms coincide with a high
tide period, resulting in roadway closures. In addition to the costs to the Town of Hempstead caused
by the necessary reaction to these events, there is
a disruption in sanitary curb-side garbage collection,
mail services, school bus routes, and more.
A general loss of productivity and enjoyment by
Community residents is experienced when they
are forced to plan departing and returning to home
around the tide schedule, but more importantly there
is also the threat to safety, especially to the elderly
and handicapped population of the area who may
need access to doctors, hospitals and/or pharmacies. The tidal flooding has often caused damage to
vehicles parked and/or driven through the salt water
on roadways. Residents also experience damage to
private property, including, but not limited to, their
lawns and landscaping. The continual flooding has
directly affected the quality of life throughout the
Community and property values have suffered.
To help alleviate some of the above issues, the
proposed project will include the reconstruction of
approximately 5,225 feet of local residential streets.
The intent of the project is to reconstruct the roads
with a minimum gutter elevation of 5.5 feet to prevent routine tidal flooding, as well as elevating up to
3,250 feet of roadway that currently is below FEMA’s
10-year still water level. The project design will include
the replacement of concrete curbs and sidewalks,
improvements to the storm drain system, installation of check valves, and the reconstruction of street

WALTERS CT
HORACE CT
ARMY PL
NAVY PL

MARINE PL

BELLMORE

MERRICK

SEAVIEW LN
RIVIERA LN
MALIBU RD
DRIFTWOOD LN
MAY CT

Roads that continually
experience tidal flooding

Bellmore roads that experience regular
tidal flooding (source: Arup)

Tidal flooding on Marine Place in Bellmore due to
a full moon tide (source: Ali Beller Frankel)

Implementation – Project Profiles

117

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

end bulkheads to a minimum elevation of six feet to
decrease storm wave energy. The raising of the roadway grade will have a direct impact on the frontages
of the private properties throughout the project area.
The design will include the re-grading and installation
of storm drain inlets on private property, necessitating preparation and approval of Work Easements
from the individual property owners affected.
Estimated Project Costs
The Proposed Project will cost an estimated
$3,150,000.
Project Benefits
This project, which addresses the Infrastructure
Recovery Support Function (RSF), will reduce the
risk of flooding to transportation infrastructure and
residences in this section of Bellmore.
Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
The drainage system improvements will reduce episodic flooding and reduce the likelihood of the road
flooding during a storm event. The reduced risk
extends to private property in the neighborhood,
reducing the likelihood of recurring property damage
to buildings and vehicles.
Economic Benefits
Reduction of flood risk will decrease repair and maintenance costs of street and stormwater infrastructure incurred by the Town of Hempstead, and has the
potential to improve local property values.

Environmental Benefits
Reduced instances of flooding on residential property will decrease the likelihood of household contaminants entering local waterways.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
This investment will bring existing infrastructure into a
state of good repair and offer another line of defense
against flooding from rainfall, storm surge, and high
tide. This line of defense would directly protect
roads, helping to provide reliable performance on a
day-to-day basis. This project would improve access
to transportation routes for the local community,
provide greater protection for property in vulnerable
areas, and reduce the harm caused by storm events.
Risk Reduction Analysis
The roadway reconstruction in flood-prone neighborhoods will reduce the risk of flooding to one mile
of local streets. In addition, the drainage system
improvements will extend benefits to private property in the neighborhood, reducing the likelihood of
recurring property damage or the risk of injury for 154
residential parcels.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project has the potential for implementation
within 36 months of commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements related to this
project.

Health and Social Services

Jurisdiction

Maintaining clear roads will improve access for residents who may require shelter, supplies, or assistance. It will also improve access for recovery crews
and equipment following a storm, improving emergency response times and accelerating local recovery. The reduction in flooding will reduce the likelihood of the presence of mold in local homes.

Town of Hempstead has jurisdiction of these roads.

118

Implementation – Project Profiles

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Bellmore Road Raising:
Koft-Boundary Road Area
The Kopf-Boundary Road area of Bellmore is a
residential neighborhood directly adjacent to the
Beach, Alder, Hairpin, and Landing canals in eastern Bellmore. Elevations of approximately two to four
feet, combined with adjacency to the canals, have
led to routine flooding during high tides or minor
storm events. Homes in this area were heavily damaged by Superstorm Sandy and as a result several
homes have been raised.
The Kopf Road - Boundary Road project would
include a comprehensive approach towards designing the reconstruction of the roadways to reduce the
frequency of tidal flooding. In addition to the typical road reconstruction project, which includes the
removal and replacement of the concrete curbs, sidewalks, driveway aprons, storm drain improvements,
and asphalt pavement, the project would include a
review of the existing road elevations to establish a
minimum road elevation to mitigate roadway flooding
in future storm events.
To undertake a grade raise project there will be an
impact on private properties; these impacts will have
to be evaluated to determine the extent of the raise.
The project would also include the installation of
catch basin filters to improve the quality of the stormwater discharge and the installation of check valves,
if shown to be effective, to further reduce the tidal
flooding.

BELLMORE

KOPF RD
CLUBHOUSE RD
ALDER RD
BEACH AVE
BARBARA RD
BOUNDARY RD

Roads that continually
experience tidal flooding

Bellmore roads that experience regular
tidal flooding (source: Arup)

Estimated Project Costs
The proposed project would cost $2,950,000.
Project Benefits
This project, which addresses the Infrastructure
Recovery Support Function (RSF), will reduce the
risk of flooding to transportation infrastructure and
residences in this section of Bellmore.
Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
The drainage system improvements will reduce episodic flooding and reduce the likelihood of the road
flooding during a storm event. The reduced risk
extends to private property in the neighborhood,
reducing the likelihood of recurring property damage
to buildings and vehicles.

Barbara Road after Superstorm Sandy
(source: Eileen Casazza)

Implementation – Project Profiles

119

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Economic Benefits

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project

Reduction of flood risk will decrease repair and maintenance costs of street and stormwater infrastructure incurred by the Town of Hempstead, and has the
potential to improve local property values.

There are no regulatory requirements related to this
project.

Health and Social Benefits
Maintaining clear roads will improve access for residents who may require shelter, supplies, or assistance. It will also improve access for recovery crews
and equipment following a storm, improving emergency response times and accelerating local recovery. The reduction in flooding will reduce the likelihood of the presence of mold in local homes.
Environmental Benefits
Reduced instances of flooding on residential property will decrease the likelihood of household contaminants entering local waterways.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
This investment will bring existing infrastructure into a
state of good repair and offer another line of defense
against flooding from rainfall, storm surge, and high
tide. This line of defense would directly protect
roads, helping to provide reliable performance on a
day-to-day basis. This project would improve access
to transportation routes for the local community,
provide greater protection for property in vulnerable
areas, and reduce the harm caused by storm events.
Risk Reduction Analysis
The roadway reconstruction in flood-prone neighborhoods will reduce the risk of flooding to 4,000 feet
of local streets. In addition, the drainage system
improvements will extend benefits to private property in the neighborhood, reducing the likelihood of
recurring property damage or the risk of injury for 197
residential parcels.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project has the potential for implementation
within 36 months of commencement.

120

Implementation – Project Profiles

Jurisdiction
The Town of Hempstead has jurisdiction of these
roads.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Merrick Road Raising:
George Court to Leslie Lane
Helen Court project area currently experiences a
roadway flooding problem during rainstorms and high
tide events. This project would include a comprehensive approach towards designing the reconstruction of the roadways to reduce the frequency of the
flooding. In addition to the typical road reconstruction project; which includes the removal and replacement of the concrete curbs, driveway aprons, and
asphalt pavement; the project will include a review of
the existing road elevations and storm drain capacity
in order to establish the required drain system and
road elevation to mitigate roadway flooding in future
storm events. In addition, the project will include the
installation of catch basin filters to improve the quality
of the stormwater discharge and the installation of
check valves to further reduce tidal flooding.

MERRICK

GEORGE CT
HELEN CT
LEONARD LN
EDWARD LN
LESLIE LN
JULIAN LN

The project will impact several adjacent private properties; these impacts will have to be evaluated to
determine the extent of the project. The setbacks on
the homes in this neighborhood are very shallow – a
condition that requires special consideration when
designing the drainage system. In addition, this is a
neighborhood in transition, as several homes are in
the process of being raised.
Estimated Project Cost
The total estimated cost of this project is $1,250,000
Project Benefits
This project, which addresses the Infrastructure
Recovery Support Function (RSF), will reduce the
risk of flooding to transportation infrastructure and
residences in this section of Merrick.
Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
The drainage system improvements will reduce episodic flooding and reduce the likelihood of the road
flooding during a storm event. The reduced risk
extends to private property in the neighborhood,
reducing the likelihood of recurring property damage
to buildings and vehicles.

Roads that continually
experience tidal flooding

Merrick roads that experience regular
tidal flooding (source: Arup)

Economic Benefits
Reduction of flood risk will decrease repair and maintenance costs of street and stormwater infrastructure incurred by the Town of Hempstead, and has the
potential to improve local property values.
Health and Social Benefits
Maintaining clear roads will improve access for residents who may require shelter, supplies, or assistance. It will also improve access for recovery crews
and equipment following a storm, improving emergency response times and accelerating local recovery. The reduction in flooding will reduce the likelihood of the presence of mold in local homes.

Implementation – Project Profiles

121

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Environmental Benefits
Reduced instances of flooding on residential property will decrease the likelihood of household contaminants entering local waterways.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
This investment will bring existing infrastructure into a
state of good repair and offer another line of defense
against flooding from rainfall, storm surge, and high
tide. This line of defense would directly protect
roads, helping to provide reliable performance on a
day-to-day basis. This project would improve access
to transportation routes for the local community,
provide greater protection for property in vulnerable
areas, and reduce the harm caused by storm events.
Risk Reduction Analysis
The roadway reconstruction in flood-prone neighborhoods will reduce the risk of flooding to approximately
one mile of local streets. In addition, the drainage
system improvements will extend benefits to private
property in the neighborhood, reducing the likelihood
of recurring property damage or the risk of injury for
186 residential parcels.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project has the potential for implementation
within 36 months of commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements related to this
project.
Jurisdiction
The Town of Hempstead has jurisdiction of these
roads.

122

Implementation – Project Profiles

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Marina and Dock Resilience Guidelines
The Community is home to three commercial marinas and over 750 privately owned docks. During
Superstorm Sandy many boats, either at marinas or
private docks, were damaged and, in some cases,
caused damage to neighboring properties. Residents
complained of receiving guidance from insurance
companies that sometimes resulted in increased
damage to their property.
Currently, the Town of Hempstead Conservation and
Waterways Department provides staff to consult
with marina owners, but best practices have not yet
been document or presented in guideline format.
This project involves the creation of marina and dock
resiliency guidelines to assist boat owners in preparing for future storms and learning how they will be
impacted by sea level rise.
The guidelines will include the following:
• Marina and dock design and siting, such
as recommended pile height, in-water
structures, bulkheads, and dredging;
• Emergency preparedness education, such
as methods for protecting human life,
reducing damage to boats, reducing damage
to property that cannot be relocated, and
restoring normal business operations;
• Evacuation procedures, such as
procedures for securing vessels; and
• Climate adaptation education, such as storm
frequency and severity awareness, tracking
wave height and frequency, and identifying
infrastructure exposed to storm events.

Boats that drifted from canal to Bellmore Avenue
during Superstorm Sandy (source: Eileen Casazza)

Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
Improving the resilience of marinas as well as the procedures for securing them will reduce the chance that
boats, fuel tanks, and other debris will be released
from marinas during high wind and high water events.
This will decrease the risk potential property damage as well as reduce resources needed for debris
removal.
Economic Benefits

Insurance companies will be invited to assist in the
creation of the guidelines to reduce conflicts and confusion around best practices and proper procedures.

The reduction in risk to property, including boats,
marina facilities, streets, utility poles, and nearby
homes, provides an economic benefit in the reduction of claims to insurance companies as well as
State and Federal programs that provide financial
assistance following a natural disaster.

Estimated Project Cost

Health and Social Benefits

The proposed project will cost an estimated
$100,000.

The project’s education component will increase the
knowledge and awareness of people responsible
for managing facilities and property. Reduced risk
of environmental contamination from damaged fuel
tanks or debris provides a health benefit.

Project Benefits
This project addresses the Community Planning
and Capacity Building and Economic Development
Recovery Support Functions (RSF).

Implementation – Project Profiles

123

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Environmental Benefits
This project will reduce the chance that boats, fuel
tanks, and other debris will be released from marinas
during high wind and high water events, the risk of
environmental contamination to local waterways is
reduced.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Agreed and consistent guidelines will help marina
operators and Town planners with the design, construction, and retrofit of public and private marinas in
a more resilient way. Consistency will ensure a level
playing field amongst operators and best practice
will ensure that all potential risks will be addressed
with current understanding of resilient design. With
three marinas and over 750 privately owned docks
in the Community, the benefits of reduced damage
to personal property during a storm event, reduced
costs of recovery and debris removal, and the ability
to more readily restore waterfront activities and tourism, the benefits of the expenditure will be realized.
Risk Reduction Analysis
This project will help to protect life and property by
reducing physical damage to boats, fuel tanks, public
infrastructure, and residential property. Environmental
risk of contamination from damaged boats and fuel
tanks will be reduced.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project has the potential for implementation
within 12 months of commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements related to this
project.
Jurisdiction
The Town of Hempstead and New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation have
jurisdiction over these areas.

124

Implementation – Project Profiles

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

This page intentionally left blank

Implementation – Project Profiles

125

Section V : Additional Materials
The following section provides supporting information for the NYRCR
Bellmore/Merrick Plan (NYRCR Plan):
A. Additional Resilience Recommendations: This section describes
resiliency projects and actions for NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick (Community)
that the NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) would like to highlight
that are not categorized as Proposed or Featured Projects.
B. Master Table of Projects: This table provides a comprehensive
list of Proposed and Featured Projects, as well as Additional Resiliency
Recommendations.
C. Public Engagement Process: This section provides a detailed
description of the public engagement process, including a description of
the Community’s eight Planning Committee Meetings and three Public
Engagement Events. Results from questionnaires and online surveys are
also included.
D. Community Asset Inventory: This table provides results of the risk
assessment for the Community’s key assets.
E. End Notes: This section includes numerical listing of all NYRCR Plan
references.
F. Glossary: This glossary comprises a comprehensive list of acronyms
used in the NYRCR Plan.

Facing image: Wildlife at Norman J. Levey Park and Preserve (Source: Charles Brown)

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Table 13: Additional resiliency recommendations
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Regional

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Strategic Adaptation
Study and Longterm Action Plan

--Identify long-term retreat and resilience options for Merrick
and Bellmore to protect future residents and business from
higher occurrence and more intense storms/surges.
--Work with flood insurance providers to study existing models
and assumptions.
--Use a combination of climate change and sea level rise
forecasts and actual events to develop triggers for changes
to zoning, planning and building regulations.

N

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Voluntary Property
Acquisition Program
Study

--Study potential impacts of existing voluntary acquisition
program on Bellmore and Merrick.
--Focus on strategies to acquire open space in extreme risk
areas for public use.

Y

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Inclusive Housing
Plan

--Develop a housing plan to accommodate the region’s aging
population and provide new housing opportunities for firsttime buyers.
--Maintain and support existing housing programs that provide
funds to purchase and rehabilitate vacant or abandoned
properties.
--Work with Nassau County, the State and private developers
to establish a relocation assistance program that gives
residents relocated due to strategic adaptation priority in new
developments.
--Provide tax incentives and direct incentives for residents to
assist with the adaptation and relocation process, and work
with developers to increase density in less vulnerable areas
and provide more housing options for community residents.

Y

Enhance
Communication,
Education, and
Awareness

Senior Education
Campaign

--Study to identify ways to better reach Seniors during storm
events and support their needs following events.
--Education campaign to increase emergency preparedness
awareness.

Y

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Downtown and
Commercial Corridor
Resiliency Plan

--This project includes a comprehensive planning and resiliency
study to re-envision the downtown and commercial corridors
in both Merrick and Bellmore.
--The study would address opportunities for housing,
emergency response and recovery services, alternative
energy and microgrid implementation, stormwater
management, traffic improvements, and zoning and building
code updates.

N

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Merrick Road
Streetscape
Improvements
and Urban Design
Guidelines

--Study to identify ways to make Merrick Road more walkable
and attractive.
--Improved guidelines for commercial development so
businesses are oriented to the street and create a better
sense of place.
--Identify opportunities to plant street trees and underground
utilities.

N

128

Additional Materials

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 13 (cont’d) : Additional resiliency recommendations
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Regional

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Emergency Parking

--Designate areas outside of flood zones to be used by
residents in evacuation zones for off-street parking and
storage during emergencies and major storm events without
being ticketed or towed. (This may include new structured
parking near rail stations).

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Energy Infrastructure

Natural Gas
Infrastructure
Modernization

--Work with National Grid to modernize natural gas distribution
infrastructure.
--Identify and invest in implementable technologies to better
regulate and isolate natural gas lines in the event of damage
or leakage.
--Connect residents and businesses to gas lines where service
is available, and expand service into areas of need.

Y

Enhance
Communication,
Education, and
Awareness

Emergency Animal
Shelters

--Work with local businesses and organizations to establish
a refuge center for animals or families with animals to go to
during a storm emergency or flood event.
--Establish a program to recruit volunteers, such as local
veterinary professionals or students, to help manage the
facility.

Y

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Energy Infrastructure

Residential
Generator Rebate
Program

--Provide rebates for residential installations of natural gas
generators.
--As part of a homeowner energy education program, provide
residents with an overview of the permitting process and
outline regulatory requirements for installation.

Y

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Energy Infrastructure

Home Heating
Upgrades

--Develop policy recommendations and an incentive program
to convert home heating oil to natural gas in extreme and
high risk areas.

Y

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Neighborhood
Preservation
Guidelines

--Creation of new residential design guidelines for improving
architectural quality and functionality in newly raised homes.
--Topics covered may include garage and parking design,
stairway and entryway design, mechanical systems, home
appliance placement, structural reinforcement, materials
recommendations, and resilient landscapes.

Y

Additional Materials 129

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

B. Master Table of Projects
Table 14: Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Bellmore/Merrick
Stormwater
Drainage, Outfall,
and Bulkhead
Repair

Assess the entire Bellmore/
Merrick drainage system
south of Merrick Road,
including the 230 outfalls
and related bulkheads.
Tidal check valves will be
installed on 25 critical and
appropriate outfalls.

Proposed

$4,150,000

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems;
Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning,
Design, and Housing

Southwest
Merrick
Masterplan and
Flood Mitigation
Pilot Project

Creation of a Masterplan
to re-envision the Town of
Hempstead parcels. A newly
reconfigured site would
provide enhanced flood
mitigation for the amenities
on-site as well as for Merrick
Road. Shoreline stabilization
or green infrastructure pilot
project upon Masterplan
completion.

Proposed

$2,400,000

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Meadowbrook
Corridor
Improvements
Pilot Study

This project would include
the reconstruction of five
stormwater outfalls currently
entering Freeport Creek.
And reconnecting the Creek
with the natural floodplain.
A floating wetland pilot
and drainage study would
also be conducted for East
Meadow Pond to improve
water quality and reduce
future flooding.
A daylighting study for
Freeport Creek would
examine the potential
benefits of uncovering the
current underground portion
of the Creek.

Proposed

$1,800,000

N

Enhance
Communication,
Education, and
AwarenessImprove
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Bellmore Merrick
Community
Assistance
Centers

Community Assistance
Centers are places
for residents to gather
information about
emergency preparedness
under normal conditions.
During and after a storm,
these centers would
become a place to gather,
collect and distribute
resources, charge cell
phones, access the internet/
TV, and seek comfort.

Proposed

$1,265,000

N

130

Additional Materials

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 14 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Enhance
Communication,
Education, and
Awareness

Public
Communication
and Education
Gap Analysis

Evaluate existing
communication and
educational processes and
uncover additional needs.
Identify public/private
partnership opportunities for
ongoing communication and
education needs.

Proposed

$20,000

Y

Enhance
Communication,
Education, and
Awareness

Business
Continuity
Program

Staff person to assist
businesses in creating
business continuity plans.
Education for Chambers
of Commerce and other
business organization.
Identify business assistance
funding.

Proposed

$40,000

Y

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Lifeline Corridor
Study and
Guidelines

Best practices and
guidelines for Resilient
Streetscapes, such as green
infrastructure, drainage
practices, redundant and
safe power, resilient street
trees and street design.

Proposed

$120,000

Y

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity;
Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Energy Infrastructure

Key Intersection
Street Light
Retrofit

Installation of LED/PV
streetlights on utility poles
along Merrick Road in
Merrick and Bellmore

Proposed

$4,630,000

N

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning,
Design, and Housing

Downtown and
Commercial
Corridor
Resiliency Plan

Study to address
opportunities for commercial
and/or residential
redevelopment out of
extreme and high risk zones.
Identify microgrid
opportunities with alternative
power distribution.
Identify stormwater and
green infrastructure
opportunities for new
development.

Proposed

$500,000

N

Additional Materials 131

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 14 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

South Shore
Stormwater
System Modeling
and Analysis

Hydrologic and hydraulic
(H&H) model to determine
the causes of localized
flooding issues across the
catchment and identify
measures to prevent the
flooding

Proposed

$725,000

Y

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity;
Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Energy Infrastructure

Resilient
Streetscape
Implementation

Underground 19 miles of
utility lines, install new PV/
LED street lights and new
emergency evacuation
signage

Featured

$58,000,000

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Bellmore Road
Raising: Army,
Navy, Marine and
Shore Road

Road raising and associated
drainage improvements
at Shore Rd, Walters Ct,
Horace Ct, Army Pl, Navy
Pl, Marine Pl, Surf Dr, Riviera
La, Malibu Rd, Driftwood La,
Seaview La, and May Ct.

Featured

$3,150,000

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Bellmore Road
Raising: KopfBoundary Road
Area

Road raising and associated
drainage improvements
at North Rd, Kopf Rd,
Clubhouse Rd, Alder Rd,
Beach Ave, Short St,
Barbara Rd, and Boundary
Rd.

Featured

$2,950,000

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Merrick Road
Raising: George
Court to Leslie
Lane

Road raising and associated
drainage improvements
for George Ct, Helen Ct,
Leonard La, Edward La,
Leslie La, and Julian La.

Featured

$1,250,000

N

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning,
Design, and Housing

Marina and
Dock Resilience
Guidelines

Emergency
preparedness guidelines,
recommendations and
education

Featured

$100,000

N

132

Additional Materials

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 14 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning,
Design, and Housing

Strategic
Adaptation Study
and Long-term
Action Plan

Identify long-term retreat
and resilience options for
Merrick and Bellmore to
protect future residents
and business from higher
occurrence and more
intense storms/surges.
Work with flood insurance
providers to study existing
models and assumptions.
Use a combination of
climate change and sea level
rise forecasts and actual
events to develop triggers
for changes to zoning,
planning and building
regulations.

Additional

$1,000,000

Y

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning,
Design, and Housing

Voluntary Property
Acquisition
Program Study

Study potential impacts of
existing voluntary acquisition
program on Bellmore and
Merrick.
Focus on strategies to
acquire open space in
extreme risk areas for public
use.

Additional

$50,000

Y

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning,
Design, and Housing

Inclusive Housing
Plan

Develop a housing plan
to accommodate the
region’s aging population
and provide new housing
opportunities for first-time
buyers.
Maintain and support
existing housing programs
that provide funds to
purchase and rehabilitate
vacant or abandoned
properties.
Work with Nassau County,
the State and private
developers to establish
a relocation assistance
program that gives residents
relocated due to strategic
adaptation priority in new
developments.
Provide tax incentives
and direct incentives for
residents to assist with the
adaptation

Additional

$200,000

Y

Additional Materials 133

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 14 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Enhance
Communication,
Education, and
Awareness

Senior Education
Campaign

Study to identify ways to
better reach Seniors during
storm events and support
their needs following events.
Education campaign
to increase emergency
preparedness awareness.

Additional

$50,000

N

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Merrick Road
Streetscape
Improvements
and Urban Design
Guidelines

Study to identify ways to
make Merrick Road more
walkable and attractive.
Improved guidelines for
commercial development
so businesses are oriented
to the street and create a
better sense of place.
Identify opportunities to
plant street trees and
underground utilities.

Additional

$120,000

N

Enhance
Communication,
Education, and
Awareness

Emergency
Parking Study

Study to designate areas
outside of flood zones to
be used by residents in
evacuation zones for offstreet parking and storage
during emergencies and
major storm events without
being ticketed or towed.

Additional

$20,000

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Energy Infrastructure

Natural Gas
Infrastructure
Modernization

Work with National Grid
to modernize natural gas
distribution infrastructure.
Identify and invest in
implementable technologies
to better regulate and isolate
natural gas lines in the event
of damage or leakage.
Connect residents and
businesses to gas lines
where service is available,
and expand service into
areas of need.

Additional

N/A

Y

134

Additional Materials

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 14 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Enhance
Communication,
Education, and
Awareness

Emergency
Animal Shelter

Local plan to identify
temporary refuge centers
for animals or families with
animals to go to during a
storm emergency or flood
event.
Establish a program to
recruit volunteers, such as
local veterinary professionals
or students, to help manage
the facility.

Additional

$15,000

N

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning,
Design, and Housing

Residential
Generator Rebate
Program

Provide rebates for
residential installations of
natural gas generators.
As part of a homeowner
energy education program,
provide residents with an
overview of the permitting
process and outline
regulatory requirements for
installation.

Additional

$2,750,000

Y

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning,
Design, and Housing

Home Heating
Upgrades

Incentivize the conversion
of home heating systems
from fuel oil to electric heat
pumps, solar thermal or
natural gas in extreme and
high risk areas.
Amend building and
planning regulations to
phase out the use of oil
fuel tanks south of Merrick
Road, and incorporate
temporary-intermediary
regulations to require proper
anchoring requirements
based on anticipated
inundation levels.

Additional

$50,000

N

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning,
Design, and Housing

Neighborhood
Preservation
Guidelines

Creation of new residential
design guidelines for
improving architectural
quality and functionality in
newly raised homes.
Topics covered may include
garage and parking design,
stairway and entryway
design, mechanical systems,
home appliance placement,
structural reinforcement,
materials recommendations,
and resilient landscapes

Additional

150,000

Y

Additional Materials 135

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

C. Public Engagement Process
The strategies and projects outlined in the NYRCR
Bellmore/Merrick Plan (NYRCR Plan) will ultimately
impact the quality of life for those who live, work,
and play in NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick (Community).
As such, input from residents, business owners, and
community leaders has been an important component of the planning process. The NYRCR Bellmore/
Merrick Planning Committee (Committee) worked
to provide a number of opportunities for public participation and community engagement, including a
series of Public Engagement Events, surveys, focus
groups , and an online outreach campaign.

• Committee Meeting 3: The third Committee
Meeting was held on October 24, 2013. It
included a discussion of the upcoming NYRCR
Conceptual Plan, and preparation for the first
Public Engagement Event immediately after.

NYRCR Planning Committee

• Committee Meeting 5 (Joint Committee
Meeting): The fifth Committee Meeting was held
on December 10, 2013, and was attended by
Committee Members from neighboring NYRCR
Communities. The meeting provided an overview of flood risk scenarios and flood mitigation
strategies.

The Committee was comprised of thirteen community representatives who dedicated their time
and expertise to work closely with the State. The
Committee guided the development of material for
the NYRCR Plan and the community engagement
process. Committee members had a major role in
defining the geographic scope and vision for the
Community. They were also critical to the development of strategies and projects. The Committee held
numerous Planning Committee Meetings over the
course of the project. In addition, the Committee
participated in two Joint Committee Meetings with
the neighboring NYRCR Communities of Baldwin,
Freeport, Massapequas, and Seaford/Wantagh
to learn about resilience measures and to explore
shared issues and opportunities for collaboration and
cooperation.
• Committee Meeting 1: The first Committee
Meeting was held on September 17, 2013,
and was the initial meeting between members
from New York State, Planning Committee, and
Consultant Team to discuss the purpose of the
NYRCR Program and initial goals and objectives.
• Committee Meeting 2: The second Committee
Meeting was held on October 2, 2013. It
included a discussion of existing planning efforts,
Community assets, Community needs and
opportunities, and the outreach strategy and
scheduling of Public Engagement Events.

136

Additional Materials

• Committee Meeting 4: The fourth Committee
meeting was held on November 12, 2013. In
this meeting Committee Members reviewed the
NYRCR Conceptual Plan and began to discuss
opportunities for sustainable reconstruction,
recovery, and resilience, and prepared for Public
Engagement Event 2.

• Committee Meeting 6: The sixth Committee
Meeting was held on January 13, 2014. In this
meeting Committee Members reviewed the
Community asset inventory and risk analysis,
discussed proposed projects, and reviewed the
findings of the business surveys.
• Committee Meeting 7 (Joint Committee
Meeting): The seventh Committee Meeting was
held on February 19, 2014, and was attended by
Committee Members from neighboring NYRCR
Communities. The meeting addressed housing
and economic development opportunities within
the five Communities that were represented.
• Committee Meeting 8 (Joint Committee
Meeting): The eighth Committee Meeting
was held on March 11, 2014. In this meeting
Committee Members voted on the proposed
and featured projects to be included in the
NYRCR Plan.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Public Engagement Events
Community residents and other stakeholders participated in three Public Engagement Events to review
the evolving work of the Committee and Consultant
Team, and to contribute their voices to the planning
process. Outlined below is a brief summary of the
proceedings and the outcomes.
Public Engagement Event 1: Vision,
Community Assets, Needs and
Opportunities and Project Ideas
The first Public Engagement Event was held on
October 24, 2013. The meeting, which included
an open house, presentation, and small group discussions, introduced the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program to the community and provided numerous opportunities for public
input.
Participants viewed project materials at three different Open House-style stations. One provided an
overview of the NYRCR Program. The second station presented six Community Asset Maps. The third
station presented the draft Vision as prepared by the
Committee. Participants were encouraged to provide
their feedback to the asset maps and vision statement. Comments received on the vision statement
were used to revise it prior to incorporation in the
NYRCR Conceptual Plan.
The next portion of the meeting was dedicated to
small group discussions; participants cooperatively
and creatively considered the future of their community. Participants identified the community’s most
important needs and generated project ideas for
recovery and resiliency. They discussed the following
two questions:
• Superstorm Sandy and, before that, Hurricane
Irene had profound impacts on our community.
Thinking about our community as a whole, what
do you believe are the three top issues that need
to be addressed to recover and emerge more
resilient in the future?
• The NYRCR Plan will include the major projects and programs that need to be undertaken
for our community to recover and be more
resilient. The plans are an investment; they will

make communities safer and stronger, increase
prosperity, improve the quality of life, and drive
innovation and competition. You are encouraged
to think big to identify the transformative and
innovative actions needed to become resilient
and grow the economy. What do you believe
should be done to create a better future for our
community?
Participants at the meeting had clear and specific
ideas about what they believed could effectively help
the Community to recover and become more resilient. The small groups generated nearly 135 different
ideas. These ideas were reviewed to identify emerging themes representing issues of concern and ideas
for the future that would inform the development of
strategies and projects. Listed below are the emerging themes organized by Recovery Support Function
(RSF). The ideas expressed at this first Public
Engagement Event have been captured in the vision,
goals, critical issues, strategies, and projects of this
NYRCR Plan.
• Community Planning & Capacity Building:
Evacuation routes and shelters; Effective emergency communication systems; Refurbish/reuse
existing buildings before issuing new permits
• Economic: Availability of fuel at gas stations.
• Housing: Vacant/abandoned homes; Support for
individual homes to prevent/mitigate flood effects
(e.g. landscaping, walls, bulkheads, raising)
• Infrastructure: Back flow devices; Storm drain
maintenance; Identify and remedy flood prone
areas; Raise streets; Tree trimming program to
protect power lines; Solar-powered street lights;
Availability of generators and fuel
• Natural and Cultural Resources: Tidal and Storm
Water Management; Sink holes
The participants did not provide any comments or
ideas related to Health & Social Services. The extent
and impacts of the physical damage from Superstorm
Sandy were forefront in the input received at the first
Public Engagement Event.

Additional Materials 137

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Public Engagement Event 2:
NYRCR Conceptual Plan, Values,
Strategies and Projects
The second Public Engagement Event was held
on November 2, 2013. After the opening presentation, participants joined small groups to weigh in on
important community issues and to expand upon
the strategies and projects included in the NYRCR
Conceptual Plan. Participants reviewed material
related to two of the six Recovery Support Functions.
They completed an independent participant questionnaire. The group members then worked cooperatively to provide reactions and observations on
a map of the community. Finally, they reviewed the
list of strategies and projects included in the NYRCR
Conceptual Plan then discussed and documented
what others should be included.
It is important to note that this event sought to solicit
reactions from community members on topics and
issues that had not been raised by the participants at
the first Public Engagement Event but that are important to the long term reconstruction and resiliency of
the Community. For example, the questionnaire and
small group questions on Health and Social Services
were specifically designed to help identify and clarify
health and social services issues in the Community
since no input on these topics was received at the
first Public Engagement Event. Interestingly, the small
group assigned to review health and social services
at this event stated that “no real health needs were
unmet” in the Community. The main concerns and
project ideas they generated dealt with ensuring that
young and old residents could evacuate safely in
case of a future storm event, critical facilities such
as pharmacies had backup generators, and that first
responder facilities were not themselves threatened
in emergency situations by being located in high risk
areas.
After the event, all materials were encoded and used
by the Consultant Team and the Planning Committee
to better understand community conditions and
needs as well as to revise and enhance the list of
reconstruction and resiliency projects. The number of
questionnaire responses generated is relatively small
compared to the population of the Community, but

138

Additional Materials

Public Engagement Event 2 (source: Arup)

they do provide an indicator of community sentiment
and the qualitative input was crucial to revising and
expanding the projects included in the NYRCR Plan.
The full results from the event are too extensive
to summarize here, so included below are some
highlights from the Community feedback (in addition to the Health and Social Services issues discussed above). The results emphasized the need for
increased emergency preparedness and the creation
of recourse centers in the Community that could support area residents during future disasters. Feedback
on infrastructure identified the Community’s desire
for improved stormwater management and utility
protection. Most of the participants’ detailed recommendations in this regard have been incorporated
into the NYRCR Plan projects, such as check valves,
bulkhead improvements, and backup power.
With regards to housing, participant feedback identified the financial implications of Superstorm Sandy
on home ownership, i.e., maintaining the value of
their homes, ability to sell, affordability of flood insurance, or the cost of raising their homes. Many of
these issues are beyond the scope of this NYRCR
Plan and are being addressed by other Federal and
State Programs. But, through infrastructure investments that improve stormwater management and
tide mitigation measures outlined in this NYRCR
Plan, residential areas on and near the waterfront will
be better protected in the future.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Input related to economic development was less
concerned with reconstruction and recovery. These
comments and ideas suggested resiliency ideas that
could strengthen both the physical and economic
conditions in the community, such as housing near
the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR), mixed use development, tax incentives and tax reductions, more parking, and beautification of downtowns.
The questionnaire results are included in their entirety
in the appendix along with the small groups’ project
ideas.
Public Engagement Event 3: Vision,
Community Assets, Needs and
Opportunities and Project Ideas
This event, held on February 27, 2014, was the third
Public Engagement Event of the NYRCR Program. The
meeting’s objectives were to provide the Community
with a progress update, gather Community feedback
on the projects being considered for inclusion in the
NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick Plan, and begin to generate public support for implementation.
Participants viewed a presentation, the main focus of
which was the projects to be considered for inclusion
in the NYRCR Freeport Plan. The State Consultant
Team presented the approach and community issues
that informed the preparation of these draft projects
as well as the definition of the three types of projects
that will be included in the NYRCR Plan.

Public Engagement Event 3 (source: Arup)

select the five projects they felt were most important
to their community by writing them on their questionnaire and then posting stickers on large boards.
After the meeting all input received on Project
Comment Cards and participant questionnaires was
documented verbatim and tabulated. The rating
scores were averaged. The Project Comment Cards
were reviewed to make final enhancements to the
project descriptions for review by the Committee and
potential inclusion in the NYRCR Plan.
Projects were also posted on the NY Rising website
and an online survey was released to solicit feedback from people not able to attend the community
meeting.

Participants then learned more details of the projects during the Open House portion of the event.
Large Boards were posted throughout the meeting
space. Each board included information on projects
including description, proposed location, cost estimates, benefits, and more. Committee members and
Consultant Team representatives staffed the stations
and were available to field participants’ questions.

Tables 15 and 16 on the following page present the
rating results for featured and proposed projects from
both Public Engagement Meeting #3 and the online
survey. Projects are sorted from highest to lowest
based on their rating from the online survey (since
more responses were generated online). A score of
2.34-3 is considered high, a score of 1.67-2.33 is
medium, and 1-1.66 is considered low.

Participants were encouraged to complete Project
Comment Cards to provide reactions to and additional information for each of the projects. Participant
were also given a questionnaire to rate each Proposed
and Featured Project as high (3), medium (2), and
low (1) based on the degree to which they believed
each project will help better prepare for and recover
from storm events. Finally, participants were asked to

Both the questionnaires and the online surveys
returned the same two top proposed and featured
projects. Stormwater Drainage and Repair, and Outfall
Assessment and Tidal Check Valve Installation were
the top two proposed projects. Local Flood Diversion
and Control, and Lifeline Network Implementation
were the top two featured projects.

Additional Materials 139

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

In general, the results of the questionnaire and survey
indicate a strong level of support from respondents.
Out of all the Proposed and Featured Projects, only
one project received a low rating from the event participants (Business Continuity Program), while online
survey respondents rated this project as medium.
Interestingly, one Featured Project (Local Flood
Diversion and Control) was rated higher than all but
one of the Proposed Projects on the questionnaires
and was the top-rated project on the online survey.
Public Engagement Event 4:
The Bellmore/Merrick NY Rising
Community Reconstruction Plan

Respondents identified potential projects that could
help the Community.
• Overall: Parking Improvements, faster
permitting process, curb and street repair,
and beautification/landscaping.
• Merrick Road Corridor: More and better
parking, small business incentives/
grants, and cleanup/streetscaping.
• Bellmore’s commercial areas
(Newbridge Road): Parking, fewer traffic
regulations, and streetscaping.
• Merricks’ commercial areas: parking,
lower taxes, and streetscaping.

The fourth and final public engagement event will
present the completed NYRCR Plan – once it is finalized – to community members and stakeholders in
order to lay the foundation for implementation.

Respondents also identified potential resiliency
measures.

Online Presence and Tools

• Backup power supplies.

The website www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr provides information about the NYRCR Program, and
regularly posted material relating to the NYRCR
Plan. This included the details for upcoming public
engagement events, news and announcements,
Committee contacts, and plan-related documents.
The website also included a tool for visitors to submit
comments, but no comments were received through
this platform.

Business Surveys
A survey was deployed by the Consultant Team specifically to businesses in the Community to gather
additional information on storm impacts, which have
been difficult to quantify from other sources, and
to generate ideas that could encourage economic
development and support resiliency. Business surveys were open from January 15 to February 25,
2014. The respondents were distributed among
many industry types including business/legal/financial, retail, healthcare, warehousing/logistics, and
construction, and had varying degrees of damage
from Superstorm Sandy. There were, however, many
similar issues and recommendations.

140

Additional Materials

• Faster response time: Rebuilding permits
as well as grants and loans.
• Plantings/swales to absorb water.
The Consultant Team developed a series of general
recommendations based on the input received from
respondents to this survey and on the Team’s understanding of economic recovery and development in
the wake of Superstorm Sandy.

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 15: Questionnaire and online survey results for proposed projects
Featured Project

Event #3 Questionnaire

Online Survey

Bellmore Merrick Community Resource Centers

Medium

Medium

Business Continuity Program (Shared)

Low

Medium

Integrated Communication Network

Medium

Medium

Lifeline Transportation Network

Medium

Medium

Outfall Assessment and Tidal Check Valve Installation

High

High

Priority Local Road Streetlight Retrofit

High

Medium

Regional Energy Action Plan

Medium

Medium

South Shore Shoreline Conditions Analysis and Restoration
(Shared)

High

Medium

South Shore Stormwater System Modeling and Analysis
(Shared)

Medium

High

Southwest Merrick Masterplan

Medium

Medium

Stormwater Drainage Repair

High

High

Table 16: Questionnaire and online survey results for featured projects
Featured Project

Event #3 Questionnaire

Online Survey

Community Resource Center Back up Electricity Generation

Medium

Medium

Home Heating Upgrades

Medium

Medium

Lifeline Network Implementation

High

High

Local Alternative Power Generation and Distribution

High

Medium

Local Flood Diversion and Control

High

High

Local Smart Grid Improvements

Medium

High

Meadowbrook Corridor Improvements Pilot Study

Medium

Medium

Revise Zoning and Building Codes for Resilience

Medium

Medium

Wetlands Restoration Demonstration Project

Medium

Medium

Additional Materials 141

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

D. Community Asset Inventory
The asset inventory and risk assessment performed
for the NYRCR Plan includes individual information
for each Community asset, landscape attributes that
may influence risk, and the risk assessment which
establishes a risk score based on landscape attributes, a hazard score, an exposure score, and a vulnerability score for each asset. The asset inventory
and risk assessment inputs can be seen in Table 17.

Asset Information
The asset information columns in Table 17 include
the following information:
• Asset Name: The name of the facility or a
descriptive name that serves as a unique identifier.
• Risk Area: Identifies the risk area for each
asset based on New York State Department
of State hazard maps. Risk areas include
extreme, high, and moderate zones.
• Asset Class: Each asset is categorized by
asset class: Economic, Health and Social
Services, Housing, Infrastructure Systems,
or Natural and Cultural Resources.
• Critical Facility: Assets are marked as critical
facilities based on critical asset criteria established
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) guidelines or Community significance.
• Community Value: Assets are given a
community value of high, medium, or low based
on NYRCR Planning Committee Member input
and feedback from Public Engagement Events.
Community value can be applied individually
or collectively based on certain assets and
asset classes. 				

Landscape Attributes

• Shore Defenses: Marked “yes” if shore defenses
are absent, not constructed to anticipated storm
or sea level rise conditions, or are deteriorating.
• Vegetation: Marked “yes” if protective
vegetation, wetlands, or intervening structures
between asset and flood source are absent.
• Dunes or Bluffs: Marked “yes” if dunes
are absent, below the base flood elevation
(BFE), eroding, discontinuous, or have little
vegetation. Marked “yes” if bluff slopes
are unstable or partially vegetated.
• Soils: Marked “yes” if the asset is located on
a coastal barrier island or filled wetland.

Risk Assessment
The risk assessment columns in Table 17 include the
following information:
• Hazard Score: The hazard score is based
on the likelihood an event will occur and the
magnitude (destructive capacity) of the event.
Likelihood is derived from the storm recurrence
interval within the selected planning time frame.
• Exposure Score: The coastal risk assessment
area maps are used to provide a “base exposure
score” for each asset. Generally, assets in the
extreme risk area are closer to the shoreline
and are more exposed to potential damage.
Therefore, assets in extreme risk areas receive
a base exposure score of 2; assets in high
risk areas receive a base exposure score of
1, and assets in moderate risk areas receive
a base exposure score of 0.5. Landscape
attributes are used to further exposure scores,
contributing an additional 0.5 for each “yes”
in the landscape attribute columns.

The landscape attribute columns in Table 17 include
the following information:

• Vulnerability Score: Each asset receives
a vulnerability score based on the impact
of its damage relative to its asset class.

• Erosion Rate: Marked “yes” if the
long-term average erosion rate is 1 ft.
or more per year, or unknown.

• Risk Score: Risk scores are based on the
formula: Hazard x Exposure x Vulnerability.

• Beach Width: Marked “yes” if the water
line is frequently in contact with a shore
defense structure or upland vegetation.

142

Additional Materials

Table 17: Community asset inventory
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Risk Assessment

Asset Name

Risk Area

Asset Class

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate

Beach
Width

Shore
Defenses

Vegetation

Dunes or
Bluffs

Soils

Landscape
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

Bellmore Library

Moderate

Natrual and Cultural

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

Bellmore LIRR

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Birch Elementary School

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Blue Water Yacht Club

Extreme

Economic

No

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Cammanns Pond County Park

Extreme

Natrual and Cultural

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Charles A Reinhard School

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Chatterton School

Moderate

Health and Social

No

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

4

30

Club House Marina

Extreme

Economic

No

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

CVS

High

Economic

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

3

3

27

CVS

Moderate

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Doctors Office Center

Moderate

Health and Social

No

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Downtown Bellmore

Moderate

Economic

Yes

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

Downtown Merrick

Moderate

Economic

Yes

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

East Bay Park

Moderate

Natrual and Cultural

Yes

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3

2

18

EMS Headquarters

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

EMS Station 2

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Fire Department Chiefs Office

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

3

5

60

Fire Department District Office

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Fire Department Headquarters

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Fire Department Hook & Ladder Co 1

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Fire Department Station 2

High

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

3

5

60

Fire Department Station 2 Friendship

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Fire Department Station 3

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Fire Department Station 3 Empire

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Fire DepartmentDistrict Office

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Table 17 (cont’d) : Community asset inventory
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Risk Assessment

Asset Name

Risk Area

Asset Class

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate

Beach
Width

Shore
Defenses

Vegetation

Dunes or
Bluffs

Soils

Landscape
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

Fire Department Station 1

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Four Towns Fireman’s Training Center

High

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

3

5

45

Grand Avenue Middle School

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Gulf Gas Station

Moderate

Economic

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

USPS Postal Inspection Facility

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

John F Kennedy High School

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3

2

18

Keezac Pharmacy

Moderate

Economic

No

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

King Kullen

Moderate

Economic

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

LIPA

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Meroke Preserve

Extreme

Natrual and Cultural

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Merrick Golf Course

Moderate

Natrual and Cultural

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3

2

18

Merrick Library

Moderate

Natrual and Cultural

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Merrick Library Wing

Moderate

Natrual and Cultural

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Merrick LIRR

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Merrick Road Park

Moderate

Natrual and Cultural

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

3

30

Merrick Senior Center

High

Health and Social

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.5

3

31.5

MTA Police Station

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

5

37.5

NCDPW Garage - Merrick

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

4.5

5

90

NCPD Booth E

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

5

37.5

Newbridge Rd Park

Moderate

Natrual and Cultural

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3

3

27

Norman J Levy Lakeside School

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Norman J Levy Park & Preserve

Moderate

Natrual and Cultural

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Open Bay Marina

Extreme

Economic

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Pumping Station - Merrick & Clubhouse
Rd

High

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

3

5

60

Table 17 (cont’d) : Community asset inventory
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Risk Assessment

Asset Name

Risk Area

Asset Class

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate

Beach
Width

Shore
Defenses

Vegetation

Dunes or
Bluffs

Soils

Landscape
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

Pumping Station - Newbridge Rd

High

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

3.5

5

70

Retail Corridor - Merrick Rd

High

Economic

Yes

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

3

3

27

Retail Corridor - Sunrise Hwy

Moderate

Economic

Yes

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

Rite Aid

Moderate

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

Rite Aid

Moderate

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Sanitation

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

3

30

Seneca Fuel Oil Company

Moderate

Economic

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

Shore Road Elementary School

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3

3

27

South Nassau Hospital Annex

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

3

30

South Shore Dialysis

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

3

30

Stop and Shop

Moderate

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

Sunrise Plaza Shopping Center

Moderate

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

Town of Hempstead Traffic Control
Division

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

3

40.5

Trader Joes

High

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

3

3

27

Waldbaums

High

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

3

3

27

Water Treatment Plant - Thelma &
Sherman St

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

3

4

48

Whaleneck Marina Center

Extreme

Economic

No

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Winthrop Avenue School

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

This page intentionally left blank

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

E. End Notes
1. Five of the 102 localities in the program – Niagara,
Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery Counties
– are not funding through the CDBG-DR program.
2. The following localities’ allocations comprise the
NYRCR Community’s total allocation: Bellmore
– $5.7 million; Merrick – $6.4 million.
3. Google Earth Desk Survey
4. U.S. Bureau of the Census 2010. Census of Population
5. Long Island Index. Places to Grow. January 2010.
6. Zielenziger, David. “Hurricane Irene: After Landfall,
Trees Down, Power Off in Nassau County.” 28
August 2011. International Business Times
7. Brinton, Scott; Krasula, Deirdre; Weingrad,
David. 29 August 2011. “Bellmore-Merrick slowly
emerges from Irene.” LI Herald Online Edition
8. La Vacca, Laura. “Merrick Takes Hit from Hurricane
Irene.” Merrick Patch. 28 August 2011.
9. Village of Freeport All Hazard Mitigation Plan 2014
10. “Mangano Orders Mandatory Evacuation of
Flood and Storm Surge Zones.” Nassau County
New York. <www.nassaucountyny.gov>
11. “Mangano Orders Mandatory Evacuation of
Flood and Storm Surge Zones.” Nassau County
New York. <www.nassaucountyny.gov>
12. Mansmann, Julie. “South Shore Slowly Comes Back To Life
After Sandy.” LI Herald Online Edition. 12 November 2012.
13. “Long Island Power Authority Investor Update
Conference Call.” 16 January 2013. Long Island
Power Authority. <www.lipower.org>
14. “Mangano Announces Food & Drink Distributions. “Nassau
County New York.<www.nassaucountyny.gov>
15. ”Mangano Opens Additional Warming Centers in Nassau.”
Nassau County New York. <www.nassaucountyny.gov>
16. Marsar, Stephen. Firefighter Nation. 19 November 2012.
17. Richardson, Todd, and Ben Winter.“Analysis of
Communities Impacted by Hurricane Sandy.”HUD Office
of Policy and Research.Draft, January 29, 2013.
18. Richardson, Todd, and Ben Winter.“Analysis of
Communities Impacted by Hurricane Sandy.”HUD Office
of Policy and Research.Draft, January 29, 2013.
19. http://www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/
documents/30714?id=65 (Sandy Housing Assistance Data
for New York and New Jersey Updated, August 28, 2013).
20. http://www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/
documents/30714?id=65 (Sandy Housing Assistance Data
for New York and New Jersey Updated, August 28, 2013).
21. Richner, Zachary.SBA DCMS Application
Information.Nassau and Suffolk Counties Business
Applicant Information.13 December 2013.
22. Richner, Zachary.SBA DCMS Application
Information.Nassau and Suffolk Counties Business
Applicant Information.13 December 2013.
23. “Mangano: Many Roads Still Closed Throughout
Nassau County.” Nassau County New
York.<www.nassaucountyny.gov>
24. http://new.mta.info/press-releases

25. “Long Island Power Authority Investor Update
Conference Call.” 16 January 2013. Long Island
Power Authority. <www.lipower.org>
26. Gomez, Karen. “Sandy Clobbers Long Island Home Heating
Oil Tanks.” June 2013. New England Interstate Water
Pollution Control Commission. <www.neiwpcc.org>
27. National Weather Service: http://www.nhc.noaa.
gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Sandy.pdf, p. 55
28. National Weather Service: http://www.erh.noaa.
gov/okx/StormEvents/storm08282011.html
29. Long Island 2035 Study Team. LI 2035
Visioning Initiative. December 2009.
30. South Shore Estuary Reserve Council. South Shore Estuary
Reserve Comprehensive Management Plan. 2001.
31. Regional Plan Association. Places to Grow – An Analysis
of the Potential for Transit-Accessible Housing and Jobs in
Long Island’s Downtowns and Station Areas. January 2010.
32. South Shore Estuary Reserve Council. South Shore Estuary
Reserve Comprehensive Management Plan. 2001.
33. New York State Department of State. NYS
Coastal Management Plan. 2006.
34. Nassau County. Draft Nassau County
Master Plan. October 2010.
35. Nassau County. Draft Nassau County
Master Plan. October 2010.
36. Regional Plan Association. Cleaner Greener LI
Regional Sustainability Plan. April 2013.
37. Nassau County. Draft Nassau County
Master Plan. October 2010.
38. Nassau County. Nassau County Consolidated Plan. 2010.
39. Long Island Regional Planning Council. Sustainable
Strategies for LI 2035. December 2010.
40. Long Island Regional Economic Development Council.
New Vision for the LI Economy. November 2011.
41. Long Island 2035 Study Team. LI 2035
Visioning Initiative. December 2009.
42. Regional Plan Association. Cleaner Greener LI
Regional Sustainability Plan. April 2013.
43. Long Island Regional Economic Development
Council. Strong Island – Recovery & Resurgence –
Strategic Economic Development Plan for Nassau
and Suffolk Counties (Update). September 2013.
44. Regional Plan Association. Nassau County Infill
Redevelopment Feasibility Report. September 2013.
45. Nassau County. Draft Nassau County
Master Plan. October 2010.
46. “Nassau Hazard Mitigation Plan.” Nassau County
New York.<www.nassaucountyny.gov>
47. Nassau County. Multi-Jurisdictional Nassau
County Debris Management Plan.
48. Long Island 2035 Study Team. LI 2035
Visioning Initiative. December 2009.
49. United States Census Bureau. 2007-2011
American Community Survey DP04. 2011.

Additional Materials 147

Bellmore/Merrick
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

50. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Title 44,
Chapter 1, Part 201 – Mitigation Planning
51. Guidance for New York Rising Community Reconstruction
Plans: A Planning Toolkit for CR Planning Committees (2013).
52. De Bruin Engineering P.C., Technical Design Report:
Meroke Pond, Bellmore, February 3, 2009, p.6
53. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC WGII
AR5 Technical Summary: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability, March 2014, available at: http://
ipcc-wg2.gov/AR5/images/uploads/WGIIAR5-TS_FGDall.pdf
54. Meeting with Town of Hempstead, March 4, 2014,
Meeting with Nassau County, February 25, 2014
55. Urbanomics, Geospatial Join of Nassau County
Assessment Data with NYS Risk Zone Layers
56. Ibid.
57. ESRI. Retail Marketplace Profile. 3 January 2014
58. ESRI. Retail Marketplace Profile. 2012.
59. US Bureau of the Census, 2010 Census of Population
60. ”METAR/SPECI from KFRG, Farmingdale,
Republic Airport (United States).” 31 March 2014.
Professional Information About Meteorological
Conditions In The World. <www.ogimet.com>
61. “State of New York Action Plan for Community Development
Block Grant Program Disaster Recovery.” New York State
Homes and Community Renewal. April 2103. 17.
62. US Bureau of the Census, 2007-2011
American Community Survey DP04
63. Low Income Occupants Have Annual Incomes
Below $75,000 or Meet HUD’s Low Income Limit
at 80% of The AMI (Area Median Income)
64. Urbanomics, Geospatial Join of Census Bureau
2010 Block Group Data and Risk Zone Map
65. “Housing Assistance Data Hurricane Sandy New York
& New Jersey.” 28 August 2013. Federal Emergency
Management Agency <www.fema.gov>
66. “NY Rising Housing Recovery Program Announces 6,388
Homeowners Have Been Issued Checks for Over $280
Million for Home Rebuilding.” The NY Rising Housing
Recovery Program. <www.stormrecovery.ny.gov>
67. http://www.newsday.com/long-island/data.Realtor.
com search. Web. Accessed October 9, 2013
68. http://data.newsday.com/long-island/data/
foreclosures/2012-2013/HUD Aggregated
US Postal Service Administrative Data on
Address Vacancies, Q3 2012 to Q3 2013
69. http://www.newsday.com/long-island/data.Realtor.
com search. Web. Accessed October 9, 2013
70. ”Long Island Foreclosure Cases.” Long
IslandNewsday. <data.newsday.com>
71. ESRI forecasts, Demographic and Income Profile,
Bellmore-Merrick (CDP 3646668). 03 January 2014.
72. Ibid.
73. “NY Rising Buyout and Acquisition
Programs.”New York Storm Recovery Resources
Center. <www.stormrecovery.ny.gov

148

Additional Materials

74. “HOME Investment Partnerships Program (HOME).”Nassau
County New York.<www.nassaucountyny.gov>
75. “FEMA Storm Damage Mitigation Proposed LIPA Initiatives.”
Brookhaven National Laboratory. <www.bnl.gov>
76. “2010 – 2020 Electric Resource Plan.” Long
Island Power Authority. <www.lipower.org>
77. “Nassau and Suffolk Counties Trends in Wetland
Loss.” New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.<www.dec.ny.gov>
78. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Functions and Values of Wetlands. 2001
79. Barbier EB, Georgiou IY, Enchelmeyer B, Reed DJ (2013)
The Value of Wetlands in Protecting Southeast Louisiana
from Hurricane Storm Surges. PLoS ONE 8(3): e58715
80. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Wetlands:
Protecting Life and Property from Flooding. 2006.
81. Galveston Bay Foundation. Living Shorelines: A
Natural Approach to Erosion Control. 2011.
82. NY Department of Environmental Conservation.
Stormwater MS4 Permit and Forms. <www.dec.ny.gov>

F. Glossary
BFE: Base Flood Elevation
CDBG-DR: Community Development Block Grant - Disaster Recovery
CHHA: Coastal High Hazard Area
DPW: Department of Public Works
ESRF: New York State Empire State Relief Fund
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency
FD: Fire Department
GIS: Geographic Information System
HRRF: New York State Homeownership Repair and Rebuilding Fund
HUD: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
IHP: Individual and Households Program
kW: Kilowatt
LIPA: Long Island Power Authority
LIRR: Long Island Rail Road
MW: Megawatt
NDRF: National Disaster Recovery Framework
NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program
NGVD: National Geodectic Vertical Datum of 1929
NOAA: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NOAA-CSC: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Coastal Services Center
NYRCR: New York Rising Community Reconstruction
NWS: National Weather Service
NYS: New York State
NYS CMP: New York State Coastal Management Plan
NYS DOS: New York State Department of State
PD: Police Department
PSEG: Public Service Electric and Gas Company
RSF: Recovery Support Function
SBA: U.S. Small Business Administration
SFHA: Special Flood Hazard Area
SLOSH: Sea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes
TOD: Transit-Oriented Development
TOH: Town of Hempstead
TSD: Transit-Supportive Development
UFSD: Union Free School District

