NYRCR
Town of
Blooming
Grove
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan
DECEMBER 2014
NY RISING
COMMUNITY
RECONSTRUCTION
PROGRAM

Town of Blooming Grove
NYRCR Planning Committee
Richard Bachman*
Perry Ragusa*
Jay Beaumont
Carl Gilbert
Julius Sas
Carl Takakjian
Lorraine Tomassi
Robert Fromaget**
*indicates Co-Chair
**indicates local government official, non-voting member

This document was developed by the Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee as part of the NYRCR Program within the
Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR). The NYRCR Program is supported by NYS
Homes and Community Renewal, NYS Department of State, and NYS Department of
Transportation. This document was prepared by the consulting firm, Tetra Tech, Inc.

The Consultant Team, led by Tetra Tech, Inc., included:
Susan G. Blickstein, AICP, PP, PhD
The Byne Group
Hudson Valley Planning and Preservation
The McKissak & McKissack Group, Inc.
Nova Consulting & Engineering, LLC
SCAPE / Landscape Architecture PLLC

Cover image is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

Foreword
Introduction

I

n the span of approximately one year, beginning in
August 2011, the State of New York experienced
three extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked
havoc on the lives of New Yorkers and their
communities. These tragic disasters signaled that
New Yorkers are living in a new reality defined by
rising sea levels and extreme weather events that will
occur with increased frequency and power. They also
signaled that we need to rebuild our communities in
a way that will mitigate against future risks and build
increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew
M. Cuomo led the charge to develop an innovative,
community-driven planning program on a scale
unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The
NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program,
within the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR),
empowers the State’s most impacted communities with
the technical expertise and funding resources needed
to develop thorough and implementable reconstruction
plans to build physically, socially, and economically
resilient and sustainable communities.

Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo
in April of 2013, is a more than $700 million planning
and implementation program established to provide
rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities
severely damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm
Lee, and Superstorm Sandy. Drawing on lessons
learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program
is a unique combination of bottom-up community
participation and State-provided technical expertise.
This powerful combination recognizes not only that
community members are best positioned to assess the
FOREWORD

needs and opportunities of the places where they live
and work, but also that decisions are best made when
they are grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by
the latest innovative solutions.
Launched in the summer of 2013 and completed in
March 2014, Round I of the NYRCR planning process
included 50 NYRCR Planning Areas, comprising 102
storm-impacted localities. In January 2014, Governor
Cuomo announced a second round of the planning
process, serving an additional 22 storm-impacted
localities. Four of these localities were absorbed into
existing Round I NYRCR Planning Areas, bringing the
number of localities participating in Round I up to 106;
the other 18 localities formed 16 new Round II NYRCR
Planning Areas. Between Rounds I and II, there are 66
NYRCR Planning Areas, comprising 124 localities. The
program serves over 2.7 million New Yorkers and covers
nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent to 14%
of the overall State population and 12% of the State’s
overall geography.
In Rounds I and II, the State allotted between $3 million
and $25 million to each participating locality for the
implementation of eligible projects identified in the
NYRCR Plan. The funding for these projects is provided
through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) Community Development Block
Grant—Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program.1
Each NYRCR Planning Area is represented by a NYRCR
Planning Committee composed of local residents,
business owners, and civic leaders. Members of the
Planning Committees were identified in consultation
with established local leaders, community organizations
and, in some cases, municipalities. The NYRCR Program
sets a new standard for community participation in
recovery and resiliency planning, with community
members leading the planning process. Across the
State, more than 650 New Yorkers have represented
their communities by serving on Planning Committees.
Nearly 650 Planning Committee Meetings have been
held, during which Planning Committee members
1 Five of the Round I Planning Areas—Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida, Madison,
and Montgomery Counties—are not funded through the CDBG-DR program.

worked with the State’s team to develop community
reconstruction plans, which identify opportunities
to make their communities more resilient. All
meetings were open to the public. An additional 250+
Public Engagement Events attracted thousands of
community members, who provided feedback on the
planning process and resulting proposals. The NYRCR
Program’s outreach has included communities that
are traditionally underrepresented, such as immigrant
populations and students. All planning materials are
posted on the program’s website (www.stormrecovery.
ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several ways for community
members and the public to submit feedback on the
program and materials in progress.
Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees
were supported by staff from GOSR, planners from
New York State (NYS) Department of State and NYS
Department of Transportation, and consultants
from world-class planning firms that specialize
in engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green
infrastructure, and more.
The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR
Plan. Governor Cuomo has allotted over $700 million
for planning as well as implementing eligible projects
identified in NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Planning Areas are
also eligible for additional funds through the NY Rising
to the Top Competition, which evaluates applications
from Round II NYRCR Planning Committees across three
categories—Regional Approach, Inclusion of Vulnerable
Populations, and Use of Green Infrastructure. The winner of
each category will be allotted a share of the competition’s
$3.5 million to fund additional eligible projects.
In April 2014, Governor Cuomo announced that
projects identified in NYRCR Plans would receive priority
consideration through the State’s Consolidated Funding
Application (CFA) process and charged the Regional
Economic Development Councils (REDCs), which
play an advisory role in the CFA process, to support
NYRCR projects. In December 2014, Governor Cuomo
announced that 24 NYRCR projects received nearly
$12 million in CFA funding. This announcement is an
example of the Governor honoring his commitment to
leverage the work of the NYRCR Planning Committees

to incorporate resilience into other State programs and
to find additional sources of funding for NYRCR projects.
The NYRCR Program is also working with both private
and public institutions to identify existing funding
sources and to create funding opportunities where none
existed before.
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated
with State and Federal agencies to help guide the
development of feasible projects. The program has
leveraged the REDC State Agency Review Teams
(SARTs), composed of representatives from dozens
of State agencies and authorities, for feedback on
projects proposed.

The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding
a more resilient community. Each NYRCR Planning
Committee began the planning process by defining the
scope of its planning area, assessing storm damage, and
identifying critical issues. Next, the Planning Committee
inventoried critical assets in the community and
assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On the basis of
this work, the Planning Committee described recovery
and resiliency needs and identified opportunities.
The Planning Committee then developed a series of
comprehensive reconstruction and resiliency strategies,
and identified projects and implementation actions to
help fulfill those strategies.
The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan
are divided into three categories. The order in which
the projects and actions are listed in this NYRCR Plan
does not necessarily indicate the Planning Committee’s
prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed
Projects are projects proposed for funding through
an NYRCR Planning Area’s allotment of CDBG-DR
funding. Featured Projects are projects and actions that
the Planning Committee has identified as important
resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in depth,
but has not proposed for funding through the NYRCR
Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations
are projects and actions that the Planning Committee
would like to highlight and that are not categorized as
FOREWORD

Proposed Projects or Featured Projects. The Proposed
Projects and Featured Projects found in this NYRCR
Plan were voted for inclusion by voting members of
the Planning Committee. Those voting members with
conflicts of interest recused themselves from voting on
any affected projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics
Handbook and Code of Conduct.
As part of Round II of the NYRCR Program, the
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Planning Area has
been allotted up to $3 million in CDBG-DR funds
for the implementation of eligible projects identified
in this plan.
While developing projects for inclusion in NYRCR
Plans, Planning Committees took into account cost
estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the effectiveness of
each project in reducing risk to populations and critical
assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning
Committees also considered the potential likelihood
that a project or action would be eligible for CDBG-DR
funding. Projects and actions implemented with this
source of Federal funding must satisfy a Federallydesignated eligible activity category, fulfill a national
objective (i.e., meeting an urgent need, removing slums
and blight, or benefiting low- to moderate-income
individuals), and have a tie to the natural disaster
to which the funding is linked. These are among the
factors that GOSR will consider, in consultation with
local municipalities and nonprofit organizations, when
determining which projects and actions are best
positioned for implementation.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan
exceeds the NYRCR Planning Area’s CDBG-DR allotment
to allow for flexibility if some Proposed Projects
cannot be implemented due to environmental review,
HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors.
Implementation of the projects and actions found in this
NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State, and
local laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act. Inclusion of a project or action in this
NYRCR Plan does not guarantee that a particular project
or action will be eligible for CDBG‐DR funding or that it
will be implemented. Projects will be implemented on a
staggered timeline, and the NYRCR Program will choose
FOREWORD

an appropriate State or local partner to implement each
project. GOSR will actively seek to match projects with
additional funding sources, when possible.
In the months and years to follow, many of the projects
and actions outlined in this NYRCR Plan will become a
reality, helping New York not only to rebuild, but also to
build back better.

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

NY Rising Community

Note: Map displays the 66 NYRCR Planning Areas from Rounds I and II. (Five of the Round I Planning Areas—Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida, Madison,
and Montgomery Counties—are not funded through the CDBG-DR program.)

iv

FOREWORD

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table of Contents
Executive Summary.....................................................................................viii
Section 1: Community Overview.................................................................... 1
A Collaborative Approach to Critical Issues............................................. 2
The Planning Process............................................................................. 2
Geographic Scope of the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan.............. 4
Historic Snapshot........................................................................................4
Location.......................................................................................................4
Physical Features.........................................................................................7
Geography...................................................................................................7
Waterways...................................................................................................8
Storm Damage....................................................................................... 9
Hurricane Irene—A Set-up for Disaster......................................................9
Tropical Storm Lee—No Rest for the Weary............................................11
Recent Hazard Event History.................................................................13
Critical Issues........................................................................................15
Nature’s Beauty and the Beast.................................................................15
Rural, Rugged, and At-Risk........................................................................15
Infrastructure Issues..................................................................................16
The People of Blooming Grove..............................................................23
Relevance of Demographics During Disaster Events...............................23
The Education-Income-Resources Connection........................................23
Where People Work..................................................................................24
Land Use....................................................................................................24
Infrastructure.............................................................................................26
Transportation...........................................................................................26
Emergency Facilities..................................................................................27
Projects with Regional Significance.......................................................27
Interagency Cooperation.......................................................................27
Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs......................................................30

TABLE OF CONTENTS

v

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Description of Community Assets and Assessment of Risk....................30
Introduction and Overview.......................................................................30
Inventory Process......................................................................................30
Description of Community Assets............................................................35
Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems..............................................47
Assessment of Needs and Opportunities...............................................62
Community Planning and Capacity Building............................................62
Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies......................................68
Strategy 1.............................................................................................68
Strategy 2.............................................................................................72
Strategy 3.............................................................................................74
Strategy 4.............................................................................................76
Strategy 5.............................................................................................78
Section 4: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles........................................82
Proposed Projects.................................................................................82
Additional Hydrologic (Flood Routing),Hydraulic, and
Stormwater Analysis.........................................................................82
Strategic Critical Facility Flood-Proofingand Structural
Mitigation Program...........................................................................89
Mountain Lodge Drainage Improvements and Flood
Damage Reduction....................................................................................98
Update Local Codes and Ordinances.....................................................104
Install Natural Gas or Solar Back-Up Power for CriticalFacilities
and Infrastructure...........................................................................110
Vulnerable Populations and Community Emergency Alert, Warning,
and Support ..................................................................................114
Detailed Inspection Program and Investment Prioritization Protocol..119
Featured Projects................................................................................125
Community Rating System Participation................................................125
Update the Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan and Develop
Hazard and Operational Specific Annexes.....................................130
Barnes Road Levee..................................................................................134
Section 5: Additional Materials...................................................................142
Additional Resiliency Recommendations.............................................142
Master Table of Projects......................................................................141
vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Collaborative Communications: The Public Engagement Process.........147
Risk Assessment Methodology............................................................152
Glossary..............................................................................................185
Endnotes.............................................................................................188

TABLE OF CONTENTS

vii

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Executive Summary

Reconstruction Program (NYRCR) Program struck the
right balance between recovery efforts and a resolve for
future resiliency.

Overview

The Town of Blooming Grove, with participation from
the Village of South Blooming Grove, formed a 40.3
square mile planning area focused on identifying flood
mitigation and community resiliency activities under the
purview of the NYRCR Program. The Town of Blooming
Grove NYRCR Plan identifies the most critical needs
and impacts from recent major storms, and highlights
potential solutions to bolster future resiliency, increase
safety and quality of life, and inject incentives for
economic growth.

W

hen visitors arrive in the Town of
Blooming Grove for the first time,
they are stunned by its breathtaking
views and majestic mountains,
charming creeks, and picturesque
valleys. The Town, located in the central/south-central
portion of Orange County and about an hour’s commute
from Manhattan, creates an ideal location for people
seeking the charm of a small town and the convenience
of a nearby large city. The natural vistas that contribute
to the Town’s attractiveness also serve to heighten its
vulnerability to flooding disasters.
In late summer 2011, Hurricane Irene showed exactly
how vulnerable the Town could be. In Orange County, 7
to 15 inches of rain fell from August 24 to 30. In addition
to numerous flooded homes, residential developments
were frequently cut off from the world by flood-swollen
creeks and rivers, as was the case for the Merriewold
Lake neighborhood on either side of Satterly Creek.
Equally as concerning, the access roads to the Mountain
Lodge community remained impassable for several days,
even after the storm ended. Emergency medical and
services personnel could not treat trapped residents,
and feelings of anxiety and fear resounded through the
Town of Blooming Grove (Town). Tropical Storm Lee,
while not as severe as Hurricane Irene, exacerbated
damages and increased stress.
The Town, however, used the storm as a chance to test
its mettle. Like the Town’s original settlers, many of
whom participated in the American Revolutionary War,
local citizens refused to let defeat be the final answer
and committed to developing a long-term strategy to
create a more resilient community. New York Governor
Andrew M. Cuomo’s NY Rising Community

viii

Critical Issues
The Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan process
recognized several critical issues surrounding the Town’s
ability to successfully recover from natural disasters and
to enhance its overall resiliency. The Town of Blooming
Grove NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) used
a combination of existing plan reviews, technical
analyses, public input, interagency guidance, and
active discussion to identify these issues. As with any
worthwhile challenge, these issues have multiple
facets and are interconnected, requiring complex and
innovative solutions.
The Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan (NYRCR Plan)
summarizes the critical issues and challenges into three
major factors to most effectively address and overcome
these concerns.

The Double-Edged Sword of
Picturesque Landscapes
Many communities with significant historical ties to the
land prosper because of their proximity to waterways,
their charming scenery, and the abundance of local
nature. The Town of Blooming Grove is no exception
to this trend. While agriculture is no longer the
predominate land use, the lush valleys and mountains
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

help to draw new residents to the Town (in addition
to the other draw for residents–the convenience of its
proximity to New York City).
The visual amenities that attract new residents to the
Town, however, increase its risk and susceptibility to
storm damage. The rugged and hilly terrain encourages
fast-moving water, while the local waterways frequently
overtop and flood the restful retreats and charming
homes next to them. Intense storms, such as Hurricane
Irene and Tropical Storm Lee, have inflicted significant
economic hardship on the Town. Some of this hardship
was more apparent, such as the isolated and damaged
homes and businesses. Meanwhile, other damage,
including the impact to agriculture and long-term
economic sustainability, was more difficult to discern.

safe neighborhood accessibility.

The Resilient Mindset: More than
Just Infrastructure Projects
Through the course of the planning process, the Town
of Blooming Grove discovered how frequently a lack
of understanding about flooding and its causes can
contribute to exacerbated conditions and increased
risk. Although many of the projects identified by the
Committee focus on infrastructure and structural
improvements, the Committee recognized one of the
most effective solutions to reduce Town vulnerability
and increase resiliency is to create a resilient mindset.

The Committee is determined to live in
harmony with nature and to seek avenues
that allow the community to enjoy its
greatest natural features, while minimizing
their threat.

Efforts to educate the community about factors that
contribute to flood damage and how they can selfprotect can create positive, long-lasting resiliency.

Impassable Roadways and
Unintended Isolation

Both the Committee and the Town met NYRCR
planning and organizational challenges with the same
indomitable spirit that saw them through the 2011
flooding and storms. The Committee formed a multipronged public engagement process to incorporate
data from as many sources as possible. In addition to
the review of existing plans and studies, the Committee
promoted scientific, detailed cost-benefit analyses and
assessments.

The waterways and bodies of water that serve as the
Town’s most appealing natural amenities are often its
greatest threat. Many neighborhoods were built near
the water and due to geographic considerations, have a
limited number of access routes or have access routes
that are easily flooded.
Recent severe storm events provided a graphic
illustration of the vulnerability of certain neighborhoods
with regards to roadway vulnerability. Lakeshore
Drive, Mountain Lodge Park, and State Route 94 all
experienced unintended isolation from flooded streams
or sheet flow. This prevented emergency personnel
from entering and unprepared residents from seeking
more secure shelter. In some instances, neighborhoods
remained isolated and inaccessible for a few days, even
after the storm ended. The NYRCR Plan recognizes this
concern and developed projects designed to increase
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

A Community-Driven Process

Most importantly, at every step, the process
deliberately included public participation.
The Committee organized and conducted extensive,
multi-media outreach and Public Engagement Events
to offer residents every opportunity to ensure their
concerns and ideas were addressed. Residents could
choose to participate through attendance at bi-weekly
Committee Meetings, online and hard-copy surveys,
door-to-door visits, radio/social media channels, and
Public Engagement Events.

ix

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The Public Engagement Events were held at both the
Town Hall and the Senior Center, to take advantage
of local resources and to attract as wide an audience
as possible. The Committee worked to ensure that all
Town residents knew about the opportunities presented
through the NYRCR Program, and that nobody was
excluded from participating by a lack of access to
transportation, lack of access to technology, or because
of a functional or other access need.

The comprehensive communications
strategy deliberately targeted home and
business owners; residents of low to
moderate income, the elderly, and other
vulnerable populations; and organizations
in both the public and private sectors.

Vision Statement
Overarching this effort was a vision adopted by the
Committee early in the planning process.
“To provide a stronger, safer, more resilient
community for the residents of the Town of
Blooming Grove and the Village of South Blooming
Grove by restoring natural systems, expanding the
body of knowledge regarding the causes of local
flood events, creating and implementing projects
to address those causes and current damage, and
planning for flood-safe neighborhoods to reduce
future damage, while maintaining the vitality and
viability of the Town of Blooming Grove.”

A Blueprint For Success
The Blooming Grove Committee chose to promote
projects that focus on long-term resiliency. The NYRCR
Plan seeks to create a sustainable blueprint that
effectively target the communities greatest at-risk assets
and recommends implementable solutions that bolster
critical facilities and essential services.

x

The Committee and the public used a multi-generational
body of knowledge and experience, augmented by
both personal experiences and technical analysis, to
determine the Town’s primary needs, risks, and critical
issues. This culminated in proposed projects to bolster
the Town’s resiliency.
The Committee began by analyzing economic,
healthcare, social services, housing, infrastructure, and
natural and cultural resources to determine prospective
risk and impact. It then developed preliminary strategies
to reduce this risk and to meet the most critical
needs. These needs focus on community health and
safety, resiliency, quality of life, economic growth, and
environmental stewardship.
These strategies became the foundation for projects
and actions proposed in the Town of Blooming Grove
NYRCR Plan.
The Committee chose not to limit itself to structure
and infrastructure projects, which can have a limited
useful life; instead, the planning process explored
projects that fall under a variety of categories:
structure and infrastructure; planning and regulatory
processes; natural resource protection; and education
and outreach.
Projects were organized into three project categories.
This methodology was designed to identify and consider
the full range of potential actions and outcomes,
while providing the Town with clear direction toward
project implementation.
Proposed Projects are projects proposed for
funding through an NYRCR Plan Area’s allotment of
CDBG-DR funding.
Featured Projects are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee has identified as important
resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in
depth, but has not proposed for funding through the
NYRCR Program.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Additional Resiliency Recommendations are projects
and actions that the Committee would like to highlight
and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects or
Featured Projects.

From Strategies to
Implementable Projects
The Committee identified five strategies in its NYRCR
Plan, around which potential projects and resiliency
actions would center. These strategies highlight the
Town’s overall reconstruction and resiliency needs,
while offering opportunities to address them.
The following strategies resulted in Proposed and
Featured Projects, along with Additional Resiliency
Recommendations. These collectively remediate,
mitigate, rebuild, and promote a resilient Town of
Blooming Grove.

Strategies
STRATEGY 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding
on the built environment, including critical facilities,
infrastructure, businesses, and housing.
STRATEGY 2: Improve stormwater management and
drainage systems throughout the Town to decrease risk
for homes, businesses, and residents.
STRATEGY 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for
emergency preparedness, response, sheltering, and
communication.

Projects
The following projects were selected for the
Proposed Project category, due to the multitude of
benefits to the community and project contribution
towards increased resiliency.

Additional Hydrologic (Flood Routing),
Hydraulic, and Stormwater Analysis
This project seeks to conduct a comprehensive study
of all local waterways, lakes, and dams affecting flood
conditions in the NYRCR Plan Area. Additional riverine
and overland (stormwater) hydraulic analyses would
provide information and recommendations. These
would be helpful in the planning and development of
further actions to reduce the extent and severity of
flooding in the Town.

Detailed Inspection Program and
Investment Prioritization Protocol
This project seeks a holistic, sustainable approach to
increase transportation system resiliency toward future
storms, and to address repetitive failures on vulnerable
roadway segments throughout the NYRCR Plan Area.
After fully evaluating the components of the existing
transportation network in the Town, and findings from
the proposed Additional Hydrologic (Flood Routing),
Hydraulic, and Stormwater Analysis Project, the
Committee recommended implementation of a detailed
inspection program and investment protocol for Town‐
owned bridges and culverts.

STRATEGY 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance the Town’s
natural, recreational, and cultural resources, and restore
natural floodplain capabilities.

Install Natural Gas or Solar
Back-up Power for Critical
Facilities and Infrastructure

STRATEGY 5: Assist Town residents, officials, and
business owners in becoming better protected from
future flood damages through education, programming,
outreach, and policy initiatives.

This project aims to obtain and install permanent
back-up power sources for the critical facilities and
infrastructure in the Town that are not addressed in
other Proposed Projects. This project would include

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

xi

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

an evaluation of existing critical facilities’ needs for
redundant power generation.
The Town could consider the use of solar or green
energy, where feasible, at these locations:
• South Blooming Grove Village Hall; and
• Town Highway Garage at 2741 State Route 94
(also the proposed site for relocation of the Town
of Blooming Grove Central Garage, providing a
secondary benefit to installing a back-up power
source here).

Mountain Lodge Drainage
Improvements and Flood
Damage Reduction
This project would provide a series of standard plans
and detailed drawings to repair or upgrade existing
degraded stormwater ditches. It would then implement
a revolving loan, grant, or cost-share program to
help low-income residents of Mountain Lodge Park
implement improvements on a property-by-property basis.
In addition to providing standard plans, this project
would provide outreach and education to homeowners
through the Homeowners Association to assist in the
implementation of the plans.

• South Blooming Grove Firehouse Stream Bank
Stabilization;
• Merriewold Lake Outlet Channel Bank Restoration;
• Flood mitigation measures for Tappan Waste
Water Treatment Plant (Barnes Road); and
• Flood mitigation measures for Village of South
Blooming Grove.

Update Local Codes and Ordinances
This project would include a comprehensive review of
the zoning and subdivision regulations to identify areas
of improvement that would enhance the Community’s
ability to be more resilient to future storm events and
would address the feasibility related to code changes.

Vulnerable Populations and Community
Emergency Alert, Warning, and Support
Implement and disseminate education materials
regarding a coordinated alerting system and general
disaster readiness. These materials would be designed
for public and private sectors, families and individuals,
and Persons with Access and Functional Needs (PAFN)
and vulnerable populations. The materials can also
benefit low and moderate income populations who may
be without reliable access to Internet service.

Strategic Critical Facility Flood-Proofing
and Structural Mitigation Program
This project aims to strengthen key critical facilities
that experienced service interruptions due to flooding
during Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee. It would
be informed by the Town’s new Detailed Program and
Investment Prioritization Tool. The following projects
are proposed:
• Town Maintenance Garage Relocation;
• Salisbury Mills Fire Department Stormwater
Retrofit;

xii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TOWN OF BLOOMING GROVE NYRCR PLAN
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR
Plan Projects By Strategy

Proposed
Project

Additional Hydrologic (Flood
Routing), Hydraulic, and Stormwater
Analysis

Featured
Project

Strategy 1

Strategy 2

Strategy 3

Strategy 4

Strategy 5

X

X

X

X

X

X

Detailed Inspection Program and
Investment Prioritization Protocol

X

X

X

Install Natural Gas or Solar
Back-up Power for Critical Facilities
and Infrastructure

X

Mountain Lodge Drainage
Improvements and Flood Damage
Reduction

X

X

X

X

Strategic Critical Facility Flood
Proofing and Structural Mitigation
Program

X

X

Update Local Codes and Ordinances

X

X

Vulnerable Populations and
Community Emergency Alert,
Warning and Support

X

X
X
X
X

X
X

Barnes Road Levee

X

X

Community Rating System
Participation

X

X

Update the Comprehensive
Emergency Management Plan and
Develop Hazard and Operational
Specific Annexes

X

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

X

X

X
X

X

xiii

Section 1

Community Overview

Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 1:
Community Overview
From Grey Skies to Great
Challenges

W

aterfront properties with amazing
views.” Most folks dream for a home
with this description. Few would
guess, though, that “waterfront
properties with amazing views” also
described many areas in the Town of Blooming Grove,
New York, in late August 2011, before torrents from
Hurricane Irene swelled streets and swallowed cars as
far as the eye could see. The flooding devastation and
resulting debris fields in the aftermath of Hurricane
Irene’s record rainfall grew in magnitude in the wake of
Tropical Storm Lee, just one week later, in early September.
Hurricane Irene was a beastly storm in late summer
2011. Image is courtesy of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
The impacts and challenges caused by these storms
and flooding were felt throughout the region. Despite
extensive community collaboration to use available
response and recovery resources, including inspired

local volunteer efforts, considerable unmet recovery
needs remain.
The NYRCR Program empowers communities severely
impacted by Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and
Tropical Storm Lee through rebuilding and resiliency
assistance. Under the guidance and funding of the
NYRCR Program, the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR
Plan aims to address the most critical needs and impacts
from these storm events, while identifying strategies
and needs for future resiliency, increased quality of life,
community vibrancy, and economic revitalization.
The Village of South Blooming Grove, geographically
connected with the Town of Blooming Grove, is
considered part of the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR
Plan Area (NYRCR Plan Area), for the purposes of the
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan.

The Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR
Plan is a critical complement to other
state, regional, and local emergency
management, economic development, and
community revitalization efforts.

Hurricane Irene was a beastly storm in late summer 2011. Image is courtesy of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

1

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

A Collaborative Approach To
Critical Issues
This Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan is the result
of months of grassroots-level Public Engagement Events
and opinion-gathering that has been corroborated by
hydraulic analysis, additional scientific and quantitative
evaluations, and historical trending. This effort was
steered by the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Planning
Committee (Committee), a collaborative cross-section of
residents, first responders, business people, community
planning specialists, educators, utility industry workers,
and other key stakeholders who met at least biweekly
over a seven-month planning process.
The all-volunteer Committee worked with Tetra Tech,
Inc. (Consultant Team), staff from the New York State
Department of State (NYS DOS), and the NYRCR
Regional Lead. The Consultant Team provided technical
expertise in all areas of planning and recovery, and
supported the Committee in developing materials,
conducting public outreach, performing detailed
analyses, and identifying projects for potential
implementation. Regular Committee Meetings provided
the venue for managing the overall process; assigning
tasks; evaluating and understanding qualitative (public
opinion) and quantitative (scientific) information
gathered; determining the vision and direction of the
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan; and ultimately, for
categorizing projects that could be eligible for NYRCR
Program funding.

the Village of South Blooming Grove by restoring
natural systems, expanding the body of knowledge
regarding the causes of local flood events, creating
and implementing projects to address those causes
and current damage, and planning for flood-safe
neighborhoods to reduce future damage, while
maintaining the vitality and viability of the Town of
Blooming Grove.

The Planning Process
The Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan presents the
established community vision, goals, projects, initiatives,
and implementation strategies to further the Town of
Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan Area (NYRCR Plan Area)’s
recovery, and to achieve greater resiliency in the face of
future storm events.
The planning process is implementation-focused and
builds on existing plans and studies to advance recovery
and resiliency steps. The Town of Blooming Grove
NYRCR Plan components, supporting documentation
and analysis, and subsequent recommendations focus
on the six Recovery Support Functions (RSFs) developed
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
(see Table 1.1).

FIGURE 1.1 - TOWN OF
BLOOMING GROVE NYRCR
PLANNING PROCESS

Community Vision and Goals
The Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan incorporates
a community-driven vision statement for the future,
accompanied by a set of goals and strategies to advance
the vision.

Review Existing
Plans, Studies
Project Analysis,
Implementation
Strategy

ID Proposed,
Featured Projects

Inventory of
Critical Community
Facilities

Public
Engagement

TOWN OF BLOOMING GROVE
NYRCR PLAN VISION STATEMENT
To provide a stronger, safer, more resilient community
for the residents of the Town of Blooming Grove and
2

ID Critical Issues,
Needs,
Opportunities

Risk Assessment
of
Critial Assets

Community
Vision, Goals

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 1.1 – RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTIONS AND
CORRESPONDING FOCUS AREAS
Recovery Support Function

Focus Area

Community Planning and Capacity Building

The community’s ability to plan and implement storm recovery activities and its ability to
mitigate the effects of future storms.

Economic

The community’s ability to return economic and business activities to healthy states
following a disaster.

Health and Social Services

The community’s ability to identify the key needs critical to protecting the health and wellbeing of all residents (particularly vulnerable populations) from the effects of a post-disaster
environment.

Housing

The community’s ability to provide safe and adequate housing for current and future
residents.

Infrastructure Systems

The community’s ability to replace or improve infrastructure in response to disasters. This
includes roads and bridges, as well as water, sewer, and communications networks.

Natural and Cultural Resources

The community’s ability to leverage natural and cultural resources while protecting manmade assets.

Source: NYS DOS, 2013

These RSFs comprise the National Disaster Recovery
Framework’s coordinating structure for key functional
areas of assistance in supporting localities. The RSFs
helped facilitate local stakeholder participation and
promoted intergovernmental and public-private
partnerships.

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

3

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Geographic Scope of the Town
of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan
Historic Snapshot
The Town of Blooming Grove was organized on March
23, 1799, when the territory was taken from Cornwall
Township. The name Blooming Grove had long been
in use for this part of Cornwall to distinguish it from
Hunting Grove, a locality then in New Windsor.
According to local accounts, many of the early settlers
from the area played a key role in the American
Revolution. Numerous roads in the Town bear the
names of Revolutionary War heroes, such as Horton,
Tuthill, Woodull, and Clinton. When the current Town of
Blooming Grove was formed, the old church, erected in
1759, formed its center.

“bedroom community” for workers, visitors, and
second homeowners. It includes a relatively small
commercial area (1.5% of all land uses in the NYRCR
Plan Area), various residential neighborhoods, a sizeable
agricultural area (nearly 18% in the NYRCR Plan Area)
and other land uses.
The NYRCR Plan Area is located in the central and
south-central portion of Orange County, in the Hudson
Valley/Catskills Region. The Town of Blooming Grove is
bordered to the east by the Towns of Woodbury and
Cornwall, to the north by the Towns of New Windsor
and Hamptonburgh, to the west by the Towns of
Chester and Goshen, and to the south by the Town of
Monroe and Village of Kiryas Joel. Figure 1.2 displays
an overview of the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR
Plan Area. The Committee considered a review of past
events, sources of historical flooding, and the location
of critical facilities impacted by flooding to determine
NYRCR Plan Area.

Location
The Town of Blooming Grove is one of 20 towns in
Orange County. Orange County is considered one of
the fastest growing counties in the State of New York.
While the Village of Washingtonville and the Village of
South Blooming Grove geographically border the Town
of Blooming Grove, these Villages are self-governing
entities. The Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan Area
comprises 40.3 square land miles and includes the
entirety of the Town of Blooming Grove (35.3 square
miles) and the Village of South Blooming Grove (5.0
square miles), as well as a small area within the
Town of Monroe containing the Orange and Rockland
Lake watershed.
The watershed spans the Blooming Grove and Monroe
Town boundary near the intersection of State Route
17/U.S. Route 6 and County Route 208 (see Figure
1.2). Although the Village of South Blooming Grove is
included in the Plan Area, the Town’s other neighbor,
the Village of Washingtonville is not included as it
participated in Round 1 of the NYRCR planning process.
The Town of Blooming Grove is about a one-hour
commute to Manhattan, making it an attractive
4

The Town of Blooming Grove’s location offers easy access to New
York City, as well as the allure of outdoor recreational opportunities.
Pictured here is a favorite walking path in the NYRCR Plan Area. Image
is courtesy of Eric Thayer.
SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Pictured here is a sample of housing stock in the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan Area. Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

5

NYRCR: Town of Blooming Grove, Orange County
FIGURE 1.2 – OVERVIEW MAP

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Geography
The Town’s uneven topography is characteristic of other
areas in the Hudson Highlands, which have formed over
tens of thousands of years via geologic uprisings, glacial
scouring, and subsequent erosion by wind and water.
Schunemunk Mountain in the east offers ridge-framed
vistas of open fields, lakes and streams, and forested
bottom lands. Town residents easily recognize and
reflect the importance of local landmarks and features,
such as Round Hill, Woodcock Mountain, and Bull Mine
Mountain, in local street and place names.
Rolling pastures are punctuated by surrounding mountains in this
community. Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

Physical Features
The long range of the Schunemunk Mountains form
the eastern boundary of the NYRCR Plan Area, and the
numerous nearby foothills provide a unique historical
element, in that their magnetic iron ore deposits
were used to make weaponry during Civil War times.
Throughout the NYRCR Plan Area, farm fields and open
meadows stretch across the valleys.
Cromeline Creek runs from Walton Lake by the base
of Goose Pond Mountain, through the Greycourt
meadows and the picturesque falls at Craigville, and
until Farmingdale and Hulsetown. The Otterkill Creek
joins the Cromline Creek by the Town of Hamptonburgh
line, and the Tappan or Schunemunk Creek, flowing
from Satterly’s Mills, joins it near the Village of
Washingtonville.
The lush meadows and apple orchards crowning the
hillsides with sweet blossoms justify the name of
Blooming Grove. With a stunning blend of evergreen
and deciduous trees, the autumn view is equally
glorious. This natural majesty of creeks, valleys, and
mountains is quickly replaced by mayhem during
severe storm events, as water that drains from the
mountainside and into the valleys can easily overrun
creek banks and tributaries that crisscross the region.

7

The same topography and natural features that
contribute to the Town’s small-town charm also resulted
in significant flood damage during severe weather
events. The western portion of the Town of Blooming
Grove is hilly, with elevations ranging from 400 to 700
feet above sea level. Meanwhile, the area located just
east and west of Clove Road, extending from the north,
near the Town of Cornwall border, to the south, near the
Town of Monroe border, characterizes itself with many
hills. These hills have elevations ranging from 400 to 850
feet above sea level, and they form a chain that extends
from the northeastern to the southern part of the Town.
In addition to mountains and foothills, the Town’s
diverse landscape includes rolling hills, wooded
hillsides, lakes, streams, rural settlements, suburban
neighborhoods, shops, and retail strips. Town
commercial development has been limited overall, with
the exception of some small strip shopping centers.
About 75% of the Town is undeveloped open space,
with much of it available for residential development.
Residential development continues to increase, similar
to many adjacent communities and consistent with
population growth across all of Orange County.

Nevertheless, the majority of the Town’s
soils can impose severe restrictions to
development due to soil stoniness, steep
slopes, slow permeability, shallow depth to
bedrock, and a seasonal high-water table
that limits land development.

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

These soil considerations are important factors in the
design and density of development. The steep slopes
and bedrock outcroppings typically found in upland
areas, such as Schunemunk Mountain, limit local
construction. Additionally, developers consider the soils
in Town (primarily in the lowland plains and valleys), as
well as the area south of State Route 94 and along the
western border of Town, as generally unsuitable
for development due to poor permeability, ponding,
or flooding.

Waterways
The topography and waterways in the Town make
it vulnerable to damaging wind and floods during
severe storm events, such as those experienced in late
summer 2011. The major waterways in the NYRCR
Plan Area include:
1. Beaverdam Lake

Residential and municipal properties experienced the
primary economic damage, particularly in regards to
structural (i.e., home/residences) and infrastructural
(i.e., Town roads and critical facilities, including fire
stations, the central garage, etc.) repair costs. Local
businesses in and near Station Road Square and
Salisbury Mills also experienced some structural repair
costs, which impacted their ability to operate on a
routine basis. Additional economic damage included
some business and employment interruption, largely
to residents stranded in their neighborhoods, or
those who used public transportation to commute to
New York City.
The first round of the NYRCR Program comprised 102
localities, including the Village of Washingtonville,
which is wholly located in the geopolitical boundary
of the Town of Blooming Grove (see the Village of
Washingtonville NYRCR Plan at www.stormrecovery.
ny.gov/nyrcr).

2. Cromline Creek
3. Hildegarde Lake
4. Korby Lake
5. Lenni Lenape Lake
6. Merriewold Lake
7. Moodna Creek Watershed
8. Orange and Rockland Lakes
9. Otter Kill
10. Perry Creek
11. Satterly Creek
12. Seely Brook
13. Silver Creek
14. Tomahawk Lake
15. Youngs Brook

A large portion of the NYRCR Plan Area
experienced severe economic damage
from Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm
Lee, and area residents in all corners of the
Town sustained lasting impacts from the
storms’ devastation.

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Pictured here is the Moodna Creek on a “blue skies” day. Lovely as it
is, flooding of this major waterway in the region severely impacted the
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan Area. Photo is courtesy of
Eric Thayer.
8

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Storm Damage
The historical impacts of Hurricane Irene
and Tropical Storm Lee on the State of
New York, Orange County, and the Town
of Blooming Grove originate from several
sources. These sources may vary in their
loss and impact information. The monetary
figures discussed here are based on these
sources and are cited, where applicable.

percentiles through a comparison against long-term
averages over the same time period in previous years.
These saturated ground conditions left those areas
less capable of absorbing the impending heavy rainfall,
setting the stage for quick runoff and uprooted trees
from the winds and rain to come. Saturated soils had
previously caused ground failures in Town, particularly
along State Routes 17 and 94.

The view from a house porch along Beverly Lane about 9:30 a.m.
on August 28, 2011, as Hurricane Irene’s deluge besieged the Town
of Blooming Grove. This scene belies the tranquility that ordinarily
characterizes this neighborhood during periods of blue skies. Photo is
courtesy of local resident, Walter Millett.

Surviving the Storm
The barely visible guard rail is the only indication that Peddler Hill
Road is under flood waters on August 28, 2011. Power lines were
compromised throughout the area, leaving many without power for
days during the aftermath of Hurricane Irene. Photo is courtesy of
Committee Co-Chair Richard Bachman.

Hurricane Irene – A Set-up
for Disaster
Out of the three most notable recent disasters, i.e.,
Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical Storm
Lee, Hurricane Irene caused the most damage to the
Town of Blooming Grove. In the weeks before Hurricane
Irene, much of eastern New York State had soil moisture
ranking in the 80th and 90th percentiles. The National
Climactic Data Center (NCDC) determines these
9

Hurricane Irene tracked up the East Coast of the
United States from August 21 to 27, 2011, when wind
speeds decreased to tropical storm forces. Hurricane
Irene made its third landfall in coastal New Jersey and
then hit New York State on August 28, 2011, bringing
heavy rains and flooding to the Catskill Mountains and
throughout the Hudson Valley. Flood waters overtopped
roadway segments in the Town of Blooming Grove,
including Horton Road, Glenwood Road, Tuthill Road,
State Route 208, and State Route 94, limiting the ability
of emergency services personnel to reach residents
for rescue. Bridges on State Route 208, Lake Road,
Merriewold Lane and Tuthill Road became impassable,
diverting residents and commercial traffic miles out of
the way.
SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Hurricane Irene, the Satterly Creek rose to wash out or
severely damage each of these roads, leaving residents
without access into or out of their neighborhood.
Nearby in the Village, four homes on Turtle Knoll were
cut off when waters from a private lake on the north
side of the road overtopped the spillway and washed
out the small private bridge accessing this subdivision.
On the other side of Town, near the Village of
Washingtonville, homes on Cardinal Drive and Patricia
Lane, backing up along the Moodna Creek, were so
significantly damaged that many were later offered
FEMA buy-outs.
Pictured above is the Salisbury Mills/Orrs Mill Road power station on
August 28, 2011. The station was overrun with hurricane flood waters.
The volume and velocity of the water rushing over the spillway shown
here was the worst in recent history. Photo is courtesy of Committee
Co-Chair Richard Bachman.

On August 31, 2011, President Barack Obama issued a
major disaster declaration (DR-4020) for New York State
and the counties impacted by Hurricane Irene, including
Orange County and the NYRCR Plan Area.
In Orange County, 7 to 15 inches of rain fell from August
24 to 30, 2011, exacerbating the already-saturated
soil conditions. The County suffered 45 to 50 mile per
hour wind gusts on August 28, 2011. Moodna Creek
overflowed its banks, resulting in water rescues at
Udderly Fresh Farms on State Route 94 near
Farmview Lane.

Access roads in and out of the Town’s
residential subdivisions were severely
damaged, leaving people stranded in their
homes and neighborhoods.
The first floor and basements of numerous homes on
Barnes Road were flooded when a culvert was breached
and water from the Satterly Creek flowed over the road
and into residents’ backyards.
In the Village of South Blooming Grove, Merriewold
Lane, Stonegate Drive, and Lake Shore Drive serve as
the three sole access roads to reach the residential
developments surrounding Merriewold Lake. During
SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Even after the rains ended, most roads in Mountain Lodge remained
dangerous or impassible. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

The Mountain Lodge community contains about 800
residential units primarily occupied by low to moderate
income households. Mountain Lodge is a former
summer residential community, with most of the access
provided via gravel roads and trails that predate the
current road standards set by the Town of Blooming
Grove. Sheet flow off the mountains damaged many
of the homes’ main accesses and entered the gravel
trails and roads, carrying large debris and gravel in fast
moving waterways. This created extremely dangerous
conditions for residents and forced many to shelter in
place while the flooding continued.

10

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Clove Road, a primary local arterial that connects
Mountain Lodge Park to the rest of the Town, had also
flooded, cutting off access for escaping the dangerous
conditions on the mountain and preventing emergency
services from entering. Two homes in Mountain Lodge
Park burned to the ground in the days following the
storm, before access roads reopened and when fire
trucks could not reach the homes quickly. Another
home in this community was washed away during the
storm, and a few have been abandoned since the storm.

Tropical Storm Lee—
No Rest for the Weary

Salisbury Mills, a primary area of commerce in the Town
of Blooming Grove, also became severely flooded from
stormwaters. Salisbury Mills is located on 94 and Station
Road, nestled between the Moodna Creek and its
tributary flowing from the nearby Beaver Lake.

In the wake of Hurricane Irene and
Tropical Storm Lee, the most common
damages across the NYRCR Plan Area
included flooded roads that forced closures
and cut off ingress and egress to many
homeowners. Embankment failures,
bridge wash-outs, septic tank back-ups,
wastewater runoff, and deluges from
private dams were also noted in damage
reports and were offered anecdotally by
local residents.

This area is home to the Salisbury Fire Department,
a Post Office, and a number of small locally-owned
businesses. Many of these buildings experienced first
floor flooding and had to be rebuilt after the storm. The
Salisbury Fire Department needed almost a complete
rebuild due to the extent of flood damage. Some of the
small businesses in the local shopping plaza did not have
the economic resources to re-open after the flood.
Additionally, State Route 94, Woodcock Mountain Drive,
and Station Road closed briefly as a result of Hurricane
Irene. The hurricane exacerbated historic embankment
failures at the State Route 88 area, between Exits 2 and
3, and the Airport Road Exit embankment failure area,
next to State Route 17.
The Community has experienced a growing local
concern over the impact of uncoordinated dam releases
by private dam owners throughout the Town and
watershed. Without effective emergency operations
agreements between the Town and all local dam
owners, some spillways overtopped with flood waters
from Hurricane Irene, while other dams were released
too late to be effective in providing flood storage to
mitigate downstream flooding. Uncoordinated dam
release, along with suspected reduced stream and lake
capacity due to sediment loading from Hurricane Irene
and other past storms, are some of the most frequently
reported concerns captured by public comment.
11

On September 7, 2011, just a few weeks after Hurricane
Irene and with the ground still saturated, Tropical
Storm Lee added to the accumulation of flooding and
rain damage. Although not as intense as Hurricane
Irene, the storm further destroyed already weakened
infrastructure, limiting the ability of the Town to recover
from the damages incurred from Hurricane Irene.

All of Orange County, including the NYRCR Plan Area,
became eligible for both Public Assistance (PA) and
Individual Assistance (IA) from FEMA, due to Hurricane
Irene. Orange County, including the Town of Blooming
Grove, was only eligible for FEMA PA after Tropical
Storm Lee. The Committee was unable to obtain the
financial amounts for damages suffered by the Town
and assistance provided to the Town of Blooming Grove;
however, Orange County received $29.1 million overall
in assistance between Hurricane Irene and Tropical
Storm Lee (see Figure 1.3).

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

FIGURE 1.3 – FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
RECEIVED BY CATEGORY IN ORANGE COUNTY
POST-HURRICANE IRENE AND TROPICAL STORM LEE

Source: FEMA, 2014

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

12

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Recent Hazard Event History
The table below summarizes information regarding
recent natural hazard events that have occurred in or
around the Town of Blooming Grove. Table 1.3 indicates
the existing plans and studies that the Committee
leveraged in the preparation of this NYRCR Plan.

TABLE 1.2 – RECENT HAZARD EVENTS
FEMA Declaration
Number

Approximate Damage Assessment

Severe Storms and
Flooding (Nor’easter)

DR-1899

A Nor’easter produced an extended period of heavy rainfall
on March 13, causing widespread flooding across portions of
southeast New York. Local waterways exceeded their banks across
Orange County and inundated properties with water.

Thunderstorms,
Wind

N/A

Severe thunderstorms brought strong winds and hail. Trees were
reported down throughout the Town of Blooming Grove Plan Area.

N/A

Heavy rainfall resulted in moderate to major flooding
across portions of southeastern New York. In the Village of
Washingtonville, Moodna Creek overflowed its banks, flooding
first-floor residents and businesses on State Route 208, as well as
State Route 94 near Washingtonville High School.

Dates of Event

Event Type

March 13 to 31,
2010

June 24, 2010

March 7, 2011

Flood

July 29, 2011

Tornado

N/A

In Lower Hudson Valley, there was at least one “supercell” that
produced a tornado in Orange County. The National Weather
Service (NWS) confirmed an EF-1 tornado that ran from the Towns
of Goshen to Blooming Grove, on Friday July 29, 2011. The tornado
touched down in the Town of Goshen before it finally lifted near
Prospect Road in the Town of Blooming Grove. Along its path, trees
converged into a well-defined narrow path. Total property damage
from this event was approximately $50,000.

August 26 to
September 5, 2011

Hurricane Irene

DR-4020

Heavy rain and widespread flooding caused damage to private
properties, public facilities, and infrastructure, particularly
roadways and embankments.

September 7 to 11,
2011

Remnants of tropical
Storm Lee

DR-4031

Tropical Storm Lee brought high winds, heavy rains and additional
flooding, leading to debris accumulation that added to damages
incurred by Hurricane Irene.

October 27 to
November 8, 2012

Superstorm Sandy

DR-4085

High winds brought down trees and power lines, and caused
widespread power outages.

Note: N/A Not Applicable.

13

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 1.3 – SUMMARY OF EXISTING PLANS AND STUDIES
E
Resource

Relevance

Key Components for NYRCR
Planning Process

Army Corp of Engineers Comprehensive
Response Document for Moodna
Watershed, 2010

Provides a review of flood risk, damage,
and causes of historical flood issues for the
Moodna Creek.

Past flood information, issues contributing
to flood risk, key areas of flood concern for
the Town of Blooming Grove, and strategies
for addressing flood issues.

Merriewold Dam Emergency Action Plan,
February 2012

Define responsibilities, procedures to notify
emergency personnel and other public
safety officials of a possible impending or
actual failure of the Merriewold Dam.

Dam inundation map, HEC RAS data,
recommendations for mitigation actions to
improve dam safety.

Moodna Creek Watershed Plan,
October 2012

Provides an inter-municipal plan for
managing the area’s water resources
including documentation of local watershed
conditions, issues, potential causes of
flooding, and water quality problems,
among others.

Identifies opportunities for improvements
related to environmental and ecosystem
protection, flood reduction, and enhanced
access to waterways.

Orange County Single Jurisdiction Hazard
Mitigation, February 2011

Provides strategies for mitigating potential
hazards at the County scale.

Detailed past flood information, hazard
vulnerabilities and flood-related issues, past
and ongoing mitigation projects, proposed
mitigation initiatives.

Orange County, NY, Agriculture Economic
Development Strategy (2004)

Provides an economic development and
growth strategy for the County.

Inventory of existing conditions, County
vision, identifies goals, priority projects for
economic development.

Orange County Comprehensive Plan (2010)
(including plan amendments Orange County
Open Space Plan, 2004, and Orange County
Water Master Plan, 2010)

Establishes a vision for the long-term
maintenance, growth, and development
of the County, with overarching goals and
recommended implementation actions.

County vision, detailed community
demographics and environmental and
economic data, forecasts, goals, and
recommendations.

Orange County Transportation Council Long
Range Transportation Plan (December 2011)

Presents development future for the
County with a planning horizon of 2040
and established goals and objectives with
recommendations for implementation.

Detailed demographic data, descriptions of
County and local roadways, and description
of current and future transportation
initiatives.

Town of Blooming Grove Multi-Jurisdictional
All-Hazard Mitigation Plan (August 2013)

Provides local strategies for mitigating
natural hazards throughout the Town.
Provides detailed information on past
and current flood issues, existing flood
initiatives, and recommendations for
additional mitigation actions to address
future disaster events.

Detailed past flood information, hazard
vulnerabilities, assessed values and potential
losses, critical asset inventory, past and
ongoing mitigation projects, and proposed
mitigation initiatives.

Town of Blooming Grove Comprehensive
Plan (December 2005)

Establishes a vision for local land use
planning and future development.

Vision, goals, and recommendations.

Town of Blooming Grove Village of
Washingtonville New York Emergency
Management Plan (October 2005)

Provides general all-hazards management
guidance for Town and Village emergency
personnel to meet their responsibilities
before, during, and after an emergency.

List of personnel training needs,
recommendations for programs/projects to
improve emergency response and hazard
mitigation.

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

14

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 1.3 – SUMMARY OF EXISTING PLANS AND STUDIES (CONT’D)
E
Resource

Relevance

Key Components for NYRCR
Planning Process

Village of South Blooming Grove Emergency
Management Plan (March 2010)

Identifies, assesses, and prioritizes local
and regional vulnerabilities to emergencies
or disasters and the resources available to
prevent, mitigate, respond to, and recover
from them.

Short-, medium- and long-range measures
to improve the Village’s capability to
manage hazards.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Village
of Washingtonville Plan (March 2014)

Recently completed NYRCR plan for
the Village of Washingtonville, which is
geographically encompassed by the Town of
Blooming Grove.

Regional and/or inter-municipal strategies
and proposed projects with potential for
coordination with the NYRCR Town of
Blooming Grove Plan.

Note: HEC RAS = Hydrologic Engineering Center River Analysis System

Critical Issues
Nature’s Beauty and the Beast
Since its founding in 1799, the Town of Blooming Grove
has grown to offer a blend of suburban neighborhoods,
small villages, rural land vistas, and flourishing
picturesque farms. Its proximity to waterways has
provided ideal fishing spots, restful retreats, and a high
quality of life. Intense storms, such as the one-two
punch experienced with Hurricane Irene and Tropical
Storm Lee, have inflicted significant economic hardship
on tourism and the small amount of local agriculture,
often wiping out crops during both planting and
harvest seasons.

Rural, Rugged, and At-Risk
While the large rural stretches of the Town of Blooming
Grove reflect its allure, impassable roadways to critical
facilities, supplies, and workplaces arise during severe
storm events. Some neighborhoods in the Town are
in remote and rugged terrain. The neighborhood of
Mountain Lodge Park has an enclave of several hundred
homes set on mostly unpaved, deeply-rutted trails on a
steep, tree-shaded side of Schunemunk Mountain. Once
a bustling vacation hub for middle-class families from
New York City, Mountain Lodge Park now contains many
vacant homes and abandoned septic systems.
15

Deep ruts scour the landscape and result in sediment runoff that clogs
culverts and stormwater drainage systems. Photo is courtesy of local
resident, Walter Millet.

Persistent sheet flow issues continuously surface during
storm events in this mountainous area and elsewhere
along Schunemunk Mountain.
Sheet flow is a condition where rainfall, particularly
runoff, distributes itself uniformly over a surface. It
basically resembles a sheet of water on the surface due
to generally being at a very low depth of flow. Sheet
flow very quickly turns to concentrated flow, usually
over a length of 50 to 300 feet. This leads to problems
with exposed surfaces, where it can pick up sediment
and cause pollutant problems. Unpaved surfaces and
nutrient-rich farm fields can also contribute to water
quality issues from the runoff.
SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Infrastructure Issues
According to many local residents, the timing of water
release from private lakes and dams in and adjacent
to the Plan Area have exacerbated flood conditions
and deluged stormwater infrastructure during severe
storm events. According to many who attended Town of
Blooming Grove NYRCR Public Engagement Events, this
dynamic contributed to well contamination issues and
sewerage plant pumping station flooding and failures in
the Village of South Blooming Grove.
Some bridges remain at risk to future storms because
their replacement and reconstruction after past events
did not cover an increase in capacity. Furthermore,
undersized and blocked culverts contributed to
additional flooding.
Impassable roadways put people who were stranded
in their homes at increased risk, as the dangerous road
conditions cut them off from medical supplies, food

staples, and emergency services. The increasingly
sizeable elderly population found throughout the
Community brings an additional element of concern
to this risk, as many of the elderly live alone and have
increased medical needs.

According to the Orange County Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) (2009), flooding sources throughout the
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan Area include:
• Moodna Creek: From approximately 1,100
feet downstream of the spillway at the Towns
of Blooming Grove and Cornwall until the
confluence with Otter Kill and Cromline Creek.
• Otter Kill: From approximately 1.2 miles
upstream of Sara Wells Trail until approximately
1.2 miles upstream of State Route 17.
• Otter Kill Tributary 12: From its confluence with
Otter Kill until approximately 150 feet upstream
of Craigsville Road.
• Satterly Creek: From its confluence with Moodna
Creek until the confluence with Satterly Creek
Tributary 5.
The next several figures offer graphic depictions of
damages and road closures, risk areas, and flood
hazard areas, respectively.

Residents experienced tremendous personal loss in the wake of Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee. Many neighborhoods were littered with
damaged property. Photo is courtesy of Walter Millet.
SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

16

NYRCR: Town of Blooming Grove, Orange County
FIGURE 1.4 – DAMAGES AND ROAD CLOSURES

NYRCR: Town of Blooming Grove, Orange County
FIGURE 1.5 – RISK AREAS

NYRCR: Town of Blooming Grove, Orange County
FIGURE 1.6 – FEMA FLOOD HAZARD AREA MAP

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The People of Blooming Grove

FIGURE 1.8 – LANGUAGES SPOKEN
IN NYRCR PLAN AREA

Relevance of Demographics
During Disaster Events
According to 2012 U.S. Census data, the Town of
Blooming Grove had a total population of 18,028
people, inclusive of the Village of South Blooming Grove
(3,234) and the Village of Washingtonville (5,811). Of
this population, 2,095 (approximately 11.5%) are aged
65 and older, as indicated in Figure 1.7. This aging
population may increasingly require assistance and
specialized care.

An increasingly aging population in the
NYRCR Plan Area, many of whom live alone,
indicates a growing need for evacuation
assistance and guidance for proper
sheltering-in-place during certain severe
weather events.
FIGURE 1.7 – AGE GROUPS IN
NYRCR PLAN AREA

Source: U.S. Census, 2012

While the vast majority of those living in the Plan
Area speak English as their primary and sole language,
almost one-third of Town residents speak a language
other than English. As more persons with Limited
English Proficiency (LEP) move to the area, emergency
managers must incorporate more varied language
comprehension strategies for emergency event
23

Source: U.S. Census, 2012

messaging. The Town currently utilizes one such
technique, the Town of Blooming Grove’s Blackboard
Connect emergency notification system.

The Town of Blooming Grove’s Blackboard Connect alerts residents and
visitors of emergencies. Residents can register their email address and/
or cell phone number to receive alerts issued by the Town.

The Education-IncomeResources Connection
The Plan Area contains many well-educated residents,
with 61% of the population having at least some college
education or a higher degree, as displayed in Figure 1.9.
SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

FIGURE 1.9 – EDUCATION LEVELS
IN PLAN AREA

FIGURE 1.10 – ANNUAL INCOME
LEVELS IN PLAN AREA

Source: U.S. Census, 2012
Source: U.S. Census, 2012

Per the direct correlation between education levels and
earning potential, Figure 1.10 indicates that incomes
in the NYRCR Plan Area exceed averages for Orange
County and New York State.
Transportation routes entirely within the NYRCR Plan
Area and those that connect to other communities can
affect the local economy during disaster events. Workers
who cannot get to their place of employment have a
reduced income-earning capacity. This often presents a
secondary economic impact, as it impacts workers’ level
of discretionary spending and leads to less spending at
service-related outlets that have increasingly become
part of the NYRCR Plan Area’s economic drivers.

related employment. Most local employment comprises
a mix of sales and office jobs.
Because the most prevalent employment sectors in
the Plan Area rely on passable roadways and utility
services (i.e., electricity, water, cell service) to conduct
commerce, the protection and sustainability of
infrastructure will directly impact the local and
regional economies.
As previously indicated, income levels in the NYRCR
Plan Area exceed both Orange County and New York
State. Figure 1.11 demonstrates a correspondingly low
unemployment rate in the Plan Area, as compared to
Orange County and New York State.

Where People Work

Land Use

The NYRCR Plan Area contains a varied mix of
employment sectors, with most residents working in the
educational services, healthcare, and social assistance
sector (24.5%), followed by retail trade (18.4%). A once
light-industrial and agricultural-intensive area, the Town
of Blooming Grove has given way to service and retail-

The NYRCR Plan Area encompasses noticeable varied
and contrasting land uses. This contributes to who
works locally and who “out-migrates” for employment
outside the region. This information can also indicate
where there may be opportunities for more diversified

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

24

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

FIGURE 1.11 – UNEMPLOYMENT
RATES IN NYRCR PLAN AREA

FIGURE 1.12 – LAND USE IN
NYRCR PLAN AREA

Source: U.S. Census, 2012

land uses to generate increased robust local economic
activity, a stronger tax base, and jobs closer to home.
These factors are all significant for people who “outmigrate” for work, particularly when faced with
potential geographic isolation from storm-caused
road closures.
Figure 1.12 indicates that residential/single-family
dwellings consist of about one-third of the land use
in the NYRCR Plan Area, while another third of the
land remains vacant. Depending on ownership, use
restrictions (zoning), and environmental sensitivity
(wetlands, preserves, etc.), vacant land offers a
source of potential future stormwater retention
locations and areas for relocation of critical facilities
out of the floodplain.
While agriculture constitutes just shy of 18% of land use
in the NYRCR Plan Area, severe flooding and subsequent
runoff cause nutrient issues and sediment cast-off in
waterways downstream and other low-lying areas. Large
snow melts, heavy spring rains, and severe summer
storms can delay or ruin planting and harvesting
seasons. This impacts the popular and prevalent
farmers’ markets along local roadways and in the
NYRCR Plan Area. Locals rely on these markets for fresh
food, and the markets serve as an income source for
local farmers.

Improved stormwater management and
increased infrastructure capacity would
help to strike a balance between economic
development and open space.
25

Source: U.S. Census, 2012

Where People Live
Prior to 1980, more houses served as vacation and
secondary homes in the Plan Area than they do today.
As people moved out of heavily urbanized areas (most
notably, New York City) and into the outlying suburbs
within an hour’s commute to New York City, the
population of Orange County grew, including in the
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan Area. The result
has been an influx of higher wage earners who can
afford newer, higher-priced, single-family detached
homes, as indicated in Figure 1.13.
The majority of homes in the NYRCR Plan Area are
owner-occupied and were built after 1939. In fact, the
NYRCR Plan Area consists of a greater percentage of
newer owner-occupied single-family homes than in
Orange County and New York State (see Figure 1.14).
Newer homes are more likely to be built to modern
building standards in compliance with the Town’s
Floodplain Management Ordinance, and may therefore
be better equipped to withstand severe storms.
However, inadequate stormwater infrastructure,
issues associated with dam water releases in the area,
and sewage treatment that has not kept pace with
population growth in the Plan Area remain persistent
problems. These factors, as previously discussed, still
contribute to invading flood waters and septic back-ups.

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

FIGURE 1.13 – TYPES OF
HOUSING UNITS IN NYRCR
PLAN AREA

Source: U.S. Census, 2012

FIGURE 1.14 – AGE OF HOUSING
IN NYRCR PLAN AREA

The NYRCR Plan Area encompasses 86.2
miles of public roads, including 17.3 miles of
state highways, 12.5 miles of county roads,
and 56.4 miles of town roads.
New York State Route 17 (Route 17) is a four-lane
highway running east-west through the southern
portion of the Plan Area. Route 17 provides access to
other major regional highways including: Interstate
84 and Interstate 87 (New York State Thruway). Three
interchanges on Route 17 reside either inside or just
outside of the NYRCR Plan Area: State Route 208 (Exit
130), Museum Village Road (Exit 129), and County
Route 51 (Exit 128). Major roads in the NYRCR Plan
Area include State Route 208 and 94, as well as County
Routes 20 (Orrs Mill Road), 27 (Clove Road), 44 (Seven
Springs Mountain Road/Ridge Road), 51 (Hulsetown/
Craigville Road), and 66 (Craigville Road).
State Route 208 acts as one of the primary access routes
into the NYRCR Plan Area. Collector roads typically
handle less traffic than local highways but serve a similar
function. These roadways tend to be through-streets
and have slower speeds. The collector roads in the Plan
Area include Round Hill Road, Prospect Road, Woodcock
Mountain, Horton Road, Tuthill Road, Helms Hill Road,
and Mountain Lodge Road.

Source: U.S. Census, 2012

Infrastructure
Transportation
ROADS
The NYRCR Plan Area emergency management officials
have identified several transportation corridors as the
major evacuation routes in Town. These include State
Routes 17, 94, and 208, along with County Routes 27
and 44. The NYRCR Plan Area has a convenient location
adjacent to a major regional highway system; however,
only a few of these highways are directly within the
limits of the NYRCR Plan Area.

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

COMMUTER RAIL AND BUS
The Metro-North Port Jervis Line offers service to
New York City at the Salisbury Mills and Campbell Hall
stations. Bus service provides an alternative form of
public transportation to New York City, with numerous
stops throughout Orange County.

LOCAL TRANSPORTATION
The Town of Warwick provides inter-municipal bus
service. Service routes run from Washingtonville/ and
Blooming Grove, and the Town of Warwick to shopping
centers in the Town of Monroe, the Village of Harriman,
and the Town of Woodbury. Orange County provides
Dial-a-Bus service in the Town of Blooming Grove and
the surrounding area for a small fee. Moreover, the
Blooming Grove Senior Center offers rides to senior
citizens over 60 years of age who need transportation
26

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

to select locations in the Plan Area. Most households in
the NYRCR Plan Area, however, appear to have ample
access to personal automobile transportation.

Emergency Facilities
The NYRCR Plan Area has significant first responder
resources, including numerous fire houses with
generators for back-up power. This resource has a
secondary value during severe weather events; in
addition to the emergency services provided, fire
houses often serve as alternate shelter and social
services locations.

Projects with
Regional Significance
The Committee made a concerted effort to advance
projects in the Plan Area that complement those
identified in the Village of Washingtonville NYRCR Plan,
formulated in the first round of the NYRCR Program.
The Committee recognized that a regional approach
can positively affect change and create cost efficiencies
through collaboration. Infrastructure and stormwater

management initiatives affect the entire region, and
emergency and social services typically transcend
geopolitical boundaries.
Two projects identified in the Village of Washingtonville
NYRCR Plan impact the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR
Plan Area. These projects focus on the flooding issues
from the Moodna Creek Watershed that threaten the
viability of both the Town of Blooming Grove and Village
of Washingtonville.

Interagency Cooperation
As the Committee developed its list of projects,
members reached out to regional organizations to
discuss project ideas and opportunities for collaboration
and to identify any required regulatory approval
processes.
Assessing available resources was critical and included
datasets, feasibility assessments, and financial and
regulatory resources to support project implementation.
This collective process was supported and furthered
through coordination with the State Agency Review
Team (SART).

Clove Road Bridge spans the Moodna Creek. Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

27

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Firehouses are often sheltering locations during disasters. Pictured here is the Salisbury Mills Fire Company. Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

SECTION I: COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

28

Section 2

Assessment of Risk
and Needs

Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs
Description of Community
Assets and Assessment of Risk

A

primary goal of the Town of Blooming
Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Plan is to ensure that both
reconstructed assets and proposed
post-storm construction projects are
more resilient during future storm events. The Town
of Blooming Grove NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee) began to identify and analyze economic
drivers, health and social services, natural and cultural
resources, housing, and infrastructure assets in the
Town of Blooming Grove (Town) and the Town of
Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan Area (NYRCR Plan Area) to
better understand the community.
To meet this goal, the Committee developed a
comprehensive inventory of assets, both within and
beyond the NYRCR Plan Area. With the aid of this
inventory, the Committee compiled sufficient and
accurate information to assess the risk to assets under
current and future conditions in the planning horizon.
The Committee was actively engaged throughout the
inventory and risk assessment process, collaboratively
reviewing all aspects of the assessment, and collectively
approving the results.

Inventory Process
DATA COLLECTION
To kick off this process, the Committee prepared a
preliminary inventory of assets through stakeholder
outreach, Committee deliberations, and review of
datasets. The New York State Department of State
(NYS DOS) Risk Assessment Work Group facilitated
development of a comprehensive list of datasets
that were provided to the Committee. NYS DOS also
provided databases that included datasets from
numerous public and private sources. In addition to
SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

these resources, the Committee compiled local-level
data from the Orange County Geographic Information
System (GIS) and the Town of Blooming Grove Hazard
Mitigation Plan (HMP) (2013). Data was also gathered
from Committee Members during scheduled Planning
Committee Meetings and via a community map portal,
as discussed in the Collaborative Approach to Public
Engagement strategy in the following section.

A COLLABORATIVE APPROACH
TO ENGAGING THE PUBLIC
GIS services often serve as a vital tool for communities
developing an inventory of structures, natural features,
or other assets associated with a physical location.
However, GIS services are frequently less available
to the suburban and rural areas of New York State,
compared to their urban counterparts. While it may
not be recorded in any discernible geographic format,
suburban and rural residents have a wealth of local
knowledge which could contribute to such an inventory.
The Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Community
(Community) and Committee sought to take advantage
of this local knowledge.

COMMUNITY MAP PORTAL
Planning Committee Meetings and widely-publicized
Public Engagement Events were held to capitalize
on local knowledge, create a collaborative dialogue
with Community members, and encourage increased
participation from local residents in the development
of the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan. The
Consultant Team, which assisted the Committee
throughout the project, incorporated all local knowledge
of critical community assets into an interactive GIS webmapping portal.

30

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

This unique online tool allowed the
Committee to identify, verify, and provide
details on Community assets and critical
facilities.
The community map portal also allowed Committee
Members to visualize, interact with, edit, and add assets
themselves, creating a greater sense of ownership in the
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan’s development.
The portal allowed for the capture and use of local
knowledge to populate and refine the asset inventory
information as indicated in Figure 2.1.

Assets were additionally classified as either “critical”
or “non-critical” facilities. As defined by FEMA, critical
assets consist of features that create or extend the
useful life of structures, as well as facilities that provide
important community services. These assets include,
but are not limited to, healthcare facilities, emergency
operation centers and emergency response providers,
power generation facilities, and educational facilities.

ASSET CLASSIFICATION
Identified assets were reviewed and classified into six
categories, in accordance with the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA)’s National Disaster
Recovery Framework. These categories, along with
examples, are described in Table 2.1.

FIGURE 2.1 – INTERACTIVE GIS WEB-MAPPING PORTAL (BLOOMING GROVE)

Source: Tetra Tech, Inc.
31

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 2.1 – ASSET CATEGORIES
Asset Class

Examples

Community Planning and
Capacity Building*

This RSF comprises plans, management functions, and recovery activities, not physical assets.

Economic

Office buildings, business and industrial parks, manufacturing facilities, warehouses, storage facilities,
groceries, restaurants, banks, lodging, storefronts, downtown center, and seasonal/tourism destinations

Health and Social Services

Schools, healthcare, daycare, elder care, emergency operations, government and administrative services,
media and communications, police, fire, and rescue

Housing

Single-family and multi-family dwellings, supportive housing/group homes, senior housing, and
affordable housing.

Infrastructure Systems

Pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular ways; transit; bridges; airports; rail; ports; ferries; gas stations;
water supply; stormwater; wastewater; solid waste; recycling; and power generation facilities.

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Natural habitats, wetlands and marshes, recreation facilities, parks, public access, open spaces, agricultural
areas, religious establishments, libraries, museums, historic landmarks, and performing arts venues.

*Because this RSF does not comprise physical assets, the Community-identified assets for the Plan were not assessed according to this category.
However, needs and opportunities for this RSF were still considered, due to the importance of this function. Source: NYS DOS, 2013

Description of Risk Areas
Once assets were identified and classified, it was
essential to understand which geographic areas have
been and will be affected by flooding to determine
which assets are at risk and to what degree. The three
risk areas for riverine communities are based on current
FEMA Flood Hazard Area (FHA) data, FEMA National
Flood Insurance Policy (NFIP) repetitive loss (RL) data,
and NFIP severe repetitive loss (SRL) data. These areas
reflect the frequency and likelihood of flood inundation
and are classified as “extreme,” “high,” or “moderate,”
in descending order of risk magnitude. Figure 2.2
provides a visual reference for the riverine risk areas in
the NYRCR Plan Area.
Because the NYRCR Plan Area includes a significant
amount of land outside of the riverine risk area where
past flood damage has caused repetitive damage to
residential properties, transportation infrastructure,
SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

and emergency operations, the Committee decided to
include additional areas of “moderate” risk associated
with these historic damage areas.
In order to accurately classify assets in these areas, two
additional geographic risk areas were included in the
analysis. First, areas with a 1,000-foot radial buffer of
a past flood damage location were added. Second, a
new detailed layer of streams, creeks, and other minor
waterways in the NYRCR Plan Area was used to generate
additional risk areas for land within 1,000 feet of those
waterways. These additions to the overall risk area
helped the Committee paint a more accurate picture
of the frequency and likelihood for flood inundation
throughout the NYRCR Plan Area, rather than limiting
the analysis to only areas in the identified FEMA FHA.
The Committee highlighted several flood risk areas of
increased concern to the Community.

32

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Satterly Creek experiences two locations with significant
riverine flooding. These include the Barnes Road
subdivision, located upstream from the Horton Road
Bridge, and the Merriewold subdivision, particularly
along Merriewold Lake and upstream of the Lake.

Moodna Creek is also home to two
locations with problematic, repetitive
flooding experiences. Several houses
immediately downstream of Beaver Dam
Lake frequently flood where water from the
lake enters Moodna Creek, near Route 94.
The second area is along the western edge
of the Village of Washingtonville. While the
Village of Washingtonville experiences more
direct flooding in this area, the floodwaters
frequently affect transportation routes and
limit access to the Town of Blooming Grove
as well.

Lastly, overland flooding significantly
contributes to storm damage in the
Town’s communities.
Some communities on the slope of the Schunemunk
Mountain, such as the Mountain Lodge Park community,
were originally built as vacation cottage communities
with little infrastructure. Since being built, these
structures have been upgraded and are now inhabited
year-round, most typically by individuals with low
incomes. Despite the increase in full-time residency
levels, the stormwater culverts built into the dirt
roads and driveways in these communities have been
neglected. During storm events, water flows down
Schunemunk Mountain, into the homes, and prevents
emergency vehicle access to the area. Post-storm
damage also creates an economic burden for most
of these residents as well, due to the average lower
income of the area.

Many culverts in the NYRCR Plan Area are impeded by vegetation, such as the one pictured here. Image is courtesy of Eric Thayer.
33

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

NYRCR: Town of Blooming Grove, Orange County
FIGURE 2.2 – RISK AREA MAP

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Description of Community Assets
The following section describes the Town of Blooming
Grove’s identified assets by Recovery Support Function
(RSF) and provides additional information for each asset
group. The RSFs used here are adopted from FEMA’s
National Disaster Recovery Framework, where they
serve as the coordinating structure for key areas of
federal emergency assistance, as well as the structural
roadmap for this NYRCR Plan.
• Community Planning and Capacity Building
• Economic Development
• Health and Social Services
• Housing
• Infrastructure
• Natural and Cultural Resources
Figures 2.3 through 2.7 illustrate the location of assets
by RSFs in the NYRCR Plan Area and for the extent of the
defined risk area.

ECONOMIC ASSETS
The Town of Blooming Grove is located in the central
portion of Orange County, New York. The Town lies
in the Hudson Valley region of New York State, near
the foothills of the Shawangunk Mountains, a local
mountain range. Local industry expanded in the Town
during the 1700s, with mills using the Satterly Creek for
power. Many of the Town’s current residents commute
to the New York City metropolitan area, making the
Town a bedroom community. At present time, very
few agricultural jobs exist in Blooming Grove and only
within small, family-operated farms. Rather, the Town’s
economy is now focused on managerial, sales, and
service fields.
The Committee identified 53 facilities in this economic
category, including restaurants, gas stations, banks, and
grocery stores. A majority of these assets are actually
located along Routes 208 and 94, in and around the
Village of Washingtonville.
Although the Village of Washingtonville is not included
in the NYRCR Plan Area, the Committee still determined
these assets to be critical, because they support Town
residents in disaster situations by providing supplies,
food, and services.

Balancing open areas and farmland with developed land uses will be important to build economic resiliency, while protecting the natural
environment. Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.
35

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

NYRCR: Town of Blooming Grove, Orange County
FIGURE 2.3 – ECONOMIC ASSETS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICE ASSETS
This asset category includes services that provide a
variety of key public functions, from health treatment
facilities to general-purpose shelters in public schools,
and from post offices to town halls. During a flood
event, these facilities could serve as critical disaster
response and recovery centers, and identification of
these elements remains crucial to ensuring appropriate
future disaster management and preparedness. This
category also contains many critical assets, including fire
protection, police services, hospitals, and emergency
operations facilities.
During Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee, storm
damage to parts of the Town of Blooming Grove
severely hindered residents’ ability to access health and
social services. In some cases, residents and business
owners were completely unable to access health and
social services, due to impassable and damaged roads
and bridges.
The Committee identified 33 facilities in this category,
including the Blooming Grove Ambulance Company; the
Washingtonville, Salisbury Mills, and South Blooming
Grove Fire Departments; and two hostels. Several of
these structures suffered flood damage from Hurricane
Irene and Tropical Storm Lee in 2011.

CRITICAL FACILITIES

Emergency medical personnel were not able to reach all residents
in need because of damaged roads. This type of situation can
be particularly perilous to vulnerable people. Photo is courtesy
of Tetra Tech, Inc.

Critical facilities are assets that the community relies on
for essential services. They include:
• Facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile,
flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive
materials;
• Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing for the
elderly. Occupants of these facilities may be unable
to evacuate during a flood or a severe storm event;
• Emergency operation centers or data storage
centers that contain records or services that may
be lost or inoperative during flood and storm
events; and
• Power-generating plants and other principal points
of utility lines.

37

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

NYRCR: Town of Blooming Grove, Orange County
FIGURE 2.4 - HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES ASSETS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

INFRASTRUCTURE ASSETS
Infrastructure assets consist of resources such as
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular ways; transit; bridges;
airports; rail; gas stations; water supply structures;
stormwater, wastewater and solid waste management;
and recycling centers.

Roadways
Major roads in the Town include State Routes 17, 208,
and 94, along with County Routes 20 (Orrs Mill Road),
27 (Clove Road), 44 (Seven Springs Mountain Road/
Ridge Road), 51 (Hulsetown/Craigville Road), and 66
(Craigville Road). These corridors provide primary access
into and out of the Town. State Route 17 also provides
access to Interstates 84 and 87.

Transit
The Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) provides
commuter rail service linking Orange County to
New York City via the Port Jervis Line of the MetroNorth Commuter Railroad. While these regional
transportations are typically less vulnerable to impacts
from flooding, local residents depend on these modes
of transportation. Widespread flooding and debris
from Hurricane Irene rendered a Metro-North station
in Salisbury Mills, east of the Village of Washingtonville,

During major storm events, it is critically important to keep open
roads that provide major access into and out of Town. Photo is
courtesy of Eric Thayer.
39

completely useless for days after the storm. This storm
debris suspended operation of the entire Metro-North
line, significantly impacting commuters.

Public Utilities
Most residents of the Town rely on private wells for
their water. Additionally, although the rest rely on the
six municipal water supply districts, these districts also
use wells for their water supply. Therefore, all residents
of the Town rely on wells for their water supply.
Likewise, most residents use on-lot septic systems to
treat wastewater. Three wastewater treatment districts
(the Orange County Sewer District Number 1, the
Tappan Hill Sewer District, and the Glenwood Sewer
District) serve the remainder of the Town.
A total of 59 Town facilities were identified in this
category, including water plants, wells, communications
facilities, the Mayer Landfill, and numerous
transportation facilities.
The Town and Committee most frequently identified
transportation-related facilities as assets in this
category. Community and Committee feedback clearly
demonstrated the importance of safe access to and
from Town during storm events.

Protecting infrastructure assets, such as the Tappan Hill Wastewater
Treatment Plant at Barnes Road, is vital to maintaining sanitary
conditions during flooding. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.
SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

NYRCR: Town of Blooming Grove, Orange County
FIGURE 2.5 – INFRASTRUCTURE ASSETS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

NATURAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCE ASSETS
Natural and cultural resources strategically enrich the
overall quality of life within the Town of Blooming
Grove. These resources provide scenic, recreational,
and environmental benefits, as well as protect other
community assets from potential flood impacts.
Identifying these assets is important to: (1) understand
ways to protect historic and cultural resources; and (2)
determine where natural resources, such as wetlands
or floodplains, could be enhanced to help protect the
Town’s infrastructure and other assets during storms.

Floodplains are lands that border rivers and
streams. Floodplains are normally dry, but
become covered with water during floods.
Buildings and structures in the floodplain
have a higher potential to be damaged by
floods. These structures can also change the
pattern of water flow and increase flooding
and damage on adjacent properties.

approximately 85 acres in the Town as Class 1 wetlands.
NYS DEC ranks wetlands according to their ability
to perform wetland functions and provide wetland
benefits, with Class 1 wetlands having the highest rank.
Another 671 acres of wetlands are spread throughout
the Town, mostly in the western half of the Town.
The Town is also home to other natural and manmade
cultural resources. Nine parks and recreational facilities,
along with several lakes and streams, provide a wide
range of recreational opportunities for the Town’s
residents. These facilities can accommodate an array of
activities, such as playground activities, picnics, cooking,
basketball, baseball, football, soccer, swimming, fishing,
waterskiing, bicycling, walking, jogging, and a place to
relax with friends and family.
The Committee and Community identified 77 facilities
as Natural and Cultural Resource Assets, including the
Town Hall, churches, community organization facilities,
parks, and numerous water bodies.

The Town of Blooming Grove consists of approximately
20,661 acres. Approximately 1,251 acres (5.9%) of
Town land resides in the 100-year FHA and about 350
acres (1.7%) of Town land in the 500-year FHA. These
floodplains are associated with the Moodna Creek
and its watershed, which includes the Cromline Creek,
Satterly Creek, and Perry Creek. Numerous buildings
and structures are located in both the 100-year and
500-year floodplains.
Wetlands function as natural sponges that trap
and slowly release surface water, rain, snowmelt,
groundwater, and floodwaters. Trees, root mats,
and other wetland vegetation slow the speed of
floodwaters, distributing them slowly over the
floodplain. A one-acre wetland can typically store
about one million gallons of water.
Overall, wetlands protect adjacent and downstream
properties from flood damage. By preserving and
protecting these natural features, they help reduce
storm damage from weather events. The New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation
(NYS DEC) has designated 23 wetland areas in the
Town of Blooming Grove. The NYS DEC has classified
41

The Town of Blooming Grove is replete with natural pathways that
invite outdoor time. Image is courtesy of Eric Thayer.
SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Numerous natural and cultural resources exist in the NYRCR Plan Area. Pictured above is the Town of Blooming Grove Government Center (Town
Hall), and below is the historic Caldwell House Bed and Breakfast. Photos are courtesy of Eric Thayer.

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

42

NYRCR: Town of Blooming Grove, Orange County

FIGURE 2.6 – CULTURAL AND NATURAL RESOURCE ASSETS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

HOUSING
The Town has several challenges affecting the
provision of safe and adequate housing for current and
future residents. These challenges were significantly
exacerbated during and after the floods from Hurricane
Irene and Tropical Storm Lee.
A total of 12 facilities were identified in this category.
This asset category includes, but is not limited to, multifamily dwellings, supportive housing/group homes,
and senior housing. Eleven of the 12 facilities are multifamily residences, e.g., apartments, many of which
serve vulnerable populations. Several of the multi-family
residences are clustered in the north-central part of
Town, as indicated in Figure 2.7.

In addition to the areas shown on the risk map in Figure
2.7, several older residential areas experience significant
overland flooding issues. These include the Mountain
Lodge Park community and others communities on the
slopes of Schunemunk Mountain. These residential
areas were developed in the 1960s and 1970s as
vacation cottages and contained little infrastructure.
The roads and driveways are not paved, and years of
stormwater flowing down the mountain have damaged
or destroyed the stormwater culverts. During storm
events, overland floodwaters flow into homes, and
emergency vehicles are cut off from these areas.

Pictured here are the Rolling Hills condominiums. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.
45

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

NYRCR: Town of Blooming Grove, Orange County
FIGURE 2.7 – HOUSING ASSETS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Assessment of Risk to
Assets and Systems
The Town of Blooming Grove has suffered recent
damage by the repetitive flooding of the Moodna
Creek. The non-flood stage water velocities along
Moodna Creek move fairly slowly, increasing sediment
accumulation behind bridges and spillways, which then
leads to an increased chance of flooding. As Moodna
Creek’s main channel is rather shallow for most of its
course throughout the Town, flood conditions develop
rapidly during periods of heavy rain. Confluences of
tributaries and culverts may also impact the flood
conditions of Moodna Creek.

The proximity of the Town to Moodna Creek
and its ongoing streambank erosion lead to
the primary causes of the Town’s substantial
flood risk.
According to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE),
the primary causes of flooding include:
• Reduced Stream Capacity – Continuous bank
erosion has led to the accumulation of sediment in
Moodna Creek. Bank erosion and sediment buildup contribute to changing stream conditions, the
loss of vegetation, and a reduced channel capacity,
leading to flooding and community damage.
• Debris and Other Obstructions – Obstructions
in the stream impede the flow of water and
contribute to increased flood risk for the Town.

Flooding Overview –
HEC-RAS Modeling
As discussed in Section 1, the Town of Blooming Grove
is located in a mountainous territory characterized
by the presence of several streams and lakes. The
main watercourses flowing through the community
are Cromline Creek, Perry Creek, and Satterly Creek,
tributaries of Moodna Creek that enter in the Village
of Washingtonville. Detailed Hydrologic Engineering
Centers–River Analysis System (HEC-RAS) models are
47

available for Perry Creek and Satterly Creek. A separate
hydraulic analysis of Moodna Creek had been previously
conducted for the assessment of flood mitigation
projects in Washingtonville (for details, please refer to
the Village of Washingtonville NYRCR Plan).
Flooding within the Town of Blooming Grove is primarily
caused by overflow of Moodna Creek’s and Satterly
Creek’s banks, given the shallowness of their main
channel. The water velocities along Moodna Creek and
Satterly Creek are fairly slow, increasing the potential
of sediment accumulation behind bridges, culverts,
and spillways, and therefore increasing the chance for
flooding. Similarly, flooding issues along Perry Creek
are possibly related to backwater effects in proximity of
inline weirs. Confluences of tributaries may also have
impacts on flood condition of the creeks.
In addition, localized flooding due to stormwater
runoff has affected some areas throughout the
community, particularly in steeper areas like those
found in Mountain Lodge Park. Flooding risk in all
areas is exacerbated by the minimal amount of natural
flood storage in the watershed due to the geology and
topography of the area.
Based on the extension of the FEMA 100- and 500-year
floodplain and the hydraulic analysis conducted through
the HEC-RAS models, the main areas of the Blooming
Grove community that are most prone to flooding are:
the Satterly Creek section between Round Hill Road and
Horton Road; the area surrounding the Hudson Road
bridge on Satterly Creek; the area surrounding the Perry
Creek inline weir at Felter Hill Road; and the Perry Creek
section between Mountain Lodge Road and Woodcock
Mountain Road. The community indicated additional
areas that flood during major storm events, but for
which no HEC-RAS models are currently available for
the analysis, including: Mountain Lodge Park, which is
prone to stormwater runoff flooding from Schunemunk
Mountain; the Satterly Creek culvert at Prospect Road;
Turtle Knoll Road, downstream of Lake Hildegarde;
and the area surrounding Merriewold Lake in South
Blooming Grove.

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Due to a lack of existing HEC-RAS models for these
locations, the Committee recommends further analysis
of these sites to be conducted, using alternative
methods, such as: estimating the flood storage capacity
of potential retention areas; and assessing the capacity
of existing culverts or stormwater drainage systems.
Satterly Creek and Perry Creek consist of multiple
arms and several minor tributaries; although their
flow contribution is included in the available HEC-RAS
models, physical geometry is restricted to only the main
channels. Bank erosion along Satterly Creek and Perry
Creek, as well as these minor tributaries might have
increased the amount of sediment deposited upstream
of bridges, culverts, and spillways, leading to additional
local flood risks.
Critical buildings and facilities were identified within
the Satterly Creek and Perry Creek floodplains. Most of
these structures include residential buildings, as well
as the Tappan Wastewater Treatment Plant, which is
located in the Barnes Road neighborhood. These assets
may require flood protection measures or relocation to
remove them from the existing floodplain. The impact
of flooding and the amount of protection required is
assessed on a case-by-case basis, using the hydraulic
modeling analysis.
The Town hydraulic analysis focused on Satterly Creek
and Perry Creek, and did not include study of past
conditions to determine whether changes in the
watershed, such as increased impervious surfaces,
would increase flooding problems. A desktop and field
reconnaissance of Blooming Grove did not identify any
large new development areas that might affect the
nature of the local hydrology, but climate change effects
could result in larger design storms, indicating the
existing stormwater system as undersized.
Many of the potential flood mitigation projects and
recommendations for funding through the NYRCR
Program assessed by the Committee are informed
by the results of the HEC-RAS modeling results. For
instance, stormwater drainage improvements are being
considered for Mountain Lodge Park. The installation of
an earthen levee along the Satterly Creek’s right bank is
being evaluated in terms of floodplain extent reduction.
SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Furthermore, based on existing model availability,
additional hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is
recommended to evaluate the potential for modification
of the existing lakes in the watershed, i.e., OrangeRockland, Merriewold, Hildegarde, and Tomahawk, or
the identification of new retention areas to provide
additional flood storage and therefore potentially
reduce impacts downstream along Satterly Creek and
Moodna Creek.

Description of Methodology
The NYS DOS provided the Town with a Risk Assessment
Tool that determined risk levels for the Town’s assets,
based on Community and Committee feedback and
in conjunction with information captured by the asset
inventory. The Risk Assessment Tool is designed to
assess and quantify the risk to individual community
assets through built-in formulas that calculate an
overall risk score category based on three factors:
hazard, exposure, and vulnerability. The tool calculates
a score for each of these factors and combines the
scores to represent the relative risk of each asset in the
community to one another.
The Risk Assessment Tool calculation combines scores
for the three factors shown in the formula below. Each
factor in this equation is calculated automatically, based
on appropriate inputs and are assigned as follows:
HAZARD
x EXPOSURE
x VULNERABILITY
= RISK
• HAZARD SCORE: Assigned for each asset based on
a 100-year storm event occurring within the next
100 years.
• EXPOSURE SCORE: Determined by the risk area
where the asset is located and by local landscape
attributes that influence the potential for storm
impacts. This score reflects how landscape features
can moderate damage to individual assets.

48

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

• VULNERABILITY SCORE: Reflects the level
of impairment or consequences that assets may
experience from a hazard event, and reflects
the ability of the asset to resist damage from
the hazard.

INTERPRETATION OF RISK
Risk scores help to identify assets with an elevated
potential for storm damage. Some factors that could
be considered for each asset when developing a
community risk management strategy include:
• Contribution to life safety;
• Whether the asset is a critical facility;
• Value of asset to the community;
• Environmental services provided;

priority based on exposure or because vulnerability
remains relatively low. It is recommended that a
combination of measures could be considered to
reduce exposure or vulnerability.

Residual Category

Risk scores in the residual category occur when both
exposure and vulnerability remain relatively low.
This situation suggests floods would pose minor or
infrequent consequences. Note that risk is never
completely eliminated. Some residual risk still
remains, even after management measures have
been implemented. It is recommended to monitor
conditions and adapt, as necessary.

For further information regarding risk scores, refer to
Section 5: Additional Materials.

• Economic contribution of the asset;
• Whether alternatives are available; and
• Capacity of the asset to adapt.
The Consultant Team evaluated risk for a 100-year event
(1% annual chance) and a 500-year event (0.2% annual
chance), both of which represent higher-intensity storm
events. Risk was calculated for each asset and each
asset was placed in one of the following categories.

Severe Category

If possible, both exposure and vulnerability could
be reduced for assets in this category. Relocation of
these assets could be considered as a priority option.

FLOODPLAIN VS. FLOODWAY
A floodplain is defined as the low lands adjoining
the channel of a river, stream, or watercourse, or
adjoining the shore of an ocean, lake, or other body
of standing water, which have been inundated by
flood water. Floodplains are further categorized by
the frequency of flooding. Most often, floodplains
are referred to as 100-year floodplains.
A regulatory floodway refers to the channel of a
river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height.
Communities must regulate development in these
floodways to ensure there are no increases in
upstream flood elevations.

High Category

Risk scores in the high category indicate conditions
that could lead to significant negative outcomes from
a storm event.
Actions could be taken to reduce vulnerability, such
as elevating or flood-proofing the asset to help avoid
a long-term loss of function.

Moderate Category

Risk scores in this category pose moderate-to-serious
consequences, but adaptation may be a lower

49

Assessment Results
Many assets identified in the Town are along the
Moodna, Cromline, and Satterly Creeks. Flooding of
Moodna Creek poses the greatest risk to the Town and
many of its key assets. Stronger and more frequent large
storms have rendered the Town of Blooming Grove
more susceptible to the devastating effects of flooding.
Clearly, many assets in the Town are exposed and
SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

extremely vulnerable to storm events, and the risk score
results below confirm this vulnerability.

Not all assets vulnerable to severe and
repetitive flooding are located in the
regulatory 100-year floodplain or identified
“Risk Area.” Many assets outside these
areas experienced significant damages
during Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm
Lee, storms that caused flooding exceeding
most projected expectations.

As previously discussed in the methodology, no
risk scores were generated for assets outside of an
identified risk area. These assets have been omitted
from the following section. Figure 2.8 provides a visual
representation of the geographic distribution of risk
scores for a 100-year event.

Wash-outs, debris deposition, and inadequate stormwater systems put many community assets at risk. Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

50

NYRCR: Town of Blooming Grove, Orange County
FIGURE 2.8 – RISK SCORE MAP

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

ECONOMIC ASSETS
The risk scores listed in Table 2.2 indicate that three
of the Town’s economic assets, (i.e., the Corner
Candle Store, Ralph’s Motor Repairs, and South
Street Collision, are at severe risk from flooding, and
another seven are at high risk. Although difficult to
see in Figure 2.8 due to the number of assets in the
center of the neighboring Village of Washingtonville,
these three severe risk assets have the highest risk
scores, and are all located along South Street, south
of the center of the Village of Washingtonville, and
along Moodna Creek, inside the 100-year floodplain.
Due to the location of these assets and their close
proximity to Moodna Creek, these facilities are
susceptible and at-risk to flooding events.
Brookside Auto and the Village Wash ’n Dry, both
designated as high risk to flooding, serve socially
vulnerable populations.

53

The buildings identified as severe, high, and moderate
risk in Table 2.2 are the most vulnerable and exposed to
flooding in the Town, and could be considered for flood
mitigation actions, such as possible relocation. These
buildings could also be prioritized for flood-proofing or
other mitigation measures.

From “town to country,” there are numerous economic assets that
add to the NYRCR Plan Area’s charm and desirability as a place to live.
Above is the Blooming Grove Plaza; below is the Pine Hill Farm. Both
have economic value to the community and enrich the quality of life.
The photo above is courtesy of Tetra Tech. The photo below is courtesy
of Eric Thayer.

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 2.2 – ECONOMIC ASSETS
Asset/Asset Type

Asset Subcategory

100-Year Risk Score

500-Year Risk Score

Corner Candle Store*

Small Business

Severe

Severe

Ralph’s Motor Repairs*

Small Business

Severe

Severe

South Street Collision*

Small Business

Severe

Severe

Brookside Auto*

Small Business

High

High

Fulton Square*

Small Business

High

High

Keller’s Machine Shop

Small Business

High

High

Newport Beverage*

Small Business

High

High

Station Road Square Plaza

Small Business

High

High

Village Wash ’n Dry*

Small Business

High

High

Weirs Ice Cream

Restaurant

High

High

Express Lube*

Small Business

Moderate

Moderate

O C Transmissions*

Small Business

Moderate

Moderate

Scottie's Diner*

Restaurant

Moderate

Moderate

Spindler Enterprises*

Large Business

Moderate

Moderate

Verizon Wireless

Small Business

Moderate

Moderate

Washingtonville Collision

Small Business

Moderate

Moderate

Alexandra Development Corporation

Large Business

Residual

Residual

ICDI Corporation*

Large Business

Residual

Residual

Mag Associates

Large Business

Residual

Residual

Markovits Blustein Gottlieb P.C.

Large Business

Residual

Residual

Nannini Callhn Shale

Large Business

Residual

Residual

Steel Style Inc.

Large Business

Residual

Residual

Stop & Shop*

Grocery/Food Suppliers

Residual

Residual

6 banks and financial services facilities**

Banks and Financial Services

Residual

Residual

10 restaurants**

Restaurant

Residual

Residual

13 small businesses**

Small Business

Residual

Residual

Source: NYRCR, NYS DOS 2014
* While the Plan Area does not include the Village of Washingtonville, certain facilities within the Village were deemed to hold some value to the
larger Town of Blooming Grove community and therefore, have been included in the risk analysis. The Village of Washingtonville assets included
in the Assessment of Risk to Assets are not intended to be the subject of Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR projects.
** One or more of the assets in this grouping are in the Village of Washingtonville. See the note above.

Health and Social Service Assets
Two of the Town’s health and social services assets (i.e.,
the Salisbury Mills Fire Department and the Salisbury
Mills Post Office) are at a high risk from flooding
and have been designated as critical facilities with
high community value. Another six assets have been
identified as containing moderate risk from flooding.
SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

The remainder of the assets (24 facilities) scored
a residual risk level to flooding during a 100-year
event. This data reflects information provided by the
Community and Committee. Table 2.3 lists the risk
scores for health and social service assets in the Town of
Blooming Grove.

54

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 2.3 - HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES ASSETS
Asset/Asset Type

Asset Subcategory

100-Year Risk Score

500-Year Risk Score

Salisbury Mills Fire Department

Emergency Operations/Response

High

High

Salisbury Mills Post Office

Government and Administrative Services

High

High

Little Harvard*

Daycare and Eldercare

Moderate

Moderate

Rehabilitation Support*

Healthcare Facilities

Moderate

Moderate

Washingtonville Department of
Public Works Facility*

Public Works Facilities

Moderate

Moderate

Washingtonville Fire Department*

Emergency Operations/Response

Moderate

Moderate

Washingtonville Middle School*

Schools

Moderate

Moderate

Washingtonville Pediatrics*

Healthcare Facilities

Moderate

Moderate

AHRC*

Schools

Residual

Residual

Blooming Grove Ambulance

Emergency Operations/Response

Residual

Residual

Blooming Grove Courthouse

Government and Administrative Services

Residual

Residual

Blooming Grove Department of
Public Works Facility

Public Works Facilities

Residual

Residual

Blooming Grove Hostel #8310

Supportive Housing

Residual

Residual

Blooming Grove Hostel #9607

Supportive Housing

Residual

Residual

Blooming Grove Police Department

Emergency Operations/Response

Residual

Residual

Blooming Grove Post Office

Government and Administrative Services

Residual

Residual

Hope Chapel

Cultural or Religious Establishments

Residual

Residual

Mt. Lodge Park Fire Company

Emergency Operations/Response

Residual

Residual

Round Hill Elementary School

Schools

Residual

Residual

South Blooming Grove Fire Department

Emergency Operations/Response

Residual

Residual

Taft Elementary School*

Schools

Residual

Residual

Washingtonville Court House*

Government and Administrative Services

Residual

Residual

Washingtonville High School*

Schools

Residual

Residual

Washingtonville Police Department*

Emergency Operations/Response

Residual

Residual

Washingtonville Post Office*

Government and Administrative Services

Residual

Residual

3 daycare/eldercare facilities**

Daycare and Eldercare Facilities

Residual

Residual

4 healthcare facilities**

Healthcare Facilities

Residual

Residual

Source: NYS DOS, NYRCR 2014
* While the Plan Area does not include the Village of Washingtonville, certain facilities within the Village were deemed to hold some value to the
larger Town of Blooming Grove community and therefore, have been included in the risk analysis. The Village of Washingtonville assets included
in the Assessment of Risk to Assets are not intended to be the subject of Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR projects.
** One or more of the assets in this grouping are in the Village of Washingtonville. See the note above.

55

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

To reduce future flood damages and losses to these
assets, mitigation actions could be taken to reduce both
vulnerability and exposure. Some buildings and facilities
could be considered for possible relocation. Facilities
that cannot be relocated could be prioritized for floodproofing and other mitigation measures.

Infrastructure Assets
Based on information provided by the public and
Committee, one infrastructure asset, i.e., the South
Blooming Grove Wastewater facility, was determined
to have severe risk from flooding, 22 assets were
identified at high risk from flooding, and six identified
at moderate risk from flooding during a 100-year event.
The remaining infrastructure assets were identified to
have residual risk.
Seventeen of the high risk assets are roadway bridges
over waterways. Floodwaters may rise above the
bridges, cutting off roadway access. Floodwaters can
also cause damage to the bridges. The other identified
high risk assets consist of water supply or wastewater
treatment facilities. Damage to these facilities may
impact public health. Potable water supplies may
be cut off from residents who are dependent on
municipal water services. Wastewater may also be
carried from the treatment plants by floodwaters and
spread throughout the flooded area, contaminating
it with harmful sewage. Many of these infrastructure
assets are considered critical facilities, have high value
to the Community, and/or serve socially vulnerable
populations.
Even greater numbers of infrastructure assets have
been routinely impacted by flood events, especially
the flood events associated with Hurricane Irene and
Tropical Storm Lee. Table 2.4 lists the risk scores for
infrastructure assets in the Town of Blooming Grove.

Maintaining the integrity of stormwater infrastructure is vital to
transferring floodwaters off properties and roadways. Photo is
courtesy of Eric Thayer.

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

56

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 2.4 – INFRASTRUCTURE ASSETS
Asset/Asset Type

Asset Subcategory

100-Year Risk Score

500-Year Risk Score

SBG Wastewater

Wastewater

Severe

Severe

Blooming Grove Tappan Homes Sewer District

Wastewater

High

High

Cherry Hill Road Bridge over Cromline Creek

Transportation

High

High

Clove Road Bridge over Moodna Creek

Transportation

High

High

Craigville Road Bridge over Cromline Creek

Transportation

High

High

Farmingdale Road Bridge over Cromline Creek

Transportation

High

High

Horton Road Bridge over Satterly Creek

Transportation

High

High

Hubshop Road Bridge over Cromline Creek

Transportation

High

High

Hudson Road Bridge over Satterly Creek

Transportation

High

High

Hulsetown Road Bridge over Cromline Creek

Transportation

High

High

Locust Street Bridge over Moodna Creek*

Transportation

High

High

Mountain Lodge Road Bridge over Perry Creek

Transportation

High

High

Perry Creek Road Bridge over Perry Creek

Transportation

High

High

Round Hill Road Bridge over Satterly Creek

Transportation

High

High

Route 94 Bridge over Cromline Creek

Transportation

High

High

Route 94 Bridge over Moodna Creek*

Transportation

High

High

South Blooming Grove Water District 1

Water Supply

High

High

South Street Bridge over Moodna Creek*

Transportation

High

High

Tappan Wastewater Facility

Wastewater

High

High

Tappan Water

Water Supply

High

High

Tuthill Road Bridge over Cromline Creek

Transportation

High

High

Washingtonville Department of Public Works Facility*

Wastewater

High

High

Woodcock Mountain Road Bridge over Perry Creek

Transportation

High

High

Frontier Communications Facility*

Telecommunications

Moderate

Moderate

Lake Road Bridge over a tributary of the Moodna Creek

Transportation

Moderate

Moderate

Route 94 Bridge over a tributary of the Moodna Creek

Transportation

Moderate

Moderate

Seely Brook

Transportation

Moderate

Moderate

Tomahawk Water District

Water Supply

Moderate

Moderate

Washingtonville Water Plant*

Water Supply

Moderate

Moderate

Callbox 1

Telecommunications

Residual

Residual

Commuter Parking Lot

Transportation

Residual

Residual

Conrail Tracks

Transportation

Residual

Residual

Digital Radio Broadcasting, Inc.

Telecommunications

Residual

Residual

57

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 2.4 – INFRASTRUCTURE SERVICES ASSETS (CONT’D)
Asset/Asset Type

Asset Subcategory

100-Year Risk Score

500-Year Risk Score

Glenwood Hills Sewer

Wastewater

Residual

Residual

Glenwood Hills Sewer District 5

Wastewater

Residual

Residual

Intersection of Routes 94 and 208*

Transportation

Residual

Residual

Mayer Landfill

Hazardous Materials, Solid
Waste, and Recycling

Residual

Residual

Mediacom

Telecommunications

Residual

Residual

Mt. Lodge

Telecommunications

Residual

Residual

Mt View Water District 5

Water Supply

Residual

Residual

Orange & Rockland Blooming Grove Operations Center

Power Supply

Residual

Residual

Orange & Rockland Well

Water Supply

Residual

Residual

Oxford Water District

Water Supply

Residual

Residual

Prides Crossing Water Tank

Water Supply

Residual

Residual

Railroad bridge over Route 94

Transportation

Residual

Residual

S J M Landing Heliport*

Transportation

Residual

Residual

South Blooming Grove Water District 5

Water Supply

Residual

Residual

10 roadway bridges

Transportation

Residual

Residual

Source: NYS DOS, NYRCR 2014
* While the Plan Area does not include the Village of Washingtonville, certain facilities within the Village were deemed to hold some value to the
larger Town of Blooming Grove community and therefore, have been included in the risk analysis. The Village of Washingtonville assets included
in the Assessment of Risk to Assets are not intended to be the subject of Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR projects.
** One or more of the assets in this grouping are in the Village of Washingtonville. See the note above.

Much of the development in the Town is either in or
near the floodplain, and many key assets in the Town
are at risk from flooding. Therefore, the Community
could explore mitigation actions, such as flood-proofing,
maintaining and enlarging culverts, clearing drainage
areas, and upgrades.

The Village of South Blooming Grove Center and Seely
Brook also have a high community value, while the
Knights of Columbus and Vern Allen Hockey Rink serve
socially vulnerable populations.

Natural and Cultural Resource Assets
Based on information provided by the Community and
Committee and as indicated in Table 2.5, four assets,
i.e., Seely Brook, the Village of South Blooming Grove
Center, and two facilities, were identified at high risk
levels, 16 assets were identified at moderate risk levels,
and 43 were identified at residual risk levels from a 100year or 500-year event.
SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

58

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 2.5 – NATURAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCE ASSETS

59

Asset/Asset Type

Asset Subcategory

100-Year Risk Score

500-Year Risk Score

Knights of Columbus*

Cultural or Religious Establishments

High

High

Seely Brook

Water Bodies

High

High

Vern Allen Hockey Rink*

Parks and Recreation

High

High

Village of South Blooming Grove Center

Community Centers

High

High

Beaverdam Lake

Water Bodies

Moderate

Moderate

Blue-Tipped Dancer Habitat

Natural Habitats

Moderate

Moderate

Cromline Creek

Water Bodies

Moderate

Moderate

Lake Hildegarde

Water Bodies

Moderate

Moderate

Little League Field*

Parks and Recreation

Moderate

Moderate

Merriewood Lake

Water Bodies

Moderate

Moderate

Moodna Creek

Water Bodies

Moderate

Moderate

Orchard Lake

Water Bodies

Moderate

Moderate

Otter Kill

Water Bodies

Moderate

Moderate

Satterly Creek

Water Bodies

Moderate

Moderate

St. Anne’s Episcopal Church*

Cultural or Religious Establishments

Moderate

Moderate

Washingtonville Village Center*

Community Centers

Moderate

Moderate

Washingtonville Village Hall*

Community Centers

Moderate

Moderate

Vern Allen Park*

Parks and Recreation

Moderate

Moderate

Tomahawk Lake

Water Bodies

Moderate

Moderate

12 Wetlands And Marshes*

Wetlands and Marshes

Moderate

Moderate

Blooming Grove Town Hall

Community Centers

Residual

Residual

Brotherhood Winery*

Museums, Performing Arts Centers,
Stadiums

Residual

Residual

County Park

Cultural or Religious Establishments

Residual

Residual

Goose Pond Mountain

Parks and Recreation

Residual

Residual

Habitats of the Wood Frog and
Eastern Box Turtle

Natural Habitats

Residual

Residual

Korean Buddhist Camp

Parks and Recreation

Residual

Residual

Marycrest Convent

Cultural or Religious Establishments

Residual

Residual

Moffat Library*

Libraries

Residual

Residual

Museum Village

Museums, Performing Arts Centers,
Stadiums

Residual

Residual

Schunemunk Mountain

Parks and Recreation

Residual

Residual

VFW Post*

Cultural or Religious Establishments

Residual

Residual

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 2.5 – NATURAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCE ASSETS (CONT’D)
Asset/Asset Type

Asset Subcategory

100-Year Risk Score

500-Year Risk Score

3 parks**

Parks and Recreation

Residual

Residual

7 churches**

Cultural or Religious Establishments

Residual

Residual

6 lakes and other water bodies**

Water Bodies

Residual

Residual

11 wetlands and marshes **

Wetlands and Marshes

Residual

Residual

Source: NYS DOS, NYRCR 2014 (Notes continue to next page)
* While the Plan Area does not include the Village of Washingtonville, certain facilities within the Village were deemed to hold some value to the
larger Town of Blooming Grove community, and are therefore included in the risk analysis. The Village of Washingtonville assets included in the
Assessment of Risk to Assets are not intended to be the subject of Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR projects.
** One or more of the assets in this grouping are in the Village of Washingtonville. See the note above.

Those buildings and facilities determined to be among
the most vulnerable and exposed to flooding in the
Town could be considered for flood-proofing mitigation
measures and possible relocation. However, these
considerations could also include facilities not located
within the regulatory floodplain (and therefore, not
associated with a risk score) where historical flood
damages suggest future vulnerability.

Housing Assets

Most housing assets in the Town are outside the areas
at risk from riverine flooding; however, they may be
at risk of overland flooding as a result of inadequate
stormwater management structures and practices.
This risk is not reflected in the risk analysis results
presented in this section. The facilities listed in
Table 2.6 could be prioritized for flood-proofing or
other mitigation measures to reduce both vulnerability
and exposure.

One housing asset, i.e., the Rolling Hills Condo complex,
was identified as having moderate risk from flooding
during a 100-year or 500-year event. This ranking is
consistent with information provided by the Community
and Committee. The Rolling Hills Condos are located
in the 0.2% annual chance floodplain and are situated
approximately 300 feet west of Satterly Creek. Table 2.6
lists the risk scores for housing assets in the Town of
Blooming Grove.

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

60

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 2.6 – HOUSING ASSETS
Asset/Asset Type

Asset Subcategory

100-Year Risk Score

500-Year Risk Score

Rolling Hills Condos

Multi-Family Residence

High

High

Brookshire Condos*

Multi-Family Residence

Residual

Residual

Colonial Gardens*

Multi-Family Residence

Residual

Residual

Hil Mar Lodge

Multi-Family Residence

Residual

Residual

Oxford Park

Multi-Family Residence

Residual

Residual

Rocky Knoll Apartments*

Multi-Family Residence

Residual

Residual

Rocky Point Apartments*

Multi-Family Residence

Residual

Residual

Skyview Estates

Multi-Family Residence

Residual

Residual

Stone Hill Apartments*

Multi-Family Residence

Residual

Residual

Washingtonville Apartments*

Multi-Family Residence

Residual

Residual

Weathervane Apartments*

Multi-Family Residence

Residual

Residual

St. Mary’s Parish Center*

Single-Family Residence

Residual

Residual

Source: NYS DOS, NYRCR 2014
* While the Plan Area does not include the Village of Washingtonville, certain facilities within the Village were deemed to hold some value to the
larger Town of Blooming Grove community, and are therefore included in the risk analysis. The Village of Washingtonville assets included in the
Assessment of Risk to Assets are not intended to be the subject of Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR projects.

61

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Assessment of Needs
and Opportunities
The Committee identified preliminary needs and
opportunities for the Town of Blooming Grove,
categorized by each of the six RSFs that serve as the
structural roadmap for this NYRCR Plan.

Community Planning and
Capacity Building
The Community Planning and Capacity Building RSF
addresses the community’s ability to implement storm
recovery activities and to mitigate the effects of future
storms. The Town’s experience with recent major
storms demonstrated that the existing stormwater
management system is ineffective and that compliance
with community regulations (such as clearing streams
and drainage ways on private property) needs to be
increased.
The Town of Blooming Grove updated its Hazard
Mitigation Plan in 2013. This document assisted the
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR planning process, as
it described the impacts of the storms and identified
actions that could be taken to increase the Town’s
resiliency from future storms and flood events.

COMMUNITY PLANNING AND
CAPACITY BUILDING
NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES
Need: Develop and enforce local zoning and codes

that help secure public safety, preserve property, and limit
disaster impacts.

Opportunity: Enforce local codes to ensure water
quality and prevent unregulated effluent from infiltrating the
water courses.
Opportunity: Adopt impervious coverage requirements in
all zoning districts but especially in the Rural Crossroads (RC)-I
and RC-II Districts (a 50% impervious coverage maximum is in
place in the Office Research/Light Industrial [ORI] District).
Opportunity: Modify site plan and zoning standards to
encourage and incentivize the use of low-impact development
and sustainable design techniques, including porous pavement
systems, in all zoning districts (a modest density bonus is in place
for major subdivisions in the Rural Residential [RR] District).
Need: Improve local capabilities to conduct floodplain

management, reduce flood vulnerability, and reduce the burden
of flood insurance on property owners.

Opportunity: Support participation in the NFIP Community
Rating System (CRS).
Opportunity: Develop a town-wide strategy to issue current
elevation certificates.
Need: Limit building in the floodplain.
Need: Increase public education and outreach for residents,
especially those most vulnerable to natural disasters.

Opportunity: Provide counseling services to

residents regarding FEMA Letters of Map Amendment (LOMA),
and other outreach and education about FEMA NFIP compliance.

Opportunity: Create emergency action/response plans

and associated guidelines for residents and emergency service
agencies to follow after a flood event.

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

62

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Economic Development
The primary economic concern after a disaster is
returning economic and business activities to a state of
health. Recovery periods present unique opportunities
for developing new economic strengths that result
in a more sustainable and fiscally robust community.
Communities that deliberately design an economic
development strategy, and support these elements in
their planning process, are more likely to capitalize on
opportunities for economic improvement, such as
those presented through recovery programs like the
NYRCR Program.
With this in mind, the Committee enumerated the
following needs and recommendations that focus on
protecting existing homes and businesses to withstand
flood impacts.

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES
Need: Retain critical commercial assets,

Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

hindrances to providing basic care at a level equal to
that of care outside of flood events.
During storm events, communications systems
frequently become compromised, so messages to
residents regarding recommended actions may not be
received. The Committee noted that most residents are
not well-informed about what to do in preparation for
an impending storm or what to do during a flood.

including existing businesses.

Opportunity: Flood proof or relocate critical facilities
and assets.

Opportunity: Identify businesses suitable for flood

mitigation improvements, including elevation, flood-proofing,
and potential acquisition.

Need: Reduce the cost of doing business (flood insurance).
Opportunity: Support participation in CRS.

The significant vulnerability posed by these
interruptions to critical public health, safety, and
communication services underlies a number of
the needs and opportunities the Committee
identified below.

HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES

Health and Social Services
After a disaster, one of the more immediate
considerations is whether public health, healthcare
facilities, and essential social service needs have
been restored. To develop appropriate strategies and
management measures, the Committee reviewed
the existing Town assets that support vulnerable
populations and identified key needs critical to
protecting the health and well-being of all residents in a
post-disaster environment. Transportation infrastructure
failures and access interruption consist of the main
63

Need: Maintain access to healthcare services during and

after disasters, including uninterrupted emergency and medical
services during flood events.

Need: Ensure that adequate infrastructure and connectivity
exists within the community to permit safe and efficient
provision of services.

Opportunity: Conduct a disaster and flood preparedness
outreach and education campaign to residents, especially to
functional needs residents and other vulnerable populations.

Need: Create new shelter facilities in the Town.
Opportunity: Ensure continuous operation of critical

emergency response personnel and facilities during future
flood events.

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Housing

Infrastructure

Local housing goals emphasize protecting housing
assets from flood damages and providing resources
to residents to better prepare for the effects of future
storms. Resiliency alternatives are directed toward:

As indicated in Figure 1.4 in Section 1, flooding from
Tropical Storm Lee and Hurricane Irene caused the
closure of substantial sections of the Town’s major
roadways, including U.S. Route 6/State Route 17, State
Route 94, State Route 208, Clove Road, Farmingdale
Road, Woodcock Mountain Drive, Station Road, and
Prospect Road.

(1) the types and locations of housing assets with the
greatest needs; (2) the provision of sufficient housing
alternatives for owners and renters; and (3) the
implementation of incentive programs for
homeowners to undertake home elevations or other
mitigation retrofits.
As people move from the urbanized areas around New
York City to the Town of Blooming Grove, they may not
be aware of the Town’s susceptibility to flooding both
around the waterways and on hillside slopes or what
that susceptibility means for them. Opportunities exist
to educate residents about flood risks to their homes,
the NFIP, and insurance rates.
Working from an intimate knowledge of these factors,
the Committee identified housing-related needs and
opportunities necessary for further evaluation in the
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR planning process.

HOUSING
NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES
Need: Address cost-burdened residents.
Need: Protect existing housing stock from further loss.
Opportunity: Identify homes suitable for flood mitigation

improvements, including elevation, flood-proofing, and potential
acquisition.

Opportunity: Create a program to offer or assist with
voluntary home and property buy-outs.

Need: Create a strategy that protects existing housing stock
and reduces flood insurance rates.

Opportunity: Offer education and consultation to area
residents on FEMA flood insurance requirements.

Many undersized and blocked culverts resulted in
roadway flooding, cutting off access for emergency
vehicles and stranding many people in their homes with
no way to get necessary supplies and assistance. Dirt
roads in the Mountain Lodge Park and other hillside
communities had washed out, cutting off access to
many residents.
During Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee, the
Tappan Water and Wastewater Plants were damaged
and made inaccessible by floodwaters. Heavy rains and
strong winds from the storms knocked down trees and
power lines across a wide area.
The Blooming Grove Committee’s infrastructure needs
and opportunities focus on improving stormwater
management infrastructure and protecting the
transportation network. HEC-RAS modeling may
identify elements (such as specific culverts, bridges,
or roadways) that could be addressed to protect the
Town’s infrastructure.

INFRASTRUCTURE
NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES
Need: Improve infrastructure capacity and
stormwater management.

Opportunity: Strengthen floodplain management

throughout the Town by improving infrastructure capacity and
stormwater management. For instance, add/improve drainage
capacity along major roadways in Town.

Opportunity: Create retention ponds and/or
flood storage.

Need: Repair, replace, and enhance culverts, dams, and
spillways to address repetitive flooding.

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

64

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

INFRASTRUCTURE
NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES (CONT’D)
Opportunity: Improve capabilities of dam infrastructure to

minimize flood risk.

Opportunity: Study the impact of coordinating dam releases
in the Town.

Need: Maintain access to critical infrastructure and all
residences during flood events.

Need: Obtain roadway profiles and examine bridges and
roadway crossings.

Opportunity: Evaluate the potential of constructing
a levee on the residential side of Barnes Road on
Satterly Creek.

Natural and Cultural Resources
Naturally occurring infrastructure has been
increasingly recognized and promoted among hazard
and climate planners and local government as a lowimpact and sustainable means to mitigate losses from
natural hazards. The substantial flood risk in the Town
of Blooming Grove is primarily caused by the proximity
of development to Moodna Creek and other creeks
in the Town. The Committee identified a number of
needs and opportunities capitalizing on these assets to
integrate conservation and property protection. These
needs and opportunities follow.

NATURAL AND
CULTURAL RESOURCES
NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES
Need: Integrate environmental conservation
with the protection of community homes, assets,
and infrastructure.
Opportunity: Create a Master Plan to address problematic

waterways and restore flood capacity throughout the Plan Area.

Need: Address stream conditions that cause or contribute to
repetitive flood areas.

Opportunity: Create a strategy to address stream
A community’s infrastructure goes far beyond major roads and
bridges. Culverts, such as this new one constructed at the Rolling Hills
Condominiums, can make a critical difference in diverting floodwaters
away from housing assets. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

conditions including silt deposits, streambank erosion, and
remaining debris.

Opportunity: Create an emergency notification system
alerting to dangerous dam levels.

Community development and preservation of natural resources can co-exist with proper infrastructure management and environmental sensitivity.
Both enhance local quality of life. Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.
65

SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Water reflections in early fall can be dramatic in Blooming Grove. Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.
SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

66

Section 3

Reconstruction and
Resiliency Strategies

Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 3:
Reconstruction and
Resiliency Strategies

T

hrough a combination of additional analysis,
ongoing discussions at Town of Blooming
Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Committee (Committee) Meetings,
and public feedback, the Committee
identified a series of preliminary strategies to address
the most critical needs related to community health,
safety, resiliency, and quality of life.

The strategies reflect community values,
issues, needs, and opportunities, and they
serve as the foundation for identifying and
prioritizing projects and implementation
actions in Section 4 of this NYRCR Plan.
The following discussion includes many of the needs
identified by the Committee and presented in Section
2: Assessment of Risk and Needs to help draw the
connection between those needs and the related
strategies. Some of those needs and opportunities
appear explicitly in one or more strategies, either by
being referenced in a strategy title or by being called

out in the strategy description. Others are presented
as actions in the associated tables after each
strategy description.
The Committee developed these strategies with input
from the public. Section 4: Proposed and Featured
Project Profiles contains descriptions and cost-benefit
analyses of the proposed and featured projects. A full
list of Proposed, Featured, and Additional Resiliency
Recommendations is in Section 5: Additional Materials.

Strategy 1
Reduce the impact of riverine flooding on the built
environment, including critical facilities, infrastructure,
businesses, and housing.
The heavy rains and flooding from Hurricane Irene
and Tropical Storm Lee severely impacted many local
structures. Because of the extent of damage to the built
environment, the Committee first focused on reducing
these impacts in future storms. This strategy addresses
several needs identified in Section 2 of this NYRCR Plan.
The Committee recognized that one way to reduce
the impact of flooding on the built environment is
to develop and enforce strong controls, such as local
zoning and building codes, to secure public safety
and property.
The Community considers it a priority to explore
activities to minimize losses to existing houses in
flood hazard areas (FHA), especially those that have
experience repetitive loss (RL) or severe repetitive
loss (SRL). Some ways to achieve this goal include the
diversion of floodwaters to retention ponds, flood
storage areas, or other structural elements designed
to protect many homes at once or the reduction of
vulnerability by acquiring, elevating, or flood-proofing
individual homes. The Community can implement
similar actions to protect commercial structures.

This is an example of housing stock on Barnes Road. Photo is courtesy
of Tetra Tech, Inc.
SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

68

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Such protection increases the likelihood that
businesses located inside these buildings
will remain in the Town of Blooming Grove,
rather than relocate to less flood-prone
areas outside of the Town.
The Committee has assessed and refined potential
flood mitigation projects and recommendations for
funding through the NYRCR Program to determine
which projects will best meet the Town of Blooming
Grove NYRCR Plan Area’s (NYRCR Plan Area) needs. This
strategy also addresses how to minimize the impacts of
future storms on critical facilities.
Repairing, replacing, or enhancing existing culverts,
dams, and spillways can address repetitive flooding
concerns. The Committee also identified the
coordination of the volume of water behind dams as
a potentially useful tool for managing flooding. These
benefits, however, must first be evaluated through a
complex hydraulic model. The results of such a study
could help the Town manage flooding, by directing
investment towards the most beneficial actions.
Recommendations from the Town of Blooming Grove
NYRCR Plan may also include restoring local lakes to

their original design depth and capacity or creating new
locations for flood storage along riverine waterways
at specific locations in Town. This NYRCR Plan will also
determine the value of using a coordinated release of
stormwater from behind local dams as a way to lessen
the impact of flooding downstream.
Protective measures and emergency rescues cannot be
carried out, unless homes and critical facilities remain
accessible during and after a flood. The installation of
an earthen levee along the Satterly Creek’s right bank
would protect residential buildings and critical assets
along the Barnes Road neighborhood; this option is
being evaluated through the Hydrologic Engineering
Centers–River Analysis System (HEC-RAS) modeling.
Initial results show positive impacts in terms of
floodplain extent reduction without increasing the
water surface elevation (WSE) significantly. It would also
reduce flood water inundation at the nearby Tappan
Waste Water Treatment Plant.
In light of these needs, this strategy to reduce the
impacts from flooding calls for investment in a range
of resiliency projects. Table 3.1 itemizes the projects
highlighted by the Committee to accomplish Strategy 1.

Past floods caused costly damages to local roadways and other infrastructure, and often led to route closures that lasted months or years after the
storm passes. Photo is courtesy of Committee Member Rich Bachman.
69

SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 3.1 – STRATEGY 1
Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding on the built environment, including critical facilities, infrastructure, businesses,
and housing.

Project
Name

Opportunities

Estimated
Cost

Proposed
or Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Additional
Hydrologic
(Flood
Routing),
Hydraulic, and
Stormwater
Analysis

Conduct a comprehensive study of all local waterways, lakes, and
dams affecting flood conditions in the NYRCR Plan Area. Complete
additional riverine and overland (stormwater) hydraulic analyses to
provide additional information and recommendations to serve as
a resource in the planning and development of further actions to
reduce the extent and severity of flooding throughout the Town.

$500,000 for
the study;
$1,000,000 for
implementation

Proposed

Y

Barnes Road
Levee

This project proposes to create a berm/levee behind the residences
on Barnes Road, from 144 Barnes Road to the Satterly Creek side of
Tappan Sewer Plant, to deflect and keep the floodwaters away from
the homes. Instead, the structural project would direct floodwaters to
the non-residential side of Satterly Creek.

$1,897,929

Featured

N

Community
Rating
System (CRS)
Participation

This project would fund professional services to develop an
application for the Town of Blooming Grove, potentially in partnership
with the Village of South Blooming Grove, to join the NFIP CRS to
reduce flood insurance rates in the Town. The project would aim to
enter participating municipalities into the program at a CRS Rating
of 8, which would immediately translate into a 10% discount in flood
insurance policy premiums for policy holders in good standing. In
addition to gaining membership to the CRS program, this contract
would educate the present Town Supervisor, Board Members, and the
public about the CRS program and its associated benefits; and assist
residents with resiliency-focused residential property improvements
and with access and awareness to needed funding resources.

$60,000

Featured

N

SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

70

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 3.1 – STRATEGY 1 (CONT’D)
Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding on the built environment, including critical facilities, infrastructure, businesses,
and housing.

Project
Name

Estimated
Cost

Opportunities

Proposed
or Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Detailed
Inspection
Program and
Investment
Prioritization
Protocol

This project seeks a holistic, sustainable approach to increase
transportation system resiliency towards future storms and to
address repetitive failures on vulnerable roadway segments
throughout the Plan Area. After fully evaluating the components of
the existing transportation network in the Town and by utilizing the
findings of the Committee‐proposed Additional Hydrologic (Flood
Routing), Hydraulic, and Stormwater Analysis Project, the Committee
recommended the funding and implementation of a detailed
inspection program and investment prioritization protocol for Town‐
owned bridges and culverts.

$500,000 to
develop the
protocol;
$1,000,000 for
implementation

Proposed

N

Mountain
Lodge Drainage
Improvements
and Flood
Damage
Reduction

This project will provide a series of standard plans and detailed
drawings for repairing and/or upgrading existing degraded
stormwater ditches. It will then provide funds to implement a
revolving loan, grant, or cost-share program to help low-income
residents of Mountain Lodge Park implement the improvements
on a property-by-property basis.

$300,000

Proposed

N

In addition to providing standard plans directly, this project would
also provide outreach and education to homeowners through the
Homeowners Association to assist in the implementation of the plans.
Strategic
Critical Facility
Flood Proofing
and Structural
Mitigation
Program

This project aims to strengthen key critical facilities that experienced
service interruptions due to flooding during Hurricane Irene and
Tropical Storm Lee. It will be informed by the Town’s new Detailed
Program and Investment Prioritization Tool.

$1,345,710

Proposed

N

Update Local
Codes and
Ordinances

This project would include a comprehensive review of the zoning and
subdivision regulations to identify areas of improvement that would
enhance the Community’s ability to be more resilient to future storm
events and would address the feasibility related to code changes.

$80,000

Proposed

N

Notes: CRS Community Rating System NFIP National Flood Insurance Program
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency Y/N Yes or no

71

SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy 2
Improve stormwater management and drainage
systems throughout the town to decrease risk for
homes, businesses, and residents.
In addition to the damages caused by riverine flooding,
which are addressed in Strategy 1, overland sheet flow
and man-made interruptions to the natural drainage
process contributed to the damage of many structures.
The existing stormwater management systems in many
residential neighborhoods throughout the Town were
incapable of handling the volume of rain from the
storms. To address this, the Committee recognized the
need to improve the Town’s stormwater management
system and the capacity of its stormwater infrastructure.
The Committee evaluated stormwater drainage
improvements for Mountain Lodge Park, based on best
management practices outlined in New York State’s
technical guidelines and recommendations. It ultimately
recommended additional hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis to evaluate the potential for modification of the
existing lakes in the watershed (e.g., Orange-Rockland,
Merriewold, Hildegarde, and Tomahawk).
Alternatively, the analysis could identify new retention
areas to provide additional flood storage and potentially
reduce impacts downstream along Satterly and Moodna
Creeks. The Committee has also considered adding or
improving drainage along densely populated residential
roadways in the Town, where multiple residents would
benefit from the improvements.
Recognizing the Town of Blooming Grove’s limited
funding and operational capacity as a small, rural,
municipal government, the Committee recommended
the creation of a Detailed Inspection Program and
Investment Prioritization Program. This Program would
evaluate return on investment and improve economic
efficiency, resource allotment, and budgeting decisions
with regards to infrastructure investment programs.
Once implemented, the Program would guide local
spending to address one or more of the identified
deficiencies. Depending on the analysis and findings

SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

This image shows a swale draining two properties on Barnes Road.
This run, flowing towards the south side of the street from Satterly
Creek, floods during small rain flow events. The Satterly swells and the
Tappan Hill neighborhood on Barnes Road becomes a basin with no
drainage alternatives. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

(per Strategy 1), the Town may also address drainage
along the following:
• State Route 94;
• State Route 208;
• County Route 27 (Craigville Road);
• County Route 51 (Hulsetown Road); and
• Local collector routes, including:
– Bull Mine Road;
– Cardinal Drive;
– Farmingdale Road;
– Goshen Road;
– Horton Road Bridge;
– Hudson Drive;
– Lakeshore Drive;
– Merriewold Lane North;
– Museum Village Road;
– Prospect Road;
– Tuthill Road;
– Station Road; and
– Woodcock Mountain Drive.
• In addition to managing infrastructural assets
through an orderly improvement plan, the
Committee identified this planning process as an
opportunity to recommend specific upgrades to
Town regulations to gradually improve stormwater
72

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

management. Such recommendations could
include the following:
• Adopt impervious coverage requirements
in all zoning districts;
• Address open space preservation;
• Increase requirements for buffer zones/setbacks
around FHA;

• Regulate public and private stream
maintenance; and
• Ensure property designations and codes
conform to the 2007 FEMA Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs).
Table 3.2 summarizes the projects highlighted by the
Committee to accomplish Strategy 2.

TABLE 3.2 – STRATEGY 2
Strategy 2: Improve stormwater management and drainage systems throughout the Town to decrease risk for homes, businesses,
and residents.

Project
Name

Proposed
or
Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Additional
Hydrologic
(Flood
Routing),
Hydraulic, and
Stormwater
Analysis

Conduct a comprehensive study of all local waterways, lakes,
and dams affecting flood conditions in the Plan Area. Complete
additional riverine and overland (stormwater) hydraulic analyses to
provide additional information and recommendations to serve as
a resource in the planning and development of further actions to
reduce the extent and severity of flooding throughout the Town.

$500,000 for the
study; $1,000,000
for implementation

Proposed

Y

Detailed
Inspection
Program and
Investment
Prioritization
Protocol

This project seeks a holistic, sustainable approach to increase
transportation system resiliency towards future storms and to
address repetitive failures on vulnerable roadway segments
throughout the Plan Area. After fully evaluating the components
of the existing transportation network in the Town and by utilizing
the findings of the Committee‐proposed Additional Hydrologic
(Flood Routing), Hydraulic, and Stormwater Analysis Project, the
Committee recommended the funding and implementation of a
detailed inspection program and investment prioritization protocol
for Town‐owned bridges and culverts.

$500,000 to
develop the
protocol;
$1,000,000 for
implementation

Proposed

N

Mountain
Lodge Drainage
Improvements
and Flood
Damage
Reduction

This project will provide a series of standard plans and detailed
drawings for repairing and/or upgrading existing degraded
stormwater ditches. It will then provide funds to implement a
revolving loan, grant, or cost-share program to help low-income
residents of Mountain Lodge Park implement the improvements on
a property-by-property basis.
In addition to providing standard plans directly, this project would
also provide outreach and education to homeowners through the
Homeowners Association to assist in the implementation of the
plans

$300,000

Proposed

N

Update Local
Codes and
Ordinances

This project would include a comprehensive review of the zoning
and subdivision regulations to identify areas of improvement that
would enhance the Community’s ability to be more resilient to
future storm events and would address the feasibility related to
code changes.

$80,000

Proposed

N

73

SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy 3
Improve upon existing capabilities for
emergency preparedness, response, sheltering,
and communication.
This strategy focuses on improving the government’s
and residents’ capability to respond to future storms,
so that those impacts do not carry the same level
of damage as those of Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane
Irene, and Tropical Storm Lee. This strategy stresses
the needs and opportunities related to the Health and
Social Services Recovery Support Function (RSF) and
the Community Planning and Capacity Building RSF
identified by the Committee and described in Section 2.
Specifically, the Committee identified three needs
related to this strategy:
• Maintain access to health services during and after
disasters, including uninterrupted emergency and
medical services;
• Ensure adequate infrastructure and connectivity
exist in the Community to permit safe and efficient
provision of services; and
• Create new shelter facilities in the Town.

Together, these three items demonstrate
that the Committee is committed to
ensuring the Town of Blooming Grove and
the Village of South Blooming Grove, along
with their residents, receive all necessary
emergency assistance during a flood event
by improving existing emergency services.
The Committee recognized the opportunity to create
emergency action/response plans and associated
guidelines that residents and emergency service
agencies can follow after a flood or other hazard
event. These plans, and the planning process used to
develop them, will result in more effective, coordinated
responses by emergency responders.

SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

A key part of response is the ability for emergency
responders and critical facilities to be fully operational
during a flood event. In the past, floodwaters damaged
equipment in firehouses, and town-wide power outages
hindered operations for numerous critical operations
centers lacking back-up power.
The Committee identified a number of facilities that
need enhancements to minimize their vulnerability to
future flood and power outages. These facilities include
the South Blooming Grove Village Hall, numerous fire
stations, the Town of Blooming Grove police station, and
designated local shelters.

Installing back-up power generation at all
identified critical facilities will help to ensure
that emergency response operations can
continue during flood events.
In addition to meeting the needs of emergency services
operations, the Committee recognized the importance
of an educated and prepared public for successfully
weathering future disaster events. Residents need to
know the best course of action to take when preparing
for a hazard event, how to find real-time flood and
disaster information, and where to go when evacuation
is necessary. Therefore, the Committee recommended
the development of guidelines for residents in
coordination with an extensive public disaster and flood
preparedness outreach and education campaign. These
guidelines and the outreach campaign will include
and address persons with access and functional needs
(PAFN) along with other vulnerable populations.
Table 3.3 identifies the projects highlighted by the
Committee to accomplish Strategy 3.

This is an example of a reinforced roadway over a new culvert.
This is a project recently completed at the lower Orange and Rockland
Lake in the Village of South Blooming Grove. Photo is courtesy of
Rich Bachman.
74

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 3.3 – STRATEGY 3
Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for emergency preparedness, response, sheltering, and communication.

Project
Name

Estimated
Cost

Short Project Description

Proposed
or
Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Additional
Hydrologic
(Flood
Routing),
Hydraulic, and
Stormwater
Analysis

Conduct a comprehensive study of all local waterways, lakes, and dams
affecting flood conditions in the Plan Area. Complete additional riverine
and overland (stormwater) hydraulic analyses to provide additional
information and recommendations to serve as a resource in the
planning and development of further actions to reduce the extent and
severity of flooding throughout the Town.

$500,000 for
the study;
$1,000,000 for
implementation

Proposed

Y

Install Natural
Gas or Solar
Back-up Power
for Critical
Facilities and
Infrastructure

This project aims to obtain and install permanent back-up power
sources for the critical facilities and infrastructure in the Town which are
not addressed in other proposed projects. This project would include
an evaluation of existing critical facilities’ needs for redundant power
generation. The Community will consider the use of solar or green
energy, where feasible. Priority locations include the South Blooming
Grove Village Hall and Town of Blooming Grove Highway Garage at
2741 State Route 94 (also the proposed site for relocation of the Town
of Blooming Grove Central Garage, providing a secondary benefit to
installing a back-up power source here).

$131,930

Proposed

N

Mountain
Lodge Drainage
Improvements
and Flood
Damage
Reduction

This project will provide a series of standard plans and detailed
drawings for repairing and/or upgrading existing degraded stormwater
ditches. It will then provide funds to implement a revolving loan, grant,
or cost-share program to help low-income residents of Mountain Lodge
Park implement the improvements on a property-by-property basis.
In addition to providing standard plans directly, this project would
also provide outreach and education to homeowners through the
Homeowners Association to assist in the implementation of the plans.

$300,000

Proposed

N

Strategic
Critical Facility
Flood Proofing
and Structural
Mitigation
Program

This project aims to strengthen key critical facilities that experienced
service interruptions due to flooding during Hurricane Irene and
Tropical Storm Lee. It will be informed by the Town’s new Detailed
Program and Investment Prioritization Tool.

$1,345,710

Proposed

N

75

SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 3.3 – STRATEGY 3 (CONT’D)
Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for emergency preparedness, response, sheltering, and communication.

Project
Name

Short Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Proposed
or
Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Update the
Comprehensive
Emergency
Management
Plan and
Develop
Hazard and
Operational
Specific
Annexes

This project would update the Comprehensive Emergency Management
Plan (CEMP) for the Town of Blooming Grove. The Town would
complete the CEMP in close coordination and partnership with the
Villages of South Blooming Grove and Washingtonville, and would
develop multi-jurisdictional hazard and operational specific annexes.

$320,000

Featured

Y

Vulnerable
Populations
and
Community
Emergency
Alert, Warning,
and Support

Implement and disseminate education materials regarding a
coordinated alerting system and general disaster readiness. These
materials will be designed for public and private sectors, families and
individuals, and PAFN and vulnerable populations. The materials can
also benefit low and moderate income populations without reliable
access to Internet.

$15,000

Proposed

N

Strategy 4
Preserve, protect, and enhance the town’s natural,
recreational, and cultural resources, and restore
natural floodplain capabilities.
This strategy addresses the Natural and Cultural
Resources, Economic Development, and Community
Planning and Capacity Building RSFs. The Committee
recognizes that flooding is a natural process and that the
Town should leverage its natural resources to minimize
damage from future flood events. The Committee
also recognizes the need to integrate environmental
conservation with the protection of community homes,
assets, and infrastructure while addressing stream
conditions that cause or contribute to repeat floods.
The projects necessary to fulfill Strategy 4, detailed in
Table 3.4, leverage previously identified opportunities
to meet existing needs. The Town may create a
Master Plan that addresses problematic waterways
SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

and sets forth a strategy to restore flood capacity
throughout the area.
Flood capacity restoration activities will address stream
conditions and may seek to alleviate silt deposits,
streambank erosion, and the build-up of both natural
and man-made debris. All of these conditions can
decrease a waterway’s capacity to access its natural
floodplain, strengthening the probability of flooding
in developed areas and thereby strengthening the
probability of costly structural damage.

This strategy also seeks to combine
improvements in emergency response and
preparedness with the creation of new
cultural and recreational amenities.
A multi-modal or pedestrian evacuation plan, for
instance, may be coupled with the creation of a local
recreational trail map. Acquiring and restoring a
stretch of eroding abandoned railroad bed that may be
76

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

contributing large amounts of silt to local waterways
could lead to a new multi-purpose recreational trail.
In addition to reducing flood damages to the built
environment and providing new recreational and
cultural assets, the Committee identified the protection
of water quality as a priority. The Town of Blooming
Grove maintains a municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4). The Town oversees the health, safety, and
general welfare of its residents through the regulation
of discharges to this system.
Local codes and permitting requirements exist to
protect water quality by controlling the introduction
of pollutants into the MS4 system and to prevent
unregulated effluent from infiltrating the water courses.
The Committee recognized the NYRCR Plan as an
opportunity to refocus the Community on enforcing
MS4 requirements. The Committee also hopes to

promote public awareness of the potential hazards and
water quality impacts from improper discharge of trash,
yard waste, wastewater, sediment, and other pollutants.
Table 3.4 relates the projects highlighted by the
Committee to achieve Strategy 4.

Pictured here is a farmland view from Tuthill Road. Photo is courtesy of
Tetra Tech, Inc.

TABLE 3.4 – STRATEGY 4
Strategy 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance the Town’s natural, recreational, and cultural resources, and restore natural
floodplain capabilities.

Proposed
or
Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

$500,000 for
the study;
$1,000,000 for
implementation

Proposed

Y

This project will provide a series of standard plans and detailed
drawings for repairing and/or upgrading existing degraded stormwater
ditches. It will then provide funds to implement a revolving loan, grant,
or cost-share program to help low-income residents of Mountain Lodge
Park implement the improvements on a property-by-property basis.
In addition to providing standard plans directly, this project would
also provide outreach and education to homeowners through the
Homeowners Association to assist in the implementation of the plans.

$300,000

Proposed

N

This project would include a comprehensive review of the zoning and
subdivision regulations to identify areas of improvement that would
enhance the Community’s ability to be more resilient to future storm
events and would address the feasibility related to code changes.

$80,000

Proposed

N

Project
Name

Short Project Description

Additional
Hydrologic
(Flood Routing),
Hydraulic, and
Stormwater
Analysis

Conduct a comprehensive study of all local waterways, lakes, and dams
affecting flood conditions in the Plan Area. Complete additional riverine
and overland (stormwater) hydraulic analyses to provide additional
information and recommendations to serve as a resource in the
planning and development of further actions to reduce the extent
and severity of flooding throughout the Town.

Mountain
Lodge Drainage
Improvements
and Flood
Damage
Reduction

Update Local
Codes and
Ordinances

77

Estimated
Cost

SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy 5
Assist Town Residents, Officials, and Business Owners
in Becoming Better Protected from Future Flood
Damages Through Education, Programming, Outreach,
and Policy Initiatives.
This strategy focuses on the Town’s regulatory
and technical capabilities to conduct floodplain
management. It focuses on addressing two needs in
particular. These needs include: (1) improving local
capabilities to conduct floodplain management, reduce
flood vulnerability, and reduce the burden of flood
insurance on property owners; and (2) reducing the cost
of doing business (e.g., flood insurance).
Participation by the Town of Blooming Grove in the
CRS, a voluntary program administered by the FEMA
NFIP, provides one approach to overcome Strategy
5 needs. The CRS recognizes and rewards those
community floodplain management activities exceeding
minimum NFIP standards by discounting flood insurance
premium rates.

Under the CRS program, the Community
would be rewarded for its interest in
developing a comprehensive approach
to floodplain management.
The issuance and maintenance of elevation certificates
comprise one component of earning CRS points.
This aligns with the identified opportunity to develop
a town-wide strategy to issue current elevation
certificates. Another element of the CRS refers to
community education and outreach. The Committee
has already identified the opportunity to educate area
residents on FEMA flood insurance requirements.
A third, related opportunity concerns the provision of
counseling services to residents regarding FEMA Letters
of Map Amendment (LOMA) and other outreach and
education about FEMA NFIP compliance.
Table 3.5 lists the projects highlighted by the
Committee to complete Strategy 5.

Residents engage in a mapping activity, which was one of many ways to educate and inspire communities to identify past losses and build
a better future. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.
SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

78

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 3.5 – STRATEGY 5
Strategy 5: Assist Town residents, officials, and business owners in becoming better protected from future flood damages through
education, programming, outreach, and policy initiatives.

Proposed
or
Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

$500,000 for
the study;
$1,000,000 for
implementation

Proposed

Y

This project would fund professional services to develop an application
for the Town of Blooming Grove, potentially in partnership with the
Village of South Blooming Grove, to join the NFIP CRS to reduce
flood insurance rates in the Town. The project would aim to enter
participating municipalities into the program at a CRS Rating of 8,
which would immediately translate into a 10% discount in flood
insurance policy premiums for policy holders in good standing. In
addition to gaining membership to the CRS program, this contract
would educate the present Town Supervisor, Board Members, and the
public about the CRS program and its associated benefits; and assist
residents with resiliency-focused residential property improvements
and with access and awareness to needed funding resources.

$60,000

Featured

N

Mountain
Lodge Drainage
Improvements
and Flood
Damage
Reduction

This project will provide a series of standard plans and detailed
drawings for repairing and/or upgrading existing degraded stormwater
ditches. It will then provide funds to implement a revolving loan, grant,
or cost-share program to help low-income residents of Mountain Lodge
Park implement the improvements on a property-by-property basis.
In addition to providing standard plans directly, this project would
also provide outreach and education to homeowners through the
Homeowners Association to assist in the implementation of the plans.

$300,000

Proposed

N

Update the
Comprehensive
Emergency
Management
Plan and
Develop Hazard
and Operational
Specific Annexes

This project would update the Comprehensive Emergency
Management Plan (CEMP) for the Town of Blooming Grove. The Town
would complete the CEMP in close coordination and partnership with
the Villages of South Blooming Grove and Washingtonville, and would
develop multi-jurisdictional hazard and operational specific annexes.

$320,000

Featured

Y

Update Local
Codes and
Ordinances

This project would include a comprehensive review of the zoning and
subdivision regulations to identify areas of improvement that would
enhance the Community’s ability to be more resilient to future storm
events and would address the feasibility related to code changes.

$80,000

Proposed

N

Project
Name

Short Project Description

Additional
Hydrologic
(Flood Routing),
Hydraulic, and
Stormwater
Analysis

Conduct a comprehensive study of all local waterways, lakes, and
dams affecting flood conditions in the Plan Area. Complete additional
riverine and overland (stormwater) hydraulic analyses to provide
additional information and recommendations to serve as a resource in
the planning and development of further actions to reduce the extent
and severity of flooding throughout the Town.

Community
Rating
System (CRS)
Participation

79

Estimated
Cost

SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 3.5 – STRATEGY 5 (CONT’D)
Strategy 5: Assist Town residents, officials, and business owners in becoming better protected from future flood damages through
education, programming, outreach, and policy initiatives.

Project
Name

Short Project Description

Vulnerable
Populations
and Community
Emergency
Alert, Warning,
and Support

Implement and disseminate education materials regarding a
coordinated alerting system and general disaster readiness. These
materials will be designed for public and private sectors, families and
individuals, and PAFN and vulnerable populations. The materials can
also benefit low- and moderate-income populations without reliable
access to Internet.

Estimated
Cost

Proposed
or
Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

$15,000

Proposed

N

Vulernable populations includes those individuals who may have functional and/or access needs, and may not be able to readily self-evacuate or who
may need assistance to shelter-in-place. This can include the elderly, those who are infirm, children, those who do not readily understand messages particularly those in English, and those who may be disenfranchised from mainstream media messages. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

SECTION 3: RECONSTRUCTION AND RESILIENCY STRATEGIES

80

Section 4
Proposed and
Featured Project
Profiles
Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Section 4: Proposed and
Featured Project Profiles
Additional Hydrologic (Flood
Routing), Hydraulic, and
Stormwater Analysis
Project Background
Although the current level of analysis has been effective
in painting a broad picture of the needs, vulnerabilities,
and opportunities for improvement in the Town of
Blooming Grove, the Town of Blooming Grove NY
Rising Community (NYRCR) Committee (Committee)
recommends a comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis of the Satterly, Perry, Cromline, and Moodna
Creeks. This analysis should extend to all relevant
tributaries and bodies of water outside of the Town
boundaries, where necessary, in addition to an analysis
of select stormwater flood damage areas.

More detailed local modeling would provide
further assessment of the known flooding
areas currently outside of existing hydraulic
models. Additionally, a regional, dynamic
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis would
identify additional potential flood storage
areas, and establish a lake management
plan to mitigate downstream flooding.
The analysis should include a comprehensive study
of all local waterways, lakes, and dams affecting flood
conditions within the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR
Plan Area (NYRCR Plan Area).

Orange and Rockland Lake Spillway. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

Other components of the study would include:
• Inspection of the numerous bridges and
structures that constrict flow;
• Identification and analysis of appropriate locations
throughout the Moodna Creek watershed to
provide additional flood storage. These locations
are in addition to those already mentioned in
other projects;
• Dynamic flood routing investigation to develop a
lake management plan to reduce water surface
elevations (WSE) in flood retention areas in
advance of large storm events;
• Analysis of the critical stormwater issues
affecting residents of the Schunemunk Mountain
neighborhoods;
• Identification and analysis of appropriate stream
management improvement measures, in addition
to those already mentioned in other projects; and
• Coordination with the Village of Washingtonville
NYRCR Plan implementation of a similar riverine
analysis project.
This comprehensive riverine and overland (stormwater)
hydraulic analyses will supplement currently insufficient
information and will provide recommendations to be

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

82

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

used in the planning and development of further actions
to reduce the extent and severity of flooding throughout
Town. This analysis would provide a platform for the
Town to implement final recommendations from
the study, as funds would be set aside for projects to
achieve future flood damage reduction.

Connection to the Disaster
Hurricane Irene washed out bridges on Lake Road,
Glenwood Road, Tuthill Road, and State Route 208,
along with a small bridge on Merriewold Lane, severely
hampering the ability of emergency service personnel
to reach residents for rescue. The storm also severely
damaged access roads in and out of residential
subdivisions, leaving people stranded in their homes in
many residential areas, especially in the Village of South
Blooming Grove. Repetitive flooding from past storm
events, including Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm
Lee, is arguably the largest challenge facing the Town
for establishing long-term community health and safety.
This project responds directly to impacts from the most
recent disaster by working towards identifying longterm solutions to areas of chronic flood risk to ensure

public safety and create confidence in the future
of the Town.

Description of Project
The study consists of a multi-pronged approach,
including more detailed hydraulic and hydrologic
modeling and an evaluation of flood mitigation and
community resiliency opportunities. The Town of
Blooming Grove NYRCR Community (Community)
will need all of this information to achieve its goal of
charting a long-term strategy.
This analysis would provide a platform for the Town
to implement final recommendations from the study,
and the Community would set funds aside for projects
to complete future flood damage reduction activities
recommended by the study.
Projects identified by the study for implementation
may include, but will not be limited to:
• Identification of specific project area(s);
• Ways to foster additional stakeholder engagement;

Pictured here is a watershed schematic, courtesy of SCAPE / Landscape Architecture PLLC
83

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Property description signage outside the Salisbury Mills Hydroelectric
Facility. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

The Town could use the implementation money set
aside to fulfill projects to the extent possible and to
spend the remainder of the money budgeted for this
project. Those study recommendations that cannot
be funded in the short-term via NYRCR funds, would
transfer to a definitive list of projects recommended for
implementation under future funding sources.

Regional Coordination

Image of Merriewold Lake while drained for maintenance. To
many residents, its bank deposition and shallow body seem to be
contributing to worsening flood conditions for lakeside properties.
Photo is courtesy of the Town of Blooming Grove Committee Member
Lorraine Tomassi.

• Rankings in the plan as the most influential and
cost-effective improvements to the floodplain;
• Preliminary designs, depending on
importance; and
• Proposed timeline and implementation schedules.
This project could also support the creation of a regional
coalition of dam owners, operators, and regulatory
agencies; pave the way to establishing emergency
action agreements to manage water levels in dams
and to understand the impacts of silt deposition and
capacity; and establish plans for long-term maintenance
and operation for dam and lake resources
within the Community.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

The Committee understands that flooding in the Town
of Blooming Grove, the Village of South Blooming
Grove, and the Village of Washingtonville are
interconnected, and the Town should evaluate flood
control measures for the protection of critical facilities
to determine collective potential impact.
In addition, the creation of additional storage areas to
protect NYRCR Plan Area residents would likely require
regional coordination and development. To this end,
the Committee has invited members of the Village of
Washingtonville NYRCR Committee to attend the Town
of Blooming Grove NYRCR Committee Meetings.
The Village of Washingtonville essentially shares the
same hydrologic system as the Town of Blooming Grove.
This project leverages the Village of Washingtonville
NYRCR Proposed Hydraulic Study, and creates a unique
opportunity to cooperatively pool resources and
ideas. The Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Proposed
Project will continue the work started by the Village of
Washingtonville and will carry it forward throughout
the NYRCR Plan Area, to cover all of the Moodna, Perry,
Cromline, and Satterly Creeks. The opportunity for
regional cooperation presented by undertaking this
study saves money and time, along with leading to a
84

PROPOSED PROJECTS

The implementation of all proposed projects resulting
from this study will likely far exceed the initial allotted
amount of funding provided through the NYRCR
Program, and all recommended projects would not be
able to be completed in the timeline set for the NYRCR
Program. With this concern in mind, projects will be
ranked in the completed study according to feasibility
and effectiveness.

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

better understanding of regional flooding conditions,
which do not respect municipal boundaries.

Cost Estimate
The total cost of the project is estimated to be
$1,500,000. It is understood that the Town has the
ability to draw on consultant and internal resources for
the management of this project. The study is estimated
to cost $500,000. The estimated project implementation
costs total $1,000,000. Please note that administrative
costs are not included in the project cost estimates.
Individual cost components of the hydrologic and
hydraulic study include:
• Identification of flood storage
opportunities - $50,000
• Regional flood routing hydrologic and hydraulic
study - $225,000
• Development of a comprehensive lake
management plan - $100,000
• Schunemunk Mountain stormwater
analysis - $75,000
• Identification of stream management
improvement measures - $50,000

Project Benefits
The following summarizes the anticipated benefits of
the project for the Town of Blooming Grove and its
neighboring municipalities, including risk and damage
reduction, and economic and social benefits. The
project’s primary benefit focuses on the usefulness
of the analytical tools created through the study and
the potential of these tools to have a positive regional
impact and to facilitate the implementation of future
flood control measures.

FLOOD PROTECTION AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
The project will benefit the entire population of the
Town of Blooming Grove (18,028 persons, as of the
85

2010 U.S. Census), by providing recommendations for
projects that increase long-term resiliency and decrease
the potential negative impact of flooding to local
residents, roadways, and businesses.
Upon the study’s completion, one of the more
immediate and notable effects will be a directed
spending effort on projects that will have discernible
impacts to reduce flood damages. Such projects may
decrease the number of road closures due to flooding.
Maintaining road service is important to the community
for many reasons, including the following:
• It allows service vehicles to access all parts
of the Town and to monitor culverts and
bridges for blockages;
• It allows for emergency access to be maintained;
• It decreases costs necessary to rescue and shelter
people during significant storm events;
• It decreases road repair costs, and aids in
preventing potential loss of sewer, water, and
other utilities; and
• After a storm, it reduces trip length of local
residents, as they patronize local restaurants,
shops, and other service providers.
• Additionally, residential properties may benefit
from projects that reduce flood water surface
elevations, especially in areas that have chronic
and widespread flooding damage caused by choke
points or inefficient management of dams.

ANTICIPATED REDUCTION OF RISK
As this project calls for a technical analysis of a defined
problem, the exact results and ultimate recommended
actions are unknown at this time. The current level of
investigation undertaken by the NYRCR planning process
has effectively painted a broad picture of the needs,
vulnerabilities, and opportunities for improvement in
the Town of Blooming Grove.
It is recommended that the Town consider a
comprehensive technical analysis to acquire detailed
recommendations for short-term implementable
projects and long-term measures. This would be
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The advancement of this study will also
ensure that cooperative efforts are
maximized and that risks to critical assets
are minimized across the entire Community.
The development of a lake management plan and
assessment of riparian areas will also establish a more
frequent and standardized monitoring protocol to
ensure natural and hardened infrastructure throughout
the Town remains in good condition. This would go far
to decrease the likelihood of catastrophic failure.

ENVIRONMENTAL
This study and the resulting lake management plan
can help protect the Moodna Creek watershed from
damages caused by high flows, and can produce better
environmental flows during dry periods to support
aquatic habitat. Practices developed based on a detailed
study of the Moodna Basin can lead to greater diversity
and higher quality local habitat, as well as improve
water quality in the NYRCR Plan Area and further
downstream.
The Town could use this information to identify those
places along the floodplain, water courses, and drainage
areas that need the most protection from inappropriate
modification. This would help to maintain high quality of
water and riverine habitat.

ECONOMIC

SOCIAL

The project indirectly supports economic development
by identifying places where commercial investments
would be protected from flooding. Protecting the
Community’s commercial and residential assets is key
to long-term resiliency. It allows the community to get
back to business and work with less damage and fewer
days of lost productivity.

Providing a better distribution of flows in the NYRCR
Plan Area’s streams, and targeting restoration of
degraded riparian areas, can also improve the
classification of Perry, Satterly, and Moodna Creeks
from classification C, i.e., waters supporting fisheries
and suitable for non-contact activities, to a higher
classification that could result in a usage for swimming
and other forms of recreation.

The model developed by this study would also create
a basis for guiding future development and assessing
the impact of development proposals that were not
anticipated by the study. This would allow the Town
of Blooming Grove to be able to approve or request
changes in projects based on a science-driven process,
especially since development impacts are cumulative
over a longer period of time and are more difficult
to assess.
The $1 million set aside for implementation of plan
recommendations would create approximately 7.1
construction jobs, potentially creating employment for
local and regional contractors in addition to 8.4 new
support jobs from increased materials and equipment
sales for suppliers and support industries.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

PUBLIC SUPPORT
As part of the public engagement process, the public
was provided an opportunity to “spend” virtual money
on projects they felt were the most important. The
Committee used this technique to gauge public support
for this project.
Overwhelmingly, the public supports the improvement
of infrastructure, which is addressed by this project.
Because the project will identify strategies to reduce
flooding, it affects all other categories as well, whether
directly or indirectly.
In addition, according to comments received at
the second Public Engagement Event, the public
overwhelmingly favored the creation of flood storage
areas as a way to alleviate the impact of floodwaters
throughout the Town. The Committee also expressed
86

PROPOSED PROJECTS

necessary to effectively reduce the impact of flooding
in the Town of Blooming Grove, including the Villages of
South Blooming Grove and Washingtonville, residing in
the Town’s borders.

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

another concern over the impact of flooding related to
spillway breaches during Hurricane Irene and the lack
of road access because of washed out roads, culverts,
and bridges.

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS
The additional benefits that would be created by this
project include the following:
• Regional Coordination and Collaboration: The
project takes advantage of an opportunity to
collaborate with the Village of Washingtonville, a
community that lies within the Town of Blooming
Grove’s municipal boundaries. The Village of
Washingtonville participated in Round 1 of the NY
Rising Program, and has identified a similar study
as a Proposed Project. This proposed expansion
to areas not studied by Washingtonville would
provide a more complete picture of the impact of
flooding across the NYRCR Plan Area, and would
benefit all regional residents.
• Easy Access to Critical Information: The project
would more fully develop available information
into a useful tool that the municipalities in the
Town of Blooming Grove could utilize when
assessing proposed projects in the floodplain. In
addition, the information contained in the study
would help to garner public support for necessary
change that would lead to ecologically sound
decisions and a more resilient community.
• Provides Springboard for Future Resiliency
Projects: By implementing the program identified
in this project, the Town will be better situated
to evaluate and determine where necessary
infrastructure upgrades and flood control/
resiliency improvements are needed. This study
will help to prepare grant applications and
obtain necessary data to implement the future
resiliency projects.

Furthermore, this project would address all
five of the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR
Plan’s resiliency strategies:
• Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding
87

on the built environment, including critical
facilities, infrastructure, businesses, and housing.
The study will identify projects that would provide
the most protection to the Community and will
have the greatest impact on flooding of the built
environment. One or more of these recommended
projects will be implemented as the second phase
of this NYRCR project.
• Strategy 2: Improve stormwater management and
drainage systems throughout Town to decrease
risk for homes, businesses, and residents.
A part of this project is related to the impacts
of sheet flow and identifies locations where
stormwater runoff becomes problematic,
especially when these areas run into the
water channels.
• Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for
emergency preparedness, response, sheltering,
and communication.
The implementation of the study’s
recommendation would aid in the protection of
roads necessary to maintain critical infrastructure
crossing the waterways. It also would allow
residents to escape flooding, if necessary, and have
access to emergency services.
• Strategy 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance
the Town’s natural, recreational, and
cultural resources, and restore natural
floodplain capabilities.
The project will create strategies to assist the
Community in protecting water resources in the
Town by identifying areas requiring protection
from inappropriate development and long-term
stewardship for the benefit of all residents
and wildlife.
• Strategy 5: Assist town residents, officials, and
business owners in becoming better protected
from future flood damages through education,
programming, outreach, and policy initiatives.
Use of the study in future planning and evaluation
would better prepare officials to shape municipal
policy, e.g., comprehensive plans, local ordinances,
and zoning. It would also garner the support
for expenditures and changes needed to better
protect against future flooding events and to
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

personnel to respond, when needed. Furthermore,
this investment will save countless dollars in the future
by providing science-backed recommendations to
reduce future losses from flood damage. As a decisionmaking tool, the completion of this study will benefit
the Community for years to come.

Project Cost-Benefit Analysis

IMPLEMENTATION TIME FRAME

This project seeks to promote one of the core tenants
of successful disaster response—ensuring emergency
responders can reach the areas where help is needed.

The study phase of this project can be completed
within 6-8 months. The implementation of the
proposed projects could take up to 2 years.

The $1.5 million maximum cost of this project seems
relatively low, when compared to the value of the lives
and property that might be saved. This can happen
by ensuring that an ambulance can reach the resident
in cardiac arrest, or that the fire department can
reach people trapped in their homes because of
swiftly-rising floodwaters.
Residents may be inconvenienced by closed roadways
during project implementation. That temporary
inconvenience, however, cannot be quantified, and
pales in comparison to the ability of emergency

REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
Other regulatory requirement will be dependent on the
projects identified and implemented.

JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction for this project rests with the Town of
Blooming Grove and the Village of South Blooming
Grove for their respective waterways.

SUMMARY
Additional Hydrologic (Flood Routing), Hydraulic, and Stormwater Analysis
• Investment: $500,000 plus $1,000,000
• Flood level reduction: Unknown
• Assets protected: Unknown
• Repetitive flood properties removed: Not Applicable (N/A)
• Potential future loss prevented: Unknown
• Jobs created: 7.1 Construction; 8.4 Permanent (Based on an estimated $1,000,000 spending on project
implementation)*
• Strategies accomplished: 5
* T he FTE construction jobs were estimated based on a methodology developed by the United States Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics
Administration as presented in the September 2013 “Economic Impact of Hurricane Sandy: Potential Economic Activity Lost and Gained in New Jersey
and New York.” This study estimated job creation from recovery spending on infrastructure projects in New York and reported 7.15 construction jobs and
8.4 total jobs per $1,000,000 in construction spending.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

88

PROPOSED PROJECTS

create a more resilient, livable community. In
addition, results from this study can be applied to
future projects proposed by the Community and
provide a way to evaluate the flooding impacts of a
project in an impartial way.

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategic Critical Facility
Flood-Proofing and Structural
Mitigation Program

Plants (the latter also known as the Tappan Sewer
Treatment Plant), located in the same development,
also took on water. The images below offer a side-byside comparison of the facilities during flood and nonflood times.

Project Background

In the Village of South Blooming Grove, the stormwaterinfused Satterly Creek wreaked havoc on roadways and
bridges. It inundated water resources infrastructure,
damaging many important structures, including the
Village of South Blooming Grove’s Sewer Pump Station.
The tributary to the Satterly Creek, running adjacent to
the South Blooming Grove Firehouse, eroded its bank to
encroach on the foundation of the firehouse and truck
bays, also penetrating the front door of the Village of
South Blooming Grove’s Sewer Pump Station.

Critical facilities and infrastructure in the
Town of Blooming Grove provide vital services to
residents on a day-to-day basis. They also serve as
crucial components of emergency preparedness,
response, and hazard mitigation.

Connection to the Disaster
During Hurricane Irene, a significant amount of runoff
surged through small and large tributaries of the
Satterly, Cromline, Moodna, and Perry Creeks, at times
overtopping spillways, eroding streambanks, and
causing overland flooding.
As floodwaters from Satterly Creek inundated the
basements and first floors of residences on Barnes
Road, the Tappan Water and Waste Water Treatment

The same tributary met with a significant amount of
runoff further downstream, flowing to the Merriewold
Lake and through its spillway. The flow from the
spillway discharged to a channel that makes a relatively
hard turn before being directed back to the original
stream channel of Satterly Creek. A significant amount
of erosion resulted in the discharge of the draining
channel, particularly along the turn before the flow
reached the original streambed.

Tappan Hill Water and Waste Water Treatment Plant flooding during Hurricane Irene and during non-flood stage. Photo is courtesy of Rachel
Robertson (left) and Tetra Tech, Inc (right).
89

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Current site and building for the Town Maintenance Garage. Photo is
courtesy of the Village of South Blooming Grove

Further downstream, the Town of Blooming Grove
Central Garage and the Salisbury Mills Fire Company
headquarters flooded from rising waters in the Moodna
Creek, inhibiting use of those facilities and damaging
critical equipment housed there. Stormwater entered
through truck bays and backed up through floor drains
at the Salisbury Mills Fire Company headquarters,
partially submerging the back-up generator and
compromising the company’s ability to provide
emergency services.

Description of Project
This project aims to strengthen key critical facilities that
experienced service interruptions due to flooding during
Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee. The project
may be informed by the Town’s new detailed inspection
program and investment prioritization protocol, if
implemented under the NYRCR Plan. The Town could
evaluate the following projects for implementation:
1. F lood mitigation measures for Tappan Waste Water
Treatment Plant
The associated Tappan Water Treatment Facility
on Barnes Road has been elevated to reduce
vulnerability, but the Sewer Treatment Facility
remains vulnerable to flood damage from the Satterly
Creek. This option seeks to install concrete floodwalls
to flood height and install barriers at flood gates.

Proposed relocation site for the Town of Blooming Grove Central
Garage, at 2741 State Route 94 in the Town of Blooming Grove. Photo
is courtesy of NYRCR Mapping Portal.

2. Relocation of Town of Blooming Grove
Central Garage
The Town of Blooming Grove Central Garage is
currently located in the Village of Washingtonville
at 53 West Main Street, roughly 500 feet from the
northern bank of Moodna Creek. The facility includes
three bays and one bathroom, and it is used by
three Town employees for equipment storage,
maintenance activities for the local fleet, and limited
administrative needs.
The garage has flooded repeatedly. Town officials
have recommended to the Committee that the garage
relocate to the Town Highway Garage, at 2741 State
Route 94, which is out of the floodplain. Doing so will
minimize the future flood vulnerability of this critical
facility, and operations at the relocated facility could
benefit from the Proposed Project to provide back-up
power at the Town Highway Garage.
3. Salisbury Mills Fire Company Headquarters
Stormwater Retrofit
Rising waters of the Moodna Creek brought up to 18
inches of water to the Salisbury Mills Fire Company
headquarters, at 2128 State Route 94, inundating the
building through the walls and bay doors and backing
up through the stormwater pipes underfoot.
This project option proposes limited mitigation
measures to protect the mechanical aparatus and

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

90

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

operational capacity of the Firehouse, including
revising the Sanitary and Domestic Water System
in accordance with Chapter7, American Society of
Civil Engineers (ASCE) 24, to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the facility and
discharge from the facility into floodwaters, elevating
the mechanical systems, water heaters, air handlers
as well as the automatic transfer switch and back-up
generator above the flood level.
4. Flood mitigation measures for Village of South
Blooming Grove Sewer Pump Station
Flood waters from the Satterly Creek during Hurricane
Irene permeated the Sewer Pump Station at 117
Duelk Ave. in the Village of South Blooming Grove.
Mitigation measures include the installation of rubber
gasket flood panels to seal the vent and door from
future floods.

Existing door and vent requiring upgrades at the sewer pump station
in the Village of South Blooming Grove. Photo is courtesy of the Village
of South Blooming Grove.

Satterly Creek

Stream embarkment
proposed to be stabilized
with Gabion basket wall.

Trib to Satterly Creek;
“Firehouse Creek”

5. Satterly Creek Tributary Streambank Stabilization
Stabilize the streambank of the tributary to Satterly
Creek, specifically where it is adjacent to the
South Blooming Grove Firehouse off State Route
208. The project would reduce risk of future flood
damage to the South Blooming Grove Firehouse;
Stonegate Shopping Center; Village water, sewer, and
communications infrastructure and operations; and
the Village Hall.

Village of South Blooming
Grove Village Hall.

Village of South Blooming
Grove Firehouse.

Site diagram for proposed streambank stabilization. Photo is courtesy
of the Village of South Blooming Grove.

Pictured here is the Salisbury Mills Fire Company headquarters. Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

91

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

PROPOSED PROJECTS

The runoff from the residential side of State Route
208 at this location has increased greatly due to new
roads, curbs, and storm drains.
The Town could consider an alternative mitigation
project at this site, that of relocating the South
Blooming Grove Firehouse and identifying locations
nearby to provide stormwater and floodwater
storage; however, the Committee could not locate
a viable site for relocation that would be out of the
floodplain and still within the service response area
for the Fire Company.
Site diagram for proposed five Satterly Creek Tributary streambank
stabilization alongside the South Blooming Grove Fire Company.
Photos are courtesy of the Village of South Blooming Grove.

Merriewold Lake Spillway Stabilization after Hurricane Irene. Photo is
courtesy of the Village of South Blooming Grove.

6. Merriewold Lake Outlet Channel Bank Restoration
During Hurricane Irene, a significant amount of
runoff flowed through Merriewold Lake and over the
spillway. The flow from the spillway was discharged
to a channel that makes a hard turn before directing
back to the original stream channel of Satterly Creek.
A significant amount of erosion occurred during
the discharge of the draining channel, particularly
along the turn before the flow reached the original
streambed. This project would include streambank
stabilization of approximately 250 feet along the
discharge channel of Merriewold Lake.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

92

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Pictured here is the Merriewold Lake proposed
bank stabilization. Photos are courtesy of the
Village of South Blooming Grove.

93

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

PROPOSED PROJECTS
Featured here are locations of the proposed strategic critical facility flood-proofing and structural mitigation efforts relative to waterways.
Location map courtesy of SCAPE / Landscape Architecture PLLC.

Cost Estimate

TABLE 4.1 – PRELIMINARY COST ESTIMATES
FOR STRATEGIC CRITICAL FACILITY FLOOD-PROOFING
AND STRUCTURAL MITIGATION PROGRAM
Project

Cost

Flood mitigation measures for Tappan Waste Water Treatment Plant

26,600

Relocation of Town of Blooming Grove Central Garage

$725,420

Salisbury Mills Fire Company Headquarters Stormwater Retrofit

$105,000 - $145,000

Flood Mitigation Measures for Village Of South Blooming Grove Sewer Pump Station

$6,215

Satterly Creek Tributary Streambank Stabilization

$282,475

Merriewold Lake Outlet Channel Bank Restoration

$200,000

Total

$1,345,710

Note: Administrative costs are not included in the project cost estimates.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

94

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Project Benefits
The following summarizes the anticipated benefits of
the project based upon the historic losses.

FLOOD PROTECTION AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Removing the Town of Blooming Grove Central Garage,
protecting the Salisbury Mills Fire Department, and
protecting South Blooming Grove Firehouse, will ensure
that public works and firefighting crews can continue to
serve the Plan Area’s residents and businesses during
and after an emergency, rather than needing to
redirect resources and time to address damages to
their own facilities.

ANTICIPATED REDUCTION OF RISK
This project reduces risk to residents and visitors by
ensuring that critical response agencies, including the
Town Department of Public Works and the Salisbury
Mills Fire Department, can continue to provide service
during a flood event, rather than spend their resources
on protecting their own facilities and equipment. It also
reduces risk to the Town’s wastewater facilities, which
serve the general public and Vulnerable Populations,
ensuring that they can continue to operate during and
after a disaster.

ECONOMIC
This project is based on strengthening local
infrastructure to make the Town more resilient to future
disasters. Investing in flood-proofing and elevation
measures for critical infrastructure demonstrates a
commitment to the future of the Town, its residents,
and its work force. This investment creates greater
confidence for private investors.
In addition, the physical work involved in relocating the
Town of Blooming Grove Central Garage; retrofitting the
Salisbury Mills Fire Department, Tappan Waste Water
Treatment Plant, and Village of South Blooming Grove
Sewer Pump Station; and stabilizing the streambank
that runs near the South Blooming Grove Firehouse will
require service providers to perform the work. These

95

service providers may be local companies. The service
providers’ increased revenue will result in increased
wages being paid to local employees. The money from
these wages will be spent on other local goods and
services, potentially creating additional jobs, increasing
expendable income, and increasing tax revenue.
This work will create approximately 8.8 full-time
equivalent (FTE) construction and 10.4 FTE support jobs
from labor, materials, equipment, and other supply
and support industries. The FTE construction jobs were
estimated based on a methodology developed by the
United States Department of Commerce Economics and
Statistics Administration as presented in the September
2013 Economic Impact of Hurricane Sandy: Potential
Economic Activity Lost and Gained in New Jersey and
New York. This study estimated job creation from
recovery spending on infrastructure projects in New
York and reported 7.15 construction jobs and 8.4 total
jobs per $1,000,000 in construction spending. These
numbers were adjusted to the $1,250,000 construction
estimates for the different aspects of this project.

ENVIRONMENTAL
Each component of this project has environmental
benefits.
• Flood mitigation measures for the Tappan Waste
Water Treatment Plant will prevent floodwater
from inundating the facility and sending untreated
wastewater into the natural environment.
• Ensuring continued operation of the Tappan Waste
Water Treatment Plant and the Village of South
Blooming Grove’s Sewer Pump Station reduces
the likelihood that untreated wastewater will be
released from the facilities, contaminating the
floodwaters and the local environment.
• Relocating the Central Garage out of the floodplain
can help reduce the amount of pollutants in
floodwaters. This type of facility houses hazardous
materials (e.g., gasoline and engine oil) that could
contaminate floodwaters if compromised. In
addition, much of the maintenance equipment
likely has an oily film on it, which would also
pollute the water when the garage floods.
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

• Stabilizing the streambank that runs past the
Firehouse and the Merriewold Lake outlet
channel bank will repair damage to the natural
environment caused by increased stormwater
runoff due to local development.
Furthermore, the facilities identified in this project may
also require renovations to implement the different
portions of this project. These renovations may include
health and safety improvements which could increase
the overall environmental quality within the buildings.

SOCIAL
The project benefits society as a whole in the Town
by ensuring that critical facilities, such as sewer
infrastructure, can continue to operate during and
after a disaster. By implementing these improvements,
the Town is ensuring basic community hygiene and
protecting the health of its residents and visitors.

PUBLIC SUPPORT
At the first Public Engagement Event of this planning
process, held on July 30, 2014, attendees cast their
ballots for projects aligned with each of the six recovery
support functions (RSF). The Infrastructure RSF received
104 (42.3%) out of the 246 votes cast, demonstrating
clear public support for projects that protect critical
infrastructure and services.

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS

two facilities may have an impact on the hydrologic,
hydraulic, and stormwater analyses being conducted
along the Moodna Creek, Satterly Creek, and
Perry Creek.

Project Cost-Benefit Analysis
The benefits of fire department personnel being able
to respond where needed during a flood event, rather
than rededicating time and work to save the equipment
in the firehouse easily outweigh the costs of protecting
the Firehouse. Fire department personnel will be able to
significantly increase the number of lives and property
saved by this measure. The cost of the pump station
mitigation measures is likewise low when compared
to the benefit of an operational sewer system and an
environment free of contamination. The public will
see little impact on their daily lives, as the project is
facility-specific.

IMPLEMENTATION TIME FRAME
This project could be implemented within 1.5 years.

REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
Completion of this project will require Article 15
Protection of Waters approvals from the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYS
DEC), as well as the Town of Blooming Grove or Village
of South Blooming Grove, depending on the individual
project component.

JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction for different components of this project
rests with the Town of Blooming Grove or the Village of
South Blooming Grove.

Relocation of the Central Garage to the Town Highway
Garage property supports implementation of providing
back-up power to critical facilities, as the Town
Highway Garage was identified as a priority location
for installation of a generator. In addition, the Tappan
Waste Water Treatment Plant is flooded by the Satterly
Creek, and the Town of Blooming Grove Central Garage
is flooded by the Moodna Creek. Protecting these
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

96

PROPOSED PROJECTS

• Preventing stormwater back-up into the
Salisbury Mills Fire Department will have
similar environmental benefits as relocating
the Central Garage. The Firehouse also stores
hazardous materials, which could be released into
floodwaters as they recede back to the drains after
flooding the facility.

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

PROPOSED PROJECTS

SUMMARY
Strategic Critical Facility Flood-Proofing And Structural Mitigation Program
• Investment: $1,345,710
• Flood level reduction: 0
• Assets protected: 6
• Repetitive flood properties removed: 0
• Potential future loss prevented: Immediate: 0; Long-term: TBD
• Jobs created: 8.8 Construction; 10.4 Permanent*
• Strategies accomplished: 4
* The FTE construction jobs were estimated based on a methodology developed by the United States Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics
Administration as presented in the September 2013 “Economic Impact of Hurricane Sandy: Potential Economic Activity Lost and Gained in New Jersey and
New York.” This study estimated job creation from recovery spending on infrastructure projects in New York and reported 7.15 construction jobs and 8.4
total jobs per $1,000,000 in construction spending.

97

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Many changes to the drainage patterns have occurred
over the years as private owners altered culverts
and open swales on individual properties, with little
understanding of how these changes can
exacerbate flooding.

Project Background

As a result, the original open trenches
built to divert stormwater runoff to nearby
brooks have significantly reduced capacity
and are often overwhelmed during storms.

Mountain Lodge Park was originally built on the western
slope of Schunemunk Mountain as summer home
residences with natural drainage systems of mostly
grass-lined swales and culverts, incorporated alongside
private gravel roads referred to as “trails” throughout
the development. The community splits into two
distinct sides—the Mountain Lodge Park side and the
Glenwood Hills side.
Occupancy on both sides has changed over the years
from part-time summer vacationers to full-time
residents, most of which receive only low to moderate
income. Approximately 800 homes exist in this area.

Brooks and other streams have also been affected by
the excess runoff in past storms, such as occurred in
Oakwood Trail North, where runoff washed away the
entire culvert structure and severely eroded trenches
(as visualized by the photographs on this page and
the next). During Hurricane Irene in 2011, many of the
roads and trails became impassible and contained large
debris, including trees, which became undermined by
fast-moving water draining through trails and trenches.

Featured here is the location of the proposed Mountain Lodge
drainage improvements and flood damage reduction measures.
Location map courtesy of SCAPE / Landscape Architecture PLLC.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

98

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Mountain Lodge Drainage
Improvements and Flood
Damage Reduction

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Trench and culvert used to divert runoff to a nearby brook at Oakwood
Trail North. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

The trench extends between properties at Oakwood Trail North. Photo
is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

Connection to the Disaster
In 2011, the Mountain Lodge Park community received
significant damage to its infrastructure. Since many of
the roads are gravel and drainage is poorly managed,
roads experienced significant flooding, leading to
washouts and inaccessibility by emergency personnel.
Some of the trails also contained large debris (e.g., rocks
and felled trees), carried in swift-moving streams that
overwhelmed Perry Creek.
Because of the limited ability of the residents to recover
from the storm, many of the losses to the stormwater
infrastructure remain in disrepair and threaten other
areas downstream. Woodcock Mountain Road,
which drains uncontrolled into the mobile home park
downstream and threatens residential dwellings, serves
as a prime example. In addition, several homes in the
Mountain Lodge Park community lie along
99

Trench erosion at Oakwood Trail North. Photo is courtesy of
Tetra Tech, Inc.
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

As a result of these ongoing issues, homes
in this community continue to become
more vulnerable to further destruction.
Description of Project
This project could be implemented in two phases.
The first part would consist of providing a series of
standard plans and detailed drawings for repairing and/
or upgrading existing degraded stormwater ditches.
This portion of the project could be implemented by
the home owners directly or the Mountain Lodge
Park Glenwood Hills Residential Association
(Homeowners Association).

This section of the project also includes a set of standard
plans designed for implementation by individual owners
to replace the historic drainage swales and improve
overland flow conditions. Plans would detail either the
re-establishment of the existing vegetated swales or a
piped alternative, if the current land use does not allow
for an open swale. Additional standard plans would
be made available to address road crossings over the
major drainages within the Mountain Lodge Park and
Glenwood Hills communities, primarily along Perry
Creek and its tributary. The Community would use these
standard plans proactively to improve flow routing and
accessibility during large storm events.
The second portion of the project focuses on outreach
and education to Mountain Lodge Park homeowners
through the Homeowners Association to assist in the
implementation of the plans. Part of the outreach could

Courtesy of SCAPE / Landscape Architecture PLLC.
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

100

PROPOSED PROJECTS

heavily damaged trails that have limited accessibly
to fire trucks.

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

include the creation of a funding pool to implement a
revolving loan, grant, or cost-share program to assist the
low-income residents of Mountain Lodge Park with the
costs of improvements. This funding pool, however, is
a future expansion that would be outside the scope of
NYRCR-funded Proposed Project.
The benefits of this project encompass facilitating
emergency vehicle and personnel access through
the neighborhood and protecting the viability of the
affordable housing in this community.

Cost Estimate
The total project cost estimates at $300,000. Of
this amount, $250,000 would be dedicated to the
development of standard plans for homeowner
drainage improvements and private road crossings,
and $50,000 would be dedicated to providing outreach
to homeowners and contractors necessary to help
implement the standard details. Separate funding
sources would need to be acquired for individual grant
or low-cost grants; these grants could serve as a funding
source for qualifying property owners.

Project Benefits
FLOOD PROTECTION AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE

The project helps to prevent loss of life
by creating a safer system of roadway
access for emergency personnel and
residents during evacuation, assuming the
implementation and ongoing maintenance
of the drainage system improvements.
The project would also help maintain emergency
access of the Mountain Lodge Firehouse, located in
the community.

ANTICIPATED REDUCTION OF RISK
A visual inspection of the area shows a need for
additional drainage swales to capture flows and direct
them safely around private property. Widespread re101

establishment of drainage swales on the uphill side of
properties could significantly reduce localized flooding
problems. Establishment of more robust stream
crossings would also reduce the likelihood of culverts
experiencing total failure and would have a significant
impact on maintaining access to homeowners over the
main drainage channels within the community.
The implementation of this project would reduce the risk
of damage to homes occupied by the community’s low
and moderate income residents. The implementation
of the project would provide access to the residents in
case of emergency, protect utility services, and allow
more time for residents to evacuate during significant
storm events.

ECONOMIC
The protection and preservation of the Mountain Lodge
housing fills an essential need for the low and moderate
income residents in this community. Low to moderate
income families include a variety of householders,
ranging from young families with children to single,
educated adults starting their first jobs or single adults
who want to live close to established parents to retirees
on fixed incomes. If these homes are lost, lower and
moderate income residents have few options if they
want to continue to live in the Town of Blooming Grove
and surrounding areas. Affordable housing has been
identified as a priority need in Orange County, especially
in southern Orange County in the Towns of Blooming
Grove, Monroe, Goshen, Woodbury, and Chester.

Preservation of affordable housing
benefits the local economy, because it
ensures nearby housing for those who
are more likely to be employed in the
growing service or retail sectors, such as
Woodbury Commons.
Without affordable housing, costs to work in Orange
County at an entry-level position become more
expensive and can lead to slower economic growth.
Projects that increase the resiliency of these homes
benefit not just the residents, but also local businesses
and the broader community by helping residents thrive.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS

The implementation of this project will help reduce
erosion of roads and trails, protecting the tree cover and
reducing materials that eventually are deposited into
streams and creeks. This reduction of soil, rocks, and
debris helps to protect water quality and wildlife habitat
in the stream and forests surrounding Mountain Lodge
homes. It also helps to preserve the capacity of the
existing floodplain.

Although the buildings in converted summer housing
communities tend to be small and the homes of low
to moderate income residents are often disregarded,
Mountain Lodge Park provides a significant link with the
development history for most of the communities in
the Plan Area. It also serves as an important source for
understanding the history of the development in Orange
County, as well as the residents that came from New
York City to summer in the Hudson Valley.

SOCIAL
The Homeowners Association may play a significant role
in the homeowner outreach and education component
of this project. Regular Homeowners Association
meetings may be used to provide homeowners with
increased access to resources, and encourage overall
involvement in actions to reduce flood-damage
vulnerability on a community-wide scale.

Likewise, this project would protect
two communities with a strong sense
of community identity and history.
PUBLIC SUPPORT
As part of the public engagement process, the
general public was provided with the opportunity to
“spend” virtual money on projects they felt were the
most important.
Overwhelmingly, the public supports the improvement
in Infrastructure, which is addressed by this project. In
addition, the project addresses Community Capacity
Building (the second strongest category) and Housing
(the third strongest category).
Although no official source has documented the
historical status of these homes, the project helps
to protect the cultural resources associated with
the history of the development of this community.
Additionally, 11 percent of the vote supported
Vulnerable Populations, which includes the low
and moderate income homes predominating in
this area. Finally, the project is supported by the
Homeowners Association, one of the primary
beneficiaries of this project.
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

The Mountain Lodge Park community is one of the few
that can provide historical information on the shift of
Orange County from a mostly agrarian community to a
suburb of New York City.
Furthermore, this project would address all five of the
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan’s resiliency strategies:
• Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding
on the built environment, including critical
facilities, infrastructure, businesses, and housing.
Although the project is not located directly on
Perry Creek, controlling the stormwater runoff
from the mountainside helps to preserve and
protect downstream properties, roads, and critical
facilities by reducing uncontrolled flows into the
receiving tributary of Perry Creek.
• Strategy 2: Improve stormwater management and
drainage systems throughout Town to decrease
risk for homes, businesses, and residents.
Since the project is related to restoration and
improvement of stormwater runoff, this project
directly relates to the fulfillment of this strategy.
• Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities
for emergency preparedness, response,
sheltering, and communication. Once
implemented, the project would improve
emergency access to homes in the community,
some of which are currently inaccessible.
• Strategy 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance
the Town’s natural, recreational, and cultural
resources, and restore natural floodplain
capabilities. The project would help to control
stormwater erosion from sheet flows entering
102

PROPOSED PROJECTS

ENVIRONMENTAL

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

unpaved trails and roads, thereby addressing water
quality created by debris and soil-related runoff
into Perry Creek.
• Strategy 5: Assist town residents, officials, and
business owners, in becoming better protected
from future flood damages through education,
programming, outreach, and policy initiatives.
The project will preserve a neighborhood of
800 homes that serves moderate and low
income households.

Project Cost-Benefit Analysis

the residents to directly protect their community.

IMPLEMENTATION TIME FRAME
This project can be carried out within one year.

REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
Completion of this project will require Article 15
approvals from NYS DEC and approvals from the
Town of Blooming Grove.

JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction for this project rests with the
Town of Blooming Grove.

This project, like others identified by the Committee,
ensures emergency access to the Town’s residents.
These benefits cannot be quantified, as they hold a
priceless value to the individuals requiring emergency
response. This project’s costs rank especially low
compared to other projects that protect emergency
access routes, as this project focuses on empowering

Pictured here is a newly installed culvert. The previous culvert and road
fill was washed away during a storm. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

SUMMARY
Mountain Lodge Drainage Improvements and Flood Damage Reduction
• Investment: $300,000
• Flood level reduction: N/A
• Assets protected: 3
• Repetitive flood properties removed: N/A
• Potential future loss prevented: Prevention of loss of access roads and trails to individual properties;
protection of individual homes.
• Jobs created: N/A
• Strategies accomplished: 5

103

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Project Background
The Town of Blooming Grove currently has an
enforceable zoning code that includes some protection
for its 100-year floodplain, streams, wetlands, and other
water surfaces and resources that help to control and
absorb the water during flooding events. Despite this,
the Committee identified the need to further refine the
zoning code to better protect flood resiliency resources
and ensure that new development is built in areas
safe from flooding, as well as begin to address existing
homes vulnerable to flooding.

Connection to the Disaster
Flooding and stormwater flows from Hurricane Irene
and Tropical Storm Lee severely damaged residential

and commercial areas in 2011. These areas included
housing that serves the needs of Vulnerable Populations
in the Plan Area and businesses that play a vital role in
the economic recovery of the Town.
Zoning codes have ongoing impacts to the Town. These
impacts have the potential to be profound, depending
on the size of the proposed development and the level
of practical application necessary.

These locally adopted regulations also
have far-reaching effects on the
Community, because changes to the
built environment are considered to be
permanent investments.
When the subdivision on Barnes Road was built in
the 1980s, the Town could not anticipate the impact of
stronger and more frequent storm events. Additionally, the
Town did not closely examine the cumulative impact of all
of the development along the Moodna Basin because no
perceived need to do so had been identified.

Source: Tetra Tech, Inc.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

104

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Update Local Codes
and Ordinances

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

only as new information becomes available. Therefore,
they often only partially address the need for protection
of the natural environment as an asset used in the
protection of property and life. This gap creates the
need for this proposed project, i.e., to ensure that
future building in the Town of Blooming Grove leads to
safe housing for Vulnerable Populations and compels
building owners and developers to incorporate flood
mitigation practices to housing in floodprone areas.

Description of Project

Shown here is the cover page of the latest [Town of Blooming Grove
Comprehensive Plan], completed in 2005. Courtesy of the Town of
Blooming Grove.

Development often strips natural resources that provide
protection from storms, such as tree cover, reducing
capacity in acceptable limits, as defined by the codes
and regulations enforceable at the time of the approvals
and during the subsequent construction of the homes.

All projects, regardless of their date of
construction, reflect the best knowledge
and practices available at the time to
protect people, property, and infrastructure.
The original drainage infrastructure for the Barnes
Road homes matched the construction and design
requirements of the time, and construction of the
homes proceeded in accordance with that knowledge.
In recent years, however, science has recognized
the importance of floodplain and channel capacity
preservation. New construction standards allow these
natural features to exist with as little modification as
possible, instead of allowing development in areas
where repetitive flooding events could be likely.
The implementation of this broader vision coincides
with the protection of water quality, lives, and property.
Locally adopted zoning codes often change slowly and
105

This project would include a comprehensive review of
current Plan Area zoning and subdivision regulations.
This review would identify where the regulations could
be improved to enhance the community’s resiliency to
future storm events. Potential updates would include
the following:
• Enhance the current water surface protection
(i.e., Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance) to
reflect standards recommended by the Moodna
Creek Study and to provide a system of evaluating
current structures in the 100-year floodway. The
Town could utilize the evaluation system if they
receive a request for expansion of a building’s
footprint or a building becomes damaged in future
flooding events and requires rehabilitation.
• Review the existing zoning map to ensure that
higher density zoning opportunities are located
in areas well outside floodway and floodplain.
The Committee hopes to create opportunities for
new business to take advantage of planned and
potential recreational pathways and to create
affordable housing in desirable mixed-use areas.
• Review the list of uses permitted in zoning districts
to determine their appropriateness in all zones,
especially when planned adjacent to flood-prone
areas or when construction may adversely affect
the water quality during a significant storm event.
• Further refine the Rural Cross Roads Development
districts (RC-1 and RC-2) to attract redevelopment
of these centers to fulfill the original concepts
expressed by the code and to ensure that zoning
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

• Review and create a limit of impervious surfaces
for each zoning district. The code currently
regulates building sizes; however, the code does
not address the impacts from other permanent
structures that can have detrimental impacts on
individual site stormwater absorption.
• Encourage the use of green infrastructure
on individual lots and develop a method to
ensure maintenance.
• Consider the use of a “form-based” zoning
code. Form-based zoning codes require the
development of a conservation plan prior
to the proposed layout. These plans identify
significant natural features of the site that often
align with the protection of the site’s ability to
absorb floodwaters and stormwater runoff. The
residential district (RR, as written in the current
code) requires some of these elements at this
date; however, it excludes significant tree cover
from evaluation. This evaluation should occur in
all zoning districts, especially in locations with
planned housing development. This approach has
two main benefits: (1) protection of floodways and
the natural environment; and (2) retention of the
natural beauty of the area, which enhances the
quality of life within the Community.
• Consider adopting an ordinance to protect and
transfer development rights from farmland to
areas that can accommodate more density.
• Consider adopting protection of larger trees
and forested areas, especially when located on
sloped areas or when providing protection along
streambanks.
• Adopt or update the recreation plan to better
utilize floodplain areas, and create a schedule
of required recreation fees. Recreation fees
can be used to purchase land and enhance the
recreational use of areas within a floodplain.
• Ensure the Town Code has sufficient flexibility to
address and protect all future FEMA-designated
floodplains and those significant environmental
features designated by other state agencies
(e.g., streams rated “C” and above), with special
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

PROPOSED PROJECTS

areas are appropriately identified.

attention to those streams and water resources
important to the ecology and water quality
of the region.

Cost Estimate
The total estimated project cost is $80,000. This
cost includes the update of zoning and subdivision
regulations and allows for the services of an
experienced certified planner and review by the
Town’s civil engineer and Town attorney.
It is anticipated that the project would require review
of the existing Town of Blooming Grove Comprehensive
Plan, revisions to the zoning code and subdivision
regulations, and preparation of a Generic Environmental
Impact Statement (GEIS) in accordance with current
State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
An environmental impact statement examines the
impacts of full build-out of the zoning code, i.e., if all
property were to be developed under the new code,
and compares this impact with existing codes. The
cost estimate does not include those changes to the
comprehensive plan that are required to implement
zoning changes.
In addition, the State of New York requires that
Towns adopt a recreation plan to justify and collect
any recreation fees. The creation of a recreation plan
would allow the Town to develop a broader vision of
its recreational opportunities and needs. If a recreation
plan has already been adopted, the plan should be
modified to include recreation fees. The cost to create
or modify a recreational plan was not considered as
part of the total estimated project; however, this
aspect would cost an estimate of $40,000 if made a
project add-on. The development of a recreational plan
could require up to two years for full completion, and
it would also require consideration under SEQRA, most
likely with a GEIS.
It is understood that the Town of Blooming Grove has
the ability to draw on consultant and internal resources
for the management of this project.

106

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Project Benefits
Development of ordinance improvements has several
long-range and permanent impacts that would be
realized over time and as development proposals
would be implemented. The following sections explain
these impacts in more detail. Most notably, policy
changes lead to better communities in the long run,
and communities often view these changes as part of a
broader vision to enhance, protect, and create value.

FLOOD PROTECTION AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Changing the zoning to protect natural resources and
removing development from flood-prone areas will
benefit the entire Plan Area by preserving its natural
beauty and protective functionality.
These changes would eventually decrease the number
of residents in unsafe and flood-prone locations,
reducing the need for emergency sheltering/rescue and
adding to the overall quality of life for residents with of
mixed-use centers that encourage community building.

ANTICIPATED REDUCTION OF RISK
The exact reduction of risk is unknown, since this project
relates to a change in policy that would be realized over
several years and as projects are implemented. Risks,
however, would be reduced in the following areas:
• Remove future residential and business
development from flood-prone areas and protect
property investment;
• Stabilize and enhance the tax base in the Plan Area
as businesses grow uninterrupted by significant
storm events;
• Reduce the impacts of development on water
quality and other ecological systems in Town;
• Reduce the impact of loss of character and open
space;
• Decrease the potential for stormwater runoff from
developed properties;
• Encourage housing development in areas where
higher density is feasible, and reduce the need for
107

evacuation and sheltering;
• Protect business investments from flooding, and
reduce lost business income and productivity;
• Address short-term and long-term risks related to
development of the Community’s resources;
• Reduce the need for flood insurance in the
Community; and
• Reduce the need for emergency rescue during
storm events.

ECONOMIC

Mixed-use centers established in areas that
can receive more density typically spur
economic development through synergies
between affordable housing and small
business start-ups.
These mixed-use centers are designed to complement
one another and facilitate a sense of identity in the
Community. Furthermore, when flooding does not
threaten development, the Community realizes
a significant cost-savings benefit, and so do local
residents, the government, and emergency service
providers. This increases the Community’s overall
resiliency and helps it to recover faster from flooding or
other hazard events. It also allows for opportunities to
develop shared public services (i.e., water, sewer, and
transportation) at a reasonable cost to the development
community, which passes along to the consumer.
A safe development environment also provides a link
to stability in terms of property values and continued
opportunities for investment. In addition, by identifying
appropriate new businesses areas that enhance and
protect the investor, the community provides potential
permanent access to goods and services in more easily
accessible locations. Vulnerable residents may need to
rely on easy access to goods and services that are within
walking distance of their homes, particularly residents
without consistent access to transportation, whether for
physical or financial causes.
The Town could place community economic centers
with a mixed-use element near locations that have
future potential for alternative transportation benefits,
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

in the floodplain benefit the entire Plan Area.
Zoning changes that protect residents from flooding
further reduces the demand for emergency
sheltering and rescue.

Newer trends in development suggest that people want
to live near protected open spaces, even at the expense
of personally maintained space.

Further, this project would address three of the Town of
Blooming Grove NYRCR project’s resiliency strategies:

When developers respond to the demand
for protected open space, practical and costsaving benefits to the Town emerge in terms
of dedicated infrastructure maintenance.
ENVIRONMENTAL
The maintenance of wetlands, streams, floodways,
floodplains, and trees would protect flora and fauna
from further degradation and would maintain
water quality and ecological diversity in the Town
of Blooming Grove.

SOCIAL
Providing protective measures to maintain open spaces
and places related to the natural forests also enhances
the quality of life enjoyed by residents. The project
would also benefit Vulnerable Populations by identifying
buildable housing sites that are outside of floodplain
areas and close to jobs, goods, and services.

Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding
on the built environment, including critical facilities,
infrastructure, businesses, and housing. The project
would advance the protection of the natural system’s
ability to receive and absorb floodwaters and would
place new critical facilities in areas that do not flood.
Strategy 2: Improve stormwater management and
drainage systems throughout Town to decrease risk for
homes, businesses, and residents. This project directly
relates to the fulfillment of this strategy.
Strategy 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance the
Town’s natural, recreational, and cultural resources,
and restore natural floodplain capabilities. The project
would create a policy that would protect natural
floodplain capabilities and would encourage the
removal of buildings and structures to areas outside
the natural floodplain.

PUBLIC SUPPORT

Project Cost-Benefit Analysis

At the first Public Engagement Event, held on July 30,
2014, attendees cast their ballots for projects aligned
with each of the six RSFs. The Community Planning
and Capacity Building RSF, that area which most closely
aligns with this project, received 46 votes (18.7%).
Only the Infrastructure RSF received more votes (104
votes, or 42.3%).

For an $80,000 investment, the Town would be able
to better ensure that its regulations protect millions of
dollars in structures and property throughout the Town,
not just in the floodplain. The financial benefits far
exceed the financial costs of this project.

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS
In addition to the benefits described above, this project
stands to positively impact community health and
wellness. The protection of natural resources that
absorb floodways and the prevention of development

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

IMPLEMENTATION TIME FRAME
The project’s implementation period would be
approximately two to three years, and it would have
long-term benefits. Long-term benefits would only
become noticeable as new projects come before the
Building Department, Planning Board, and Zoning

108

PROPOSED PROJECTS

such as an extension of the Heritage Trail into Blooming
Grove. This would increase the potential of the
Community to attract tourists and in turn, increase
business opportunities within the Town.

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Boards for review, are subsequently approved, and are
then built.
The impact of policy changes intertwines with the
pace of proposed development in the Community, and
although the useful life of policy changes is considered
ongoing, exact timing cannot be predicted.

JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction for this project rests with the Town of
Blooming Grove and the Village of South Blooming
Grove. Some codes and ordinances may also have
regional or State jurisdiction; the Town of Blooming
Grove and Village of South Blooming Grove will comply
with any Federal or State requirements.

REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
The Plan Area, i.e., both the Town of Blooming Grove
and the Village of South Blooming Grove will follow
their respective existing procedures for approving
modifications to local codes and ordinances.

SUMMARY
Update Local Codes And Ordinances
• Investment: $80,000
• Flood level reduction: N/A
• Assets protected: All existing and future development
• Repetitive flood properties removed: 0
• Potential future loss prevented: Immediate: 0; Long-term: TBD
• Jobs created: N/A
• Strategies accomplished: 3

109

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Project Background
Critical facilities and infrastructure in the Town of
Blooming Grove provide vital services to residents on
a day-to-day basis; however, they also serve as crucial
components of emergency preparedness, response,
and hazard mitigation.
During Superstorm Sandy, high winds downed trees
and power lines, causing widespread power outages in
the Plan Area, including at critical infrastructure.
Similar power outages have occurred numerous
times in the Town’s history, including from seasonal
thunderstorms and not just severe storms, i.e., storms
similar to Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and
Superstorm Sandy.

Description of Project
This project aims to obtain and install permanent backup power sources for critical facilities and infrastructure
in the Town not addressed in other proposed projects.
This project would include an evaluation of existing
critical facilities’ needs for redundant power generation.
The Community will consider use of solar or green
energy, where feasible.

South Blooming Grove Village Hall currently does not have back-up
power. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Priority locations include the following:
• South Blooming Grove Village Hall; and
• Town Highway Garage at 2741 State Route 94
(also the proposed site for relocation of the new/
relocated Town of Blooming Grove Central Garage.
If the Central Garage relocates, the proposed
back-up power source will benefit multiple
critical facilities).

Cost Estimate
The estimated project cost for the project, which
includes installation of the generators and the electrical
work to connect them to the facilities, is $83,320.

Project Benefits
The following summarizes the anticipated benefits of
the project based upon the historic losses.

FLOOD PROTECTION AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
This project will have substantial benefits to the Town.
Coordination of the Plan Area’s responders requires that
the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) be operational
throughout the preparedness, response, and recovery
phases of a hazard event. Also, public works activities,
such as debris removal and closing unsafe roadways,
must continue during and after a storm. This project
will help prevent injuries and deaths among the Town’s
population by ensuring that these critical services can
be performed.

This entrance and driveway of the Town Highway Garage at 2741
State Route 94, is recommended as a location for installing back-up
emergency power. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.
110

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Install Natural Gas
or Solar Back-up Power
for Critical Facilities
and Infrastructure

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

This map depicts the locations of proposed back-up power. SCAPE /
Landscape Architecture PLLC.

ANTICIPATED REDUCTION OF RISK
This project reduces risk to residents and visitors by
ensuring that critical infrastructure can continue to
operate during and after a disaster. It also reduces the
risk of additional damage or increased maintenance
to systems and facilities as a result of a prolonged
power outage.

ECONOMIC
This project focuses on strengthening local
infrastructure to make the Town more resilient to
future disasters. Investing in back-up power generation
capabilities at critical facilities demonstrates a
commitment to the future of the Town, its residents,
and its work force. This investment creates greater
confidence for private investors.
In addition, the physical installation of permanent
generators at critical facilities will require service
providers to perform the work. These service providers
may consist of local companies. The service providers’
increased revenue will result in increased wages
paid to local employees. Employees will then spend
111

the money from these wages on local goods and
services, potentially creating additional jobs, increasing
expendable income, and increasing taxes.
Using natural gas or solar power as fuel for the
generators also has economic benefits. Natural gas
is generally cheaper than gasoline or diesel fuel, and
sunlight is free. Over time, the operation of natural
gas or solar power generators will ultimately save the
Community more money than the operation of gasoline
or diesel generators.
This work will create approximately 0.6 full-time
equivalent (FTE) construction and 0.7 FTE support jobs
from labor, materials, equipment, and other supply and
support industries.

ENVIRONMENTAL
The environmental benefit of this project relates to the
type of fuel used by the generators. Gasoline, diesel
fuel, natural gas, and solar power can all fuel a back-up
power generator. Natural gas generators, as opposed
to gasoline or diesel fuel generators, result in a cleaner
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

In addition, the critical facilities in need of the
generators may require renovations for installation
and operation of the generator. These renovations may
increase the environmental quality in the building due
to requisite health and safety improvements made
during the renovation.

SOCIAL
Residents often use public buildings to hold social
events; the South Blooming Grove Village Hall could
serve a similar function for the local community.
Ensuring that the Village Hall has back-up power would
allow these events to continue if there is a power
outage for any reason.

PUBLIC SUPPORT
At the first Public Engagement Event of this NYRCR
planning process, held on July 30, 2014, attendees cast
their ballots for projects aligned with each of the six
RSFs. The Infrastructure RSF received 104 (42.3%) votes,
out of the 246 votes cast. The next highest vote tally
was the Community Planning and Capacity Building RSF,
which received 46 votes (18.7%). This demonstrates that
the public clearly favors infrastructure projects such as
this one, i.e., ensuring that critical infrastructure can
operate during power outages.

PROPOSED PROJECTS

burn of the fuel and lower emissions. Using solar arrays
for back-up power at critical facilities and infrastructure
eliminates the need for hydrocarbon-based fuel
all together and results in zero emissions to power
the generator.

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS
• Supports Implementation of Other NYRCR
Projects: Guaranteed continued operation of
the EOC in the Village of South Blooming Grove
and the Town’s Highway Garage also increases
the success threshold for the Vulnerable
Populations and Community Alert, Warning,
and Support project.

Project Cost-Benefit Analysis
This project’s goals, i.e., ensuring uninterrupted Town
Highway Department emergency operations services
and the effective coordination of all emergency
operations in the Village of South Blooming Grove, carry
the same benefit to the protection of human life and
property as other projects that focus on maintaining
access for emergency responders.
The value of the lives and property protected by
emergency responders outweigh the financial costs of
the project. The Town of Blooming Grove and the Village
of South Blooming Grove will also realize economic
benefit that exceeds the financial cost of the project
when they need to use their generators, because the
two municipalities will save the cost of an emergency
fuel delivery by being connected in advance to the
natural gas supply lines.

IMPLEMENTATION TIME FRAME
This project can be implemented within six months.

REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
Generator hook-ups will need to meet electrical and
all other applicable codes.

JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction for this project rests with the Town of
Blooming Grove and Village of South Blooming Grove.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

112

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

PROPOSED PROJECTS

SUMMARY
Install Natural Gas or Solar Back-up Power
for Critical Facilities and Infrastructure
• Investment: $83,320
• Flood level reduction: 0
• Assets protected: 2
• Repetitive flood properties removed: 0
• Potential future loss prevented: Immediate: 0; Long-term: TBD (the number of injuries prevented
by coordinating operations, clearing debris, and closing unsafe roadways will depend on the nature
of future storms)
• Jobs created: Construction: 0.6; Permanent: 0.7*
• Strategies accomplished: 1
* T he FTE construction jobs were estimated based on a methodology developed by the United States Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics
Administration as presented in the September 2013 “Economic Impact of Hurricane Sandy: Potential Economic Activity Lost and Gained in New Jersey
and New York.” This study estimated job creation from recovery spending on infrastructure projects in New York and reported 7.15 construction jobs and
8.4 total jobs per $1,000,000 in construction spending.

113

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Project Background
The Citizen Corps National Survey (2009) indicates that
29% of Americans have not prepared for a disaster,
because they think that emergency responders will
assist them if needed. Results also indicate that over
60% expect to rely on emergency responders in the
first 72 hours following a disaster. While local, state,
and Federal government agencies will execute their
emergency response functions, communications to the
public need to convey a more realistic understanding
of the emergency response capacity and capability and
need to emphasize the importance of an individual
citizen’s self-reliance. Inaccessibility during storm events
offers a valid threat to the NYRCR Plan Area.

The Town of Blooming Grove and the
Village of South Blooming Grove only have
two main roads. These roads have certain
limitations that will impact the ability of
emergency vehicles to travel, especially if
damage occurs to the roadways.
Under these circumstances, an individual’s protective
measures and stored resources (e.g., moving to higher
ground, boarding up windows, stored food and water,
a household emergency plan, staying informed on
emerging situations) can reduce the risk of damage
and injury.

Connection to the Disaster
During periods of disaster, people may end up isolated
from external assistance. They may also have limited
or no access to normal community and societal
resources and functions for several days. In the Town of
Blooming Grove, several communities have experienced
such isolation, including Mountain Lodge Park, and
Merriewold Lake. During the past disasters of Hurricane
Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy, each
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

of these communities has presented access challenges
for emergency responders. In the case of Mountain
Lodge Park, poor drainage and steep grades led to
washed out roads. In Merriewold Lake, flooding resulted
in access bridges becoming structurally unsound,
barring response vehicles from entering.

Description of Project

This community preparedness and
outreach program would implement
and disseminate increased emergency
awareness and drive action to better
prepare the NYRCR Plan Area for all-hazards
emergencies and disasters.
The program would strengthen whole community
partnerships around emergency preparedness by
utilizing various approaches to engage the public and
private sectors, families and individuals, those with
functional needs and Vulnerable Populations, and low
to moderate income populations who do not have
reliable access to the Internet. This program reinforces
and supports existing preparedness outreach efforts by
Federal, State, and county government agencies; private
sector businesses; non-profits; and community/faithbased organizations.
The Committee identified the following specific
pieces of information as priorities for information
dissemination:
• Be Informed: Citizens should learn what protective
measure to take before, during, and after an
emergency.
• Blooming Grove Emergency Alert Program: Public
safety officials use reliable systems to alert the
public and local facilities in the event of natural
or human-caused disasters (via reverse 911,
social media, NY-Alert, New York 211, etc.). The
dissemination of timely and accurate information
during a disaster particularly benefits communities
with access limitations. The Town should
disseminate public information through several
methods and not solely rely on modes dependent
114

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Vulnerable Populations and
Community Emergency Alert,
Warning, and Support

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

on electricity (e.g., social media, text messages,
and TV announcements).
• Public Safety and Preparedness Information:
The Town could publish and make easily accessible
materials to ensure the preparedness and safety
of Blooming Grove citizens. Specific populations
targeted by the materials include:
• General Public
• Pet Owners
• Seniors
• Children
• People with Access and Functional Needs (PAFN)
• Local Community and Other Plans: The
Committee considers it important for the public to
be well informed on their community’s plans. The
Community will make the following information
readily available to all citizens:
• What hazards are most likely in the Town
of Blooming Grove and the Village of South
Blooming Grove?
• How will citizens get alerts and warnings?
• W
 hat advice and/or plans does the Town have
for sheltering and evacuation during hazard
incidents that may impact Blooming Grove?
• What are the emergency contact numbers
citizens should have for different situations?

• Make an Emergency Plan: Disasters can strike at
any point. Information should be readily available
to the public to help them prepare an emergency
plan for their home, vehicle, and workplace.
• Build an Emergency Kit: A disaster supplies kit
consists of a collection of basic items a household
may need to be self-reliant for the first 72 hours
post-disaster. A recommended supplies list should
be available to the citizens of Blooming Grove.
• Develop a Business Continuity Plan: Like
individuals, every business should have a plan
to prepare for, respond to, and recover from a
disaster. Information on and/or a template for a
business continuity plan should be made readily
available to businesses operating within
Blooming Grove.
• Get Involved: The formula to ensure a safer and
more prepared Plan Area consists of volunteers,
a trained and informed public, and increased
support of emergency response agencies during
disasters. The Town could develop and share
information on how members of the public can get
involved before a disaster. Some organizations for
involvement include Citizen Corps, the American
Red Cross, and Voluntary Organizations Active in
Disaster (VOAD).

• W
 hat opportunities are there in Blooming Grove
for preparedness education and training?
• Be Prepared: Being prepared for a disaster or
emergency involves educating oneself, making a
plan to act, and testing that plan.

Digital Emergency Alert via mobile device.
Image is courtesy of NWS.org.

115

Image is courtesy of courtesy of FEMA.gov.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The Village of Washingtonville identified a similar
project during its NYRCR planning process. The Town of
Blooming Grove and Village of South Blooming Grove
could coordinate implementation of this project with
the Village of Washingtonville.

Cost Estimate
The total project cost is estimated at $15,000, which
includes the development, print and dissemination
of all public outreach material; outreach efforts to
register residents for Blooming Grove’s emergency
communication system; and the development of a
website/social media site (e.g., Facebook) to store
outreach material electronically and to post safe,
reliable, and rapid emergency communications. Please
note that administrative costs are not included in the
project cost estimates.

Project Benefits
FLOOD PROTECTION AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Emergency services rely heavily on prepared citizens
to conduct essential services for those most in need.
During emergency situations, this need increases
substantially. This project focuses on encouraging civic
responsibility and promoting more self-reliant residents
during times of disaster. This not only protects individual
households, it strengthens the entire Community.
Having citizens and businesses fully prepared and
self-sufficient for 72 hours post-disaster will increase
the overall public safety and emergency response
capabilities in the Town of Blooming Grove.

ANTICIPATED REDUCTION OF RISK
This project takes an all-hazards approach to preparing
the citizens and businesses of Blooming Grove to be
more self-reliant during times of disaster. This project
reduces risk in the following areas:

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

• Personal preparedness for disasters can
significantly mitigate or reduce the impact a
disaster can have on one’s household and
overall community.
• Being prepared can reduce the feelings of fear,
anxiety, and loss that often accompany disasters.
• Individual citizens’ level of preparedness plays a
critical role in supporting disaster response efforts.
Evidence from past disasters suggests friends and
family members, themselves victims of disaster,
provide the most vital rescue work, including the
immediate provision of first aid, transportation
of causalities to hospitals for treatment, and the
provision of food and shelter.
• According to the Insurance Information Institute,
15-40%of businesses fail following a natural or
human-caused disaster. In addition, FEMA states
that 40% of businesses struck by a disaster never
reopen, and of those that do reopen, 25% close
again within two years. Research has shown
that businesses with a continuity plan in place
can drastically reduce a disaster’s impact and
return to normal work operations faster than
those companies who do not invest in effective
preparedness planning.

ECONOMIC
While there are few anticipated direct economic
benefits (i.e., permanent jobs secured or added;
potential increase in economic activity) as a result of
this proposed project, it does offer great potential in
decreasing the impact on already taxed emergency
services budgets by lessening the number of responses
necessary before, during, and after a disaster.
In addition, encouraging the development and
implementation of business continuity plans for those
businesses operating in the Plan Area promotes a
quicker return to normal business operations and
stimulates the economy. Past disasters have proven that
companies which proactively plan for disasters are the
first to return to business.

116

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Regional Coordination

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

ENVIRONMENTAL

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS

Although no environmental assets were identified
as being completely secured, this project does offer
environmental benefits. Community preparedness and
outreach can highlight environmental stewardship by
demonstrating the impact of human activity on the
environment. As a result, increased pro-social behavior,
both at the household and community level, may occur.
In the past, citizen education has also influenced policy
controls on hazardous materials, safe and renewable
energy, recycling, and water conservation.

In addition to the benefits described above, completion
of this project supports two of the Town of Blooming
Grove NYRCR Plan resiliency strategies, including:

SOCIAL
As stated above, this project focuses on encouraging
civic responsibility and making residents more selfreliant during times of disaster, not only to protect one’s
household but the entire community in which one lives.

PUBLIC SUPPORT
At the first Public Engagement Event of this NYRCR
planning process, held on July 30, 2014, attendees
cast their ballots for projects aligned with each of the
six RSFs. Blooming Grove residents who participated
in a NYRCR Public Engagement Event, survey, or other
outreach opportunity indicated that Community
Planning and Capacity Building was the second
highest priority RSF for investment and resiliency
project opportunities.
Additionally, although this project is most specifically
related to the RSF of Community Planning and Capacity
Building, it can have indirect benefits to the other
RSFs, particularly Housing (ranking third on public
concerns), Vulnerable Populations (ranking fourth on
public concerns), and Health and Human Services,
by encouraging citizen and business preparedness and
self-reliance.

117

• Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for
emergency preparedness, response, sheltering,
and communication.
• Strategy 5: Assist town residents, officials, and
business owners, in becoming better protected
from future flood damages through education,
programming, outreach, and policy initiatives.

Project Cost-Benefit Analysis
By implementing a system to warn residents of
impending danger, the Town and Village ensure that
residents have enough time to protect their property
and evacuate from hazard areas, whether on their own
or with assistance from the government. Fewer at-risk
residents yield less loss of life or injury in the Plan Area
and less risk to emergency responders on duty during
a disaster. The financial cost of the project is very
low compared to the reduced risk to residents
and responders.

IMPLEMENTATION TIME FRAME
Initial outreach would be conducted in the first year
of the project, with regular outreach conducted on an
ongoing basis.

REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
This project contains no regulatory requirements.

JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction for this project rests with the Town of
Blooming Grove, the Village of South Blooming Grove,
and the Village of Washingtonville.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

PROPOSED PROJECTS

SUMMARY
Vulnerable Populations and Community Emergency
Alert, Warning, and Support
• Investment: $15,000
• Flood level reduction: Immediate: 0; Long-term: TBD
• Assets protected: Immediate: 0; Long-term: Potential benefit to all assets (economic, health and social
services, housing, infrastructure systems, and natural and cultural resources)
• Repetitive flood properties removed: Immediate: 0; Long-term: TBD (however, educational awareness and
outreach will be provided to all property owners in areas with repetitive flood loss damage)
• Potential future loss prevented: Immediate: 0; Long-term: TBD
• Jobs created: N/A
• Strategies accomplished: 2

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

118

PROPOSEDPROPOSED
PROJECTS PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Detailed Inspection
Program and Investment
Prioritization Protocol
Project Background
Transportation corridors are typically a major victim of
flooding events. Numerous roadways in and around
the Town of Blooming Grove have been impacted by
the floodwaters from local creeks and tributaries. The
damage includes the potential for complete roadway
collapse, culvert failure, road washouts, and more,
creating systemic issues that not only threaten the
regional transportation system but also the health and
safety of the motorists who need to use the roadways.

Connection to the Disaster
The Committee, with help from Town officials and
past damage reports, has identified multiple roadway
segments which would be evaluated for improvement
through the Detailed Inspection Program and
Investment Prioritization Protocol. Priority locations for
improvements include those that most heavily relied
upon by first responders and other emergency services
personnel, along with roads that currently threaten the
health and safety of motorists in their existing condition.

For instance, the Y intersection of State
Route 208 and Clove Road in the Village
of South Blooming Grove is a dangerous
intersection and one that gets routinely
flooded during severe storms. When
floodwaters overtop this intersection,
emergency response access along the
State Route 208 corridor is inhibited.
Representatives from the Town of Blooming Grove
Planning Board and the Village of South Blooming Grove
Mayor’s office reported that improvements at this Y
intersection will allow full access to emergency vehicles
to residents in the Village of South Blooming Grove on
both State Route 208 and Clove Road. Plans to improve
the entire intersection were designed and approved at
both the State and County levels; however, they were
never fully implemented. While this section of State
Route 208, just south of the gas station at Clove Road,
was repaved within the last decade, a proposed traffic
signal remains to be installed and flood problems persist.
The Committee identified another priority location for
investment as one of the three crossroads in the Town
that connect State Route 208 and State Route 94–Round
Hill Road, Horton Road, and Hudson Road. All three
roads became impassable during Hurricane Irene due to
floodwaters overtopping box culverts and bridges. This
overtopping prohibited emergency responders from
travelling freely between the two main corridors and
population centers in Town.
To improve future emergency operations during flood
events, one or more of these roads must receive
the improvements necessary to guarantee passage
during extreme conditions. This will allow emergency
responders safe passage through the Town of Blooming
Grove and the Village of South Blooming Grove.
These roads and bridges, along with the others listed,
experienced significant damage during Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and/or Superstorm Sandy. They
have also been identified as having a higher level of
vulnerability to experiencing flood damage.

This is a dangerous intersection at State Route 208 and Clove Road in the
Village of South Blooming Grove. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.
119

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

• Bull Mine Road
• Cardinal Drive
• Farmingdale Road
• Goshen Road
• Horton Road Bridge
• Hudson Drive
• Lake Shore Drive
• Merriewold Lane North
• Museum Village Road
• Prospect Road
• Station Road
• Tuthill Road
• Woodcock Mountain Road

COUNTY ROADS
• County Route 27 (Craigville Road)
• County Route 51 (Hulsetown Road)

STATE ROADS

Description of Project
This project seeks a holistic, sustainable approach
to increasing transportation system resiliency to
future storms and to addressing repetitive failures on
vulnerable roadway segments throughout the Town of
Blooming Grove. After fully evaluating the components
of the existing transportation network in the Town and
by utilizing the findings of the Committee-proposed
Additional Hydrologic (Flood Routing), Hydraulic,
and Stormwater Analysis project, the Committee
recommends the funding and implementation
of a detailed inspection program and investment
prioritization protocol for Town-owned bridges
and culverts.

This project involves the creation of a
field inspection program to assess the
current condition of the infrastructure,
the conduct of a basic hydraulic analysis to
determine capacity of inspected systems,
and the preparation of a rough cost
estimate for replacement or upgrade.

• State Route 94
• State Route 208, south of Mountain Road near
a culvert that experiences frequent overtopping

Pictured here is County Route 20 (Clove Road) bridge over Moodna
Creek. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

This photo is courtesy of Farmington River Watershed Association,
2014. http://frwa.org/what-we-do/research-stewardship/habitatstudy-and-restoration/dam-and-culvert-projects-fish-passage/culvertsurveys-in-massachusetts/
120

PROPOSED PROJECTS

LOCAL ROADS

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

A field inspection protocol will standardize data
collection to examine the physical condition of the
crossing, along with the upstream and downstream
area, and will collect necessary information to assess
the available and needed hydraulic capacity of the
structure. This data will be used to make qualitative
assessments on whether replacements or upgrades are
required due to physical condition, flooding concerns,
or both.
A prioritization scheme will establish a list of community
priorities for culvert and bridge improvements located
throughout the Town of Blooming Grove, based on the
quantitative and qualitative assessments.

Image from Lake Shore Drive, taken in the aftermath of Hurricane
Irene. Photo is courtesy of Town of Blooming Grove Committee
Member Lorraine Tomassi.

This image depicts stormwater infrastructure on Tuthill Road
that would be assessed as part of this program. Photo is courtesy of
Eric Thayer.

Image of Lake Shore Drive flooding from Merriewold Lake, taken in the
aftermath of Hurricane Irene. Photo is courtesy of Town of Blooming
Grove Committee Member Lorraine Tomassi.

The Town could use the standardized inspection
protocols and tools developed through this project in
regular recurring intervals to re-assess the condition
of existing infrastructure and re-prioritize both
maintenance and replacement projects for the Plan
Area. This will provide a dynamic list of critical areas
within the Town and facilitate a faster and better use
of additional funding that might become available after
future disasters.

121

Cost Estimate
The total project cost is $1,500,000. It is understood
that the Town has the ability to draw on consultant and
internal resources for the management of this project.
The estimated project implementation costs total
$1,000,000. The remaining $500,000 is the estimate
cost for developing the program and protocol.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

• Establishment of inspection protocol and
tools - $225,000
• Performance of initial round of infrastructure
inspection - $200,000
• Development of prioritization and
recommendation report - $75,000
Please note that administrative costs are not included
in the project cost estimates.

Project Benefits
FLOOD PROTECTION AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
The inspection program and prioritization protocol
will benefit the entire population of the Town of
Blooming Grove (18,028 persons, as of the 2010 U.S.
Census) by directing resources towards infrastructure
and transportation projects that increase long-term
resiliency and decrease the potential negative impact
of flooding to local roadways.
Once the inspections are complete, one of the more
immediate and notable effects of the ensuing projects
will be a decrease in the number of road closures due
to flooding. Secondary benefits from a decrease in road
closures include a decrease in the costs necessary to
detour people, decreased temporary repair costs, and
prevention of a potential loss of sewer, water,
and other utilities.
Additionally, once roadway improvements have been
implemented as a result of this project, the overall
safety for emergency response or other essential
personnel who need to be able to access all areas of
the community during a storm event will increase.
This is especially important during events that result in
evacuations, supply distribution, and any other need for
emergency assistance. Socially Vulnerable Populations
may be at greater risk during such severe events and
would also benefit from secured roadways.
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

The prioritization protocol will identify and encourage
the implementation of necessary roadway projects,
such as replacing and upgrading culverts, repairing
roads, installing bridges and other measures that will
lead to less overtopping, sheeting, and other forms of
riverine and overland flooding.

ANTICIPATED REDUCTION OF RISK
Existing transportation infrastructure is generally
designed for a variety of risk levels, depending on
ownership, level of use, flood considerations, and
community value. The inspection protocol will quantify
the current level of risk for individual projects and
establish the desired level of risk to determine the
amount of risk reduction that can be obtained
through project improvements. This will help
the community prioritize future investments in
transportation infrastructure.

ECONOMIC

The biggest asset to this project is its cost
effectiveness and ability to efficiently
use limited NYRCR and Town funding to
implement a sustainable record-keeping
tool. This tool could serve a springboard
to identify future resiliency projects
and accurately tracks damages and
vulnerabilities in the Community.
Although the project will have limited direct economic
benefits, it provides numerous indirect benefits. A
detailed, easy-to-use, and accurate record keeping
tool will help the Town make informed decisions
about future resiliency infrastructure and economic
development projects, preventing wasteful and
redundant spending. By regularly assessing critical Town
infrastructure, Town officials can commit money to less
costly maintenance activities rather than more costly
total replacement, extending the useful life of new and
existing infrastructure and reducing capital costs of the
Town in the future.
Many disasters also lead to an increased demand
on staff time, even during the recovery phase. By
implementing this project, staff will more efficiently
122

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Individual cost components of the inspection and
assessment protocol include:

PROPOSED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

utilize their time as it will be easier to track down
records and complete necessary State and Federal
reports and grant applications for funding.

Infrastructure and Community Capacity Building, it can
have indirect benefits to the Economic Development
recovery support function.

ENVIRONMENTAL

In addition, comments from the second Public
Engagement Event included the following
recommendations that are related to or could benefit
from this project:

Inappropriately sized or degrading transportation
infrastructure can result in disconnections of habitat
along riparian corridors. This can prevent movement
of aquatic life or sediment along a river reach, putting
a dynamic stream environment at greater risk of
instability and degradation.
Catastrophic failure of infrastructure located in riparian
corridors can also result in a sudden environmental
shock to a natural system, leading to degradation that
can take years or decades to recover. Regular inspection
and maintenance of hardened infrastructure helps
to maintain a safe and stable balance with natural
infrastructure that can promote environmental health
and diversity.
The $1,000,000 set aside for implementation of plan
recommendations would create approximately 7.1
construction jobs, potentially creating employment for
local and regional contractors in addition to 8.4 new
support jobs from increased materials and equipment
sales for suppliers and support industries.

SOCIAL
Benefits from a decrease in road closures include
reduction in lost trips to local restaurants and shopping
areas, where many residents go to socialize.

PUBLIC SUPPORT
Blooming Grove residents who participated in an NYRCR
Public Engagement Event, survey, or other outreach
opportunity indicated that Infrastructure was the most
important area and Community Capacity Building
the second most important area for investment and
resiliency project opportunities. Additionally, although
this project is most specifically related to the RSFs of

123

• Establish a tracking and fine system to prevent
dumping in Town water bodies (Community
Planning and Capacity Building)
• Identify strategies to ensure emergency services
can reach those in flooded areas, particularly when
access is blocked by flooded waterways (Housing)
• Create flood storage areas to alleviate the impact
floodwaters have on infrastructure throughout the
Town (Infrastructure)

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS
• Easy Access to Critical Information: During periods
of unexpected or frequent staffing changes,
completion of this project will ensure that critical
information will remain organized and in the
same place. When there are multiple municipal
personnel handling documentation or during
high-stress time periods, such as disaster events,
records and damage assessments can become
misplaced more easily, a concern when documents
need to be accessed several years later for grant
applications, project completions, or disaster
declaration assistance.
• Provides Springboard for Future Resiliency
Projects: By implementing the program identified
in this project, the Town will be better to
situated to evaluate and determine priority
infrastructure upgrades and flood control/
resiliency improvements. This tool will help
the Town in preparing grant applications and
obtaining necessary data to implement the future
resiliency projects.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•	Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine
flooding on the built environment, including
critical facilities, infrastructure, business,
and housing.
•	Strategy 2: Improve stormwater management
and drainage systems throughout Town
to decrease risk for homes, businesses,
and residents.

Project Cost-Benefit Analysis
This project closely relates to the Additional Hydrologic
(Flood Routing), Hydraulic, and Stormwater Analysis
project, and has a similar cost-benefit analysis. By
ensuring that the identified roadways and bridges
remain passable during emergencies, the Town also
ensures that emergency responders can reach residents
who require their help.

PROPOSED PROJECTS

• Supports Multiple NYRCR Plan Goals:
Completion of this project supports two of
the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR resiliency
strategies, specifically:

Given the limited number of routes
throughout the Town, a single bridge or
roadway that remains passable may be
the difference between life and death
for a resident.
By developing a protocol for prioritizing investment
in the Town’s transportation infrastructure, the Town
can dedicate funding where it will do the most good
for the residents’ safety. Such life and safety benefits
significantly outweigh the costs of this project.

IMPLEMENTATION TIME FRAME
The Community can implement the initial inspection
program within one year and conduct the program
regularly on an ongoing basis.

REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
No regulations are applicable to developing the
prioritization protocol. Infrastructure upgrades will be
subject to state and local regulations.

JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction for this projects rests with the Town of
Blooming Grove and Village of South Blooming Grove,
along with New York State (for state roads and bridges).

SUMMARY
Detailed Inspection Program And Investment Prioritization Protocol
• Investment: $150,000
• Flood level reduction: Unknown
• Assets protected: Unknown
• Repetitive flood properties removed: Not Applicable (N/A)
• Potential future loss prevented: Unknown
• Jobs created: 7.1 Construction; 8.4 Permanent (Based on an estimated $1,000,000 spending on project
implementation)*
• Strategies accomplished: 2
* T he FTE construction jobs were estimated based on a methodology developed by the United States Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics
Administration as presented in the September 2013 “Economic Impact of Hurricane Sandy: Potential Economic Activity Lost and Gained in New Jersey
and New York.” This study estimated job creation from recovery spending on infrastructure projects in New York and reported 7.15 construction jobs and
8.4 total jobs per $1,000,000 in construction spending.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

124

FEATURED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Community Rating
System Participation
Project Background
FEMA promotes the benefits of the NFIP Community
Rating System (CRS) as a voluntary program that
recognizes and rewards communities for floodplain
management activities that exceed minimum NFIP
requirements through the receipt of discounted
insurance rates. FEMA initiated the CRS program 1990
and currently has over 1,200 participating communities.
As of August 31, 2014, the Town of Blooming Grove had
91 NFIP policies in-force and $103,376 in total annual
premiums, with an average annual premium of $1,136.
All communities participating in the NFIP CRS begin at
a Class 10 rating, which offers no insurance discount.
Lower class numbers (i.e., Class 1 to Class 9) are reached
based on the number of community achievements in
the six core flood loss reduction areas important to the
NFIP. These areas include the following:

Image is courtesy of
http://www.passaiccountynj.org/index.aspx?NID=1041

1. Reduce liabilities to the NFIP Fund;

Description of Project

2. Improve disaster resiliency and sustainability of
communities;

This project would fund professional services to
develop an application for the Town of Blooming Grove,
potentially in partnership with the Village of South
Blooming Grove, to participate in the NFIP CRS and
reduce flood insurance rates for Town residents. The
Town would seek to achieve a Class 8 rating, which
would result in a 10% discount in flood insurance policy
premiums for policy holders in good standing.

3. Integrate a “whole community” approach to
addressing emergency management;
4. Promote natural and beneficial functions of
floodplains;
5. Increase understanding of risk; and
6. Strengthen adoption and enforcement of disasterresistant building codes.

Connection to the Disaster
In 2011, after the events of Hurricane Irene and Tropical
Storm Lee, Town residents submitted a total of 43 claims
(27.6%), the largest number of claims submitted in any
one year during the Town’s history of NFIP participation.

125

In addition to gaining CRS membership, this project
would also contain the following aspects:
• Educate the current Town Supervisor, Board
members, and the public about the CRS program
and its benefits; and
• Assist residents with resiliency-focused
residential property improvements and assist in
providing access to and awareness of needed
funding resources.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

This project would be a cooperative effort between
the two municipalities in the Town of Blooming Grove
NYRCR Plan Area.

incentives for the Town to continue implementing new
flood protection measures, highlighting the practices
already in place, and thus reducing the impact of flood
events when they actually occur.

ANTICIPATED REDUCTION OF RISK

Cost Estimate
The total project cost is estimated at $60,000, which
includes funding for both the assessment and planning
process and for the application preparation.
Administrative costs are not included in the
project cost estimates.

The CRS program seeks to reduce risk to communities
by encouraging community flood mitigation and
prevention activities through the incentive of increased
insurance payment discounts.
One way in which the CRS program seeks to lessen risk
of floods to a community is by requiring communities
with Repetitive Loss (RL) properties (i.e., properties
for which two or more flood insurance claims of more
than $1,000 have been paid by the NFIP within any 10year period since 1978) to implement annual outreach
projects to the properties in the mapped RL areas that
have insurable buildings.
The CRS program also encourages communities to
complete more than just outreach to reduce their
repetitive flooding problems. Some of the other
activities that CRS encourages, although does not
require, including the following:
• Flood Protection Assistance: Technical assistance
on property protection.
• Floodplain Management Planning: Conducting an
analysis of the RL areas and identifying mitigation
strategies for these areas.

Diagram courtesy of https://suite.io/david-a-todd/2ejr2j6

Project Benefits
FLOOD PROTECTION AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Because the CRS program encourages the use of flood
mitigation, preparedness, and reduction activities
to achieve credits, it ultimately decreases flood
vulnerability and increases public safety by offering
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

• Acquisition and Relocation: Acquiring or
otherwise removing RL properties. Larger bonuses
are applied for Severe Repetitive Loss (SRL)
Properties (i.e., family properties that have had
four or more claims of more than $5,000 or two
to three claims that cumulatively exceed the
building’s value).
• Flood Protection: Retrofitting or otherwise
protecting RL properties. Larger bonuses are
applied for SRL properties.
Although the CRS encourages risk reduction
through flood mitigation activities, empirical data
demonstrating the success of the CRS in flood risk
126

FEATURED PROJECTS

Regional Coordination

FEATURED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

reduction provides much more technical detail for
consideration when a community weighs the costs
and benefits of the program.

Several studies about flood mitigation and
the CRS Program indicate that participation
by the Town of Blooming Grove in CRS will
lead to a significantly reduced risk of flood
damage for the Community, particularly as
the Town becomes more developed.
ECONOMIC
The CRS program gives communities multiple incentives
to maintain and improve their flood mitigation activities
over an indefinite period of time. The most visible
benefit of participation in the CRS program is the
discount in flood insurance payments that property
owners receive. Table 4.2 shows the breakdown of
insurance discount to class rating for CRS
participating communities.

ENVIRONMENTAL
While this project anticipates few direct environmental
benefits, the CRS program provides a significant
opportunity for indirect benefits. CRS offers special
credit for activities that protect and/or restore natural
floodplain functions due to the benefits of maintaining a
floodplain in its natural state.
The CRS program encourages state, local, and private
activities that preserve or restore the natural state of
floodplains and ensure that they continue to perform
these necessary functions. The CRS program also
encourages communities to coordinate their flood
loss reduction programs with other public and private
activities that preserve and protect natural and
beneficial floodplain functions.

SOCIAL
Each new activity that the Community engages in
provides a new public relations opportunity for the
Town to highlight current initiatives. They can use these
activities as a way to increase civic pride and public
education about topics such as flood risk, individual
property owner vulnerability, or recommendation
127

TABLE 4.2 - INSURANCE DISCOUNT
BY CRS CLASS RATING AND REGION
CRS Class

Insurance Discount

Credits Required

1

45%

4,500+

2

40%

4,000 to 4,499

3

35%

3,500 to 3,999

4

30%

3,000 to 3,499

5

25%

2,500 to 2,999

6

20%

2,000 to 2,499

7

15%

1,500 to 1,999

8

10%

1,000 to 1,499

9

5%

500 to 999

10

0%

0 to 499

guides to residents on how to protect their homes and
businesses during floods.

PUBLIC SUPPORT
Blooming Grove residents who participated in a NYRCR
Public Engagement Event, survey, or other outreach
opportunity indicated that Community Planning and
Capacity Building was the second most important RSF
for investment and resiliency project opportunities.
Additionally, although this project most specifically
relates to the RSF of Community Planning and Capacity
Building, it can have indirect benefits to the other
RSFs, particularly Infrastructure (ranking first on
public concerns) and Housing (ranking third on public
concerns) by encouraging the implementation of other
flood mitigation projects.

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS
• Supports Implementation of Other NYRCR
Projects: Because a community receives CRS
credits through the implementation of flood
control and mitigation activities, this program
will provide additional incentives to the Town to
implement other projects identified in the Town of
Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan, as funding becomes
available.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

• Barnes Road Levee;
• Update local land ordinances; and
• Strategic critical facility flood-proofing and
structural mitigation program.
• Provides Springboard for Other Flood Control
Projects: For the same reason that this project
supports the implementation of other NYRCR
projects, it also supports and encourages other
flood mitigation and control activities, i.e., FEMA
grants the Town more CRS credits for each new
mitigation activity. One of the primary related
activities is for the Town to encourage an increase
in residential participation in the NFIP.
• Supports Multiple NYRCR Plan Goals: Completion
of this project supports two of the Town’s NYRCR
Plan resiliency strategies, including:
• Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine
flooding on the built environment, including
critical facilities, infrastructure, business, and
housing; and
• Strategy 5: Assist Town residents, officials, and
business owners, in becoming better protected
from future flood damages through education,
programming, outreach, and policy initiatives.

Town by implementing additional mitigation activities.
This will result in increased safety, mobility, and access
and property protection.

This project will also lead to a significant
cost savings in insurance premiums for local
residents, thereby increasing civic pride and
decreasing any potential economic burden
for residents.
IMPLEMENTATION TIME FRAME
This project can be carried out within one year.

REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
Many of the activities related to implementing the
CRS program involve enhancing local ordinances
and regulations. The Town of Blooming Grove and
the Village of South Blooming Grove have to comply
with existing requirements related to changing local
regulations. Structural projects implemented as part
of this project have to comply with relevant state and
local laws and regulations.

JURISDICTION
Jurisdiction for this project rests with the Town of Blooming
Grove and the Village of South Blooming Grove.

Project Cost-Benefit Analysis
Participating in the CRS program will benefit overall
community preparedness and minimize the impact
from future flood events, ensuring long-term protection
ofthe Town of Blooming Grove’s assets and the safety
of its residents. This project has the potential to greatly
reduce the impacts of flood damage throughout the

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

128

FEATURED PROJECTS

These projects could include, but are not limited to,
the following:

FEATURED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

SUMMARY
Community Rating System Participation
• Investment: $60,000
• Flood level reduction: Immediate: 0; Long-Term: TBD
• Assets protected: Immediate: 0; Long-Term: Potential benefit to all assets (economic, health and social
services, housing, infrastructure systems, and natural and cultural resources)
• Repetitive flood properties removed: 0; Long-Term: TBD (however, educational awareness and outreach will
be provided to all property owners in areas with repetitive flood loss damage)
• Potential future loss prevented: Immediate: 0; Long-Term: TBD
• Jobs created: N/A
• Strategies accomplished: 2

129

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

responsibilities of government, private, volunteer, and
non-governmental organizations. Along with the basic
body of the plan, this project looks to develop multijurisdictional (i.e., in conjunction with neighboring
jurisdictions) hazard and operational specific annexes
to include the following:
• Flood Emergency Response Plan
• Winter Weather Emergency Response Plan
• Coordinated Dam Emergency Release Plan
• Mass Care and Emergency Shelter Operations Plan
• Emergency Evacuation Plan
• Volunteer Management Plan
• Animal Emergency Response Plan

Image is courtesy of AdCouncil.org

Project Background
Blooming Grove’s capacity to respond to and recover
from disasters cannot flourish without the provision of
safe, reliable, and rapid emergency services.

Connection to the Disaster

The project will not limit itself to the plans listed above,
and the Town of Blooming Grove may incorporate other
hazard or operational specific annexes as necessary (e.g.
Excessive Heat Plan, Public-Private Partnership, etc.).

Regional Coordination
The Town of Blooming Grove could coordinate with
the Village of South Blooming Grove and the Village
of Washingtonville to implement this project.

Although some damages and losses from previous
disasters may originate from the Town’s previous
paradigm of emergency planning and response,
this planning initiative has no specific associated
historic losses.

Description of Project
This project would update the Comprehensive
Emergency Management Plan (CEMP) for the
Town of Blooming Grove in close coordination and
partnership with the Villages of South Blooming Grove
and Washingtonville, and it would develop multijurisdictional hazard and operational specific annexes.
The CEMP is the master operations document
for the Town and provides the framework for
handling emergencies and disasters. It defines the
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Example emergency management plan update meeting. Image is
courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.
130

FEATURED PROJECTS

Update the Comprehensive
Emergency Management
Plan and Develop Hazard and
Operational Specific Annexes

FEATURED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Cost Estimate
The total project cost is estimated at $320,000, which
includes the update of the Town of Blooming Grove
CEMP and the development of coordinated operational
and hazard specific annexes for the Town and two
Villages. The cost breakdown for each plan follows
this schema:
• Update of CEMP - $75,000
• Development of Annexes - $35,000 each (up to
$245,000 for all seven proposed annexes)
Please note administrative costs are not included in the
project cost estimates.

Project Benefits
FLOOD PROTECTION AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Having pre-disaster plans in place will reduce local
emergency service response times, define roles and
responsibilities in advance to create ownership for
potential problems, and create more robust capabilities
via volunteer networks and elimination of redundancy.
The development of pre-disaster plans will enhance
the efforts of the Plan Area and the Village of
Washingtonville to successfully rescue, evacuate,
shelter, and perform other emergency services functions
necessary to directly protect the life and safety of Town
and Village residents.

ANTICIPATED REDUCTION OF RISK
This project takes an all-hazards planning approach
to coordinate response efforts across all disciplines in
the Town of Blooming Grove, as well as the Villages
of South Blooming Grove and Washingtonville, during
times of disaster.
This project reduces risk in the following areas:
• The CEMP will identify specific prevention and
mitigation efforts of the Town of Blooming Grove
131

and the Village of South Blooming Grove. These
efforts will describe the activities taken to prevent
or minimize the impact of hazards in the Plan Area.
• The multi-hazard approach to the CEMP, along
with its multijurisdictional operational and
hazard specific annexes, will improve overall
response effectiveness to the Town of Blooming
Grove and its neighboring jurisdictions. In the
planning process, stakeholders will incorporate
knowledge of a full-range of hazards into disaster
and risk management. The CEMP will not only
review natural hazards but will also factor in
political strategies, technical analysis, operational
capabilities, and public understanding. The CEMP
update will also incorporate nationwide best
practices and lessons learned. This approach will
ultimately lead to greater effectiveness and costefficiency for emergency response.
• The update and development of plans, policies,
and procedures will involve, to a certain
degree, public participation. The involvement
of community members in the design and
implementation of plans helps to tailor the
plans to the vulnerabilities and needs of the
affected people.
• The development of volunteer organizations,
programs, and public-private partnerships will
increase the response capabilities within Blooming
Grove and its neighboring jurisdictions. These
organizations can offer government agencies
opportunities to combine resources and expertise
to act jointly to reduce risks and potential losses.

ECONOMIC
This project anticipates few direct economic benefits
(i.e., permanent jobs secured or added; potential
increase in economic activity); however, it offers a great
potential in increasing integration and synchronization
of emergency response efforts across multiple
jurisdictions. As a result, the Plan Area and the Village
of Washingtonville will see more efficient and effective
emergency response efforts, thus decreasing the
number of resources utilized and money spent during a
given year.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Although this project did not identify any direct
environmental benefits, a community emergency
response team (CERT) could promote environmental
stewardship. The CERT would need to be established
through the Volunteer Management Plan. CERT
members can provide information to the public on
the impact human activity has on the environment.
As a result, increased pro-social behavior, both at the
household and community level may occur. In the past,
citizen education has also influenced policy controls
on hazardous materials, safe and renewable energy,
recycling, and water conservation.

SOCIAL
The updated CEMP and annexes may include the need
to conduct social events for residents affected by a
disaster. In addition, development of certain annexes,
such as the Volunteer Management Plan annex, may
include community groups and residents as emergency
responders. To build on that capability, residents
will need access to education materials about local
organizations and membership opportunities. This will
provide an opportunity for individuals to socialize with
others who share the spirit of community service.

FEATURED PROJECTS

ENVIRONMENTAL

from future flood damages through education,
programming, outreach, and policy initiatives.

Project Cost-Benefit Analysis
The benefits of having a coordinated response to
a disaster outweigh the initial costs of developing
the CEMP for that response. Emergency response
stakeholders develop and maintain relationships with
each other during the planning process.

Pre-existing relationships make emergency
operations run more efficiently.
This increases the chance of success of emergency
operations, saving lives and property during a disaster.
The cost to develop the CEMP, particularly each annex,

PUBLIC SUPPORT
At the first NYRCR Public Engagement Event, held on
July 30, 2014, attendees cast their ballots for projects
aligned with each of the six RSFs. The Community
Planning and Capacity Building RSF received 46 votes
(18.7%). Only the Infrastructure RSF received more
votes (104 votes, or 42.3%).

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS
In addition to the benefits described above, completion
of this project supports two of the Town of Blooming
Grove NYRCR resiliency strategies, including:
• Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for
emergency preparedness, response, sheltering,
and communication.
• Strategy 5: Assist town residents, officials, and
business owners, in becoming better protected
Image is courtesy of AdCouncil.org
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

132

FEATURED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

is outweighed by the benefits that the Town will realize
from the plans.

IMPLEMENTATION TIME FRAME

Coordinated Dam Emergency Release Plan may need to
address requirements in NYS DEC regulations for dam
emergency action plans.

This project can be implemented in one year.

JURISDICTION

REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS

Jurisdiction for this project rests with the Town of
Blooming Grove.

Both Article 2-B of State Executive Law and New
York State Defense Emergency Act authorize the
development of the CEMP. Individual annexes may
be subject to further regulation. For instance, the

SUMMARY
Update the Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan and
Develop Hazard and Operational Specific Annexes
• Investment: $320,000
• Flood level reduction: N/A
• Assets protected: Immediate: 0; Long-term: Potential benefit to all assets (economic, health and
social services, housing, infrastructure systems, and natural and cultural resources)
• Repetitive flood properties removed: N/A
• Potential future loss prevented: Immediate: 0; Long-term: TBD
• Jobs created: N/A
• Strategies accomplished: 2

133

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Project Background
Residents in the area of the Tappan Subdivision along
Barnes Road have experienced economic hardships due
to damage from multiple flood events. Because
of this concern, the Committee has investigated multiple
mitigation measures to try to reduce the impact of
flooding, including the potential creation of additional
flood storage along Satterly Creek to relocate floodwaters
away from the vulnerable, residential structures.
Unfortunately, preliminary hydraulic findings have
indicated that Satterly Creek already accesses a
significantly large floodplain, which means that it will
be difficult to identify additional storage areas for
local floodwaters. Additionally, the land surrounding

Satterly Creek has a very shallow grade, further
limiting flood storage potential due to the amount of
excavation required and the potential to run into a high
groundwater table.

Connection to the Disaster
Historic flood damages and losses in the area of the
Tappan Subdivision along Barnes Road have led to great
economic hardships for residents, as evidenced by the
number of FEMA NFIP—participating homeowners
along Barnes Road that are listed as RL/SRL plan
holders. Five of the nine RL/SRL properties in the Tow n
of Blooming Grove are located on Barnes Road. Barnes
Road properties received nearly $631,000 in NFIP
reimbursement due to Hurricane Irene and Tropical
Storm Lee.

This image depicts the location of Barnes Road levee project. Location
map courtesy of SCAPE / Landscape Architecture PLLC.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

134

FEATURED PROJECTS

Barnes Road Levee

FEATURED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Barnes Road and North Drive during Hurricane Irene Flooding. Photo
courtesy of Lorraine Tomassi.

Description of Project
This project proposes to address the recurrent flood
damage through the creation of a berm/levee located
behind the residences on Barnes Road, from 144
Barnes Road to the Satterly Creek side of the Tappan
Waste Water Treatment Plant. This berm/levee would
direct floodwaters away from homes toward the nonresidential side of Satterly Creek. This project would
also build on the base analysis from the NYRCR planning
process and would include a comprehensive analysis of
the Satterly Creek in the area of Barnes Road to evaluate
the quantitative potential flood reduction benefits of a
levee in this area.

Floodwaters cover the entrance to the Tappan Hill Water and
Waste Water Treatment Plant during Hurricane Irene. Photo Courtesy
of Rachel Robertson.

The initial hydraulic analysis using the existing HEC-RAS
model for Satterly Creek resulted in a 0.5-mile long
levee, approximately 7-feet in height (to an elevation
of approximately 340 feet), as necessary to mitigate
floodplain flows from impacting residences and the
wastewater treatment plant along Barnes Road. The
levee must be constructed to provide protection from
flood flows while limiting the impact on the WSE and
stream power.

BARNES ROAD PROTECTION LEVEE
(APPROX. DIMENSIONS AND COSTS)

This image depicts water level elevations, courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

135

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

FEATURED PROJECTS

Cost Estimate
The total project cost is $1,198,623. It is understood
that the Town has the ability to draw on consultant and
internal resources for the management of this project.
Please note administrative costs are not included in the
project cost estimates.

Project Benefits
FLOOD PROTECTION AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
The Barnes Road Levee will have the most significant
impact on the residents of Barnes Road. This would
directly benefit a minimum of 16 residences on Barnes
Rd, although it would also indirectly benefit many
SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

of the nearby property owners by creating increased
access to local roadways during severe storms and
flooding events.
Benefits to the local community include: (1) improving
overall floodplain management and reducing the
frequency of flood damage to homes, businesses and
residents; and (2) ensuring redundancy in transportation
and access to roadways by decreasing the number
of road closures in a flood event (i.e., thus increasing
access to local homes, businesses, and other essential
facilities such as hospitals, doctor’s offices, etc.).
Additionally, this project will help benefit residents
and emergency response or other essential personnel
needing access during storm events. This is important
for emergency and essential personnel during events
136

FEATURED PROJECTS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

that result in evacuations, the need for distribution of
supplies, and any other need for emergency assistance.
Socially Vulnerable Populations may be at greater
risk during such events, and would also benefit from
securing the roadways. These residents may also have
more difficulty in leaving their homes, particularly
during storm or flood events.

ANTICIPATED REDUCTION OF RISK
HEC-RAS modeling shows that the proposed Barnes
Road levee can be placed in a manner that does not
significantly increase the WSE and stream power but
does remove the residences and wastewater treatment
plant along Barnes Road from the existing floodplain.

ECONOMIC
This project would create approximately 8.5
construction jobs, potentially creating employment
for local and regional contractors in addition to 10.1
new support jobs from increased materials and
equipment sales for suppliers and support industries.
This injected funding into the regional construction
supply line encourages economic growth through
additional induced spending. Induced spending occurs
as employees and businesses benefitting from the
construction work in turn spend money on other goods
and services. The potential induced benefit includes
additional permanent jobs, increased taxes, and
increased expendable income that may be spent on
additional local goods and services.
In addition to job creation, levees have been found to
have a variety of economic benefits. Data suggests that
total productivity and personal income are greater and
that poverty is less in counties with levees. Specifically,
the average county with levees produces nearly 3.3
times (or $2.6 billion) more in annual goods and
services, the average resident in a county with levees
earns $1,500 more per year, and the poverty rate
averages 2% less in counties with levees.
Although this data is general in nature as it has been
averaged across all counties in the U.S., it provides
a general snapshot of the potential secondary
economic benefits that the Town of Blooming Grove
137

could experience by maintaining safe and responsible
development of its floodplain, such as through the
construction of a levee on Barnes Road.
Additionally, the economic impact of the Barnes Road
levee will have significant implications for residents on
Barnes Road besides that of future development and
indirect secondary benefits. Many of the Barnes Road
residents have experienced economic hardship based
on the frequency of
flood events and total damage from floods impacting
their homes.
Depending on the amount of flood risk reduction, the
16 residences with NFIP policies may also experience
a decrease in their premium rates. Installing a levee
to reduce this flood damage will provide a significant
financial relief to these residents and give them an
opportunity to invest their increased savings in personal
expenses, long-term savings, and more discretionary
spending, such as eating at restaurants, attending
movies, and supporting local community events.

ENVIRONMENTAL
Hydraulic modeling shows that the proposed levee
should not significantly impact WSE or velocities in
the local vicinity or downstream portions of Satterly
Creek. This project does not anticipate any negative
direct environmental impact. Eliminating houses and
the wastewater treatment plant from the Satterly
Creek floodplain could greatly reduce the possibility of
household cleaners, petroleum products, untreated
wastewater, or other pollutants from entering the
stream and impacting the downstream community.

SOCIAL
A decrease in the number of road closures due to
flooding will serve as one of the most immediate and
notable effects. Secondary benefits from a decrease
in road closures will help prevent lost trips to local
restaurants and shopping areas, where many residents
conduct social engagements.

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

FEATURED PROJECTS

PUBLIC SUPPORT
Blooming Grove residents who participated in an NYRCR
Public Engagement Event, survey, or other outreach
opportunity indicated that Infrastructure was the most
important area for investment and resiliency project
opportunities. Additionally, although this project most
specifically relates to the Infrastructure RSF, it can
have indirect benefits to the Economic Development
and Housing RSFs.

ADDITIONAL BENEFITS
• Supports NYRCR Plan Goals – Completion of
this project supports one of the Town’s NYRCR
strategies, specifically:
• Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine
flooding on the built environment, including
critical facilities, infrastructure, business,
and housing.

Project Cost-Benefit Analysis
The NFIP reimbursed homeowners along Barnes Road
approximately $631,000 from flood insurance payments
due to Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee in 2011.
This was just reimbursements; actual damages were
likely higher. The value of damages grows as time
passes, meaning similar flood events will cause higher
values of loss as time goes on.
Although levee construction has an expensive up-front
cost, the levee will justify its existence after only three
flood events, at a maximum, similar in scope to those
of 2011.

The Barnes Road levee will have significant implications for residents
on Barnes Road. Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

residents and the expected decrease to their flood
insurance premiums.

IMPLEMENTATION TIME FRAME
This project can be implemented in one year.

REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
To be certified, the levee must comply with the
requirements of Chapter 44 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (44 CFR), Section 65.2 and 65.10. The
project may also have to comply with Article 15
Protection of Waters and Article 24 Freshwater
Wetlands of the NYCRR.

JURISDICTION
This project will be under the jurisdiction of the
Town of Blooming Grove.

The benefits of building the levee further outweigh
the costs when factoring in the decreased risk to

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

138

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

FEATURED PROJECTS

SUMMARY
Barnes Road Levee
• Investment: $1,198,623
• Flood level reduction: The levee would completely protect homes along Barnes Road from riverine flooding.
• Assets protected: Immediate: Housing and Infrastructure Systems; Long-term: Potential benefit to other
assets (health and social services and economic).
• Repetitive flood properties removed: Although no RL/SRL sites will be physically removed, this project may
lead to properties losing the RL/SRL designation due to flood reduction and decreased flood damage in
future flooding events.
• Potential future loss prevented: Unknown, although Barnes Road properties received nearly $631,000 in
NFIP reimbursement due to Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee.
• Jobs created: 8.5 Construction; 10.1 Permanent*
• Strategies accomplished: 1
* T he FTE construction jobs were estimated based on a methodology developed by the U.S. Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics
Administration as presented in the September 2013 Economic Impact of Hurricane Sandy: Potential Economic Activity Lost and Gained in New Jersey and
New York. This study estimated job creation from recovery spending on infrastructure projects in New York and reported 7.15 construction jobs and 8.4
total jobs per $1,000,000 in construction spending

139

SECTION 4: PROPOSED AND FEATURED PROJECT PROFILES

Photo is courtesy of Richard Bachman.

Section 5

Additional Materials

Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 5: Additional Materials
Additional Resiliency Recommendations
TABLE 5.1 – ADDITIONAL RESILIENCY RECOMMENDATIONS
Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

This project seeks to fund a floodplain administrator
or manager staffing position for the Town of
Blooming Grove, allowing the Town the dedicated
resources and enhanced capabilities that
would come from a full-time staff member. The
Town’s floodplain manager would serve as the
principal community administrator in the daily
implementation of flood loss reduction activities,
including enforcing the community’s flood damage
prevention ordinance; updating flood maps, plans,
and policies for the Community; and implementing
any of the activities related to administration of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).

$45,000
per year

Potential

Interoperable
Communications
Program

A multi‐jurisdictional Tactical Interoperable
Communications Plan (TICP) for Blooming Grove,
South Blooming Grove, Washingtonville, and other
surrounding jurisdictions, inclusive of emergency
responders, state agencies, and closely aligned
non‐governmental organizations, will support
effective tactical incident management and strategic
emergency management activities throughout the
life cycle of an emergency event. Installing cross‐
band/in‐band repeaters, gateways, and back‐up
power sources at communications towers will
support the implementation of the TICP. Exercises
will evaluate the effectiveness of the TICP and
identify necessary areas for further refinement.

$300,000 $500,000

Y

New MultiPurpose Shelter
and Emergency
Operations Facility

The Town does not currently have a reliable,
designated emergency shelter with sufficient
capacity to meet the Community’s needs during
major flood events. During Hurricane Irene, three
of the Town’s firehouses flooded. Two schools
also flooded, while the other three schools were
not accessible by all residents of the Town due to
flooded roads. High ground in the Town of Blooming
Grove is at a premium. This project will identify a
location in the Town but out of the floodplain where
the Town can establish a designated Emergency
Shelter and/or build a multi‐use facility. In addition,
this facility would act as a staging area for first
responders, i.e., it would provide parking for their
vehicles. Town services, such as the senior center,
Town and Village Courts, the recreation program and
administration, and the town's maintenance garage,
could relocate to this facility as well.

$3,000,000

Potential

Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Strategy 5: Assist Town
residents, officials,
and business owners
in becoming better
protected from
future flood damages
through education,
programming,
outreach, and policy
initiatives.

Fund a Town
Floodplain
Manager or
Administrator
Position

Strategy 3: Improve
upon existing
capabilities
for emergency
preparedness,
response, sheltering,
and communication.

Strategy 3: Improve
upon existing
capabilities
for emergency
preparedness,
response, sheltering,
and communication.

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

142

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.1 – ADDITIONAL RESILIENCY RECOMMENDATIONS (CONT’D)
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Strategy 4: Preserve,
protect, and enhance
the Town's natural,
recreational, and
cultural resources,
and restore natural
floodplain capabilities.

Town of Blooming
Grove MultiModal Emergency
Exit Trail Map

The Town of Blooming Grove currently hosts miles of
recreational walking and hiking trails, some of which
connect to regionally and nationally recognized
trail systems, although many residents and most
visitors to the Plan Area remain uninformed of their
existence. Creating and distributing a map of these
resources would not only benefit local residents
and potentially attract new tourism activity; it
could double as an outreach campaign to outline
emergency pedestrian evacuation routes. These
routes would aid the Town in capitalizing on multiple
modes of transportation in appropriate disaster
situations. This project would fund the design and
dissemination of a map of existing local walking and
hiking trails, as well as local pedestrian amenities,
such as local roadways with sidewalks, which may
be designed and distributed in combination with a
pedestrian evacuation plan.

143

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

$30,000

N

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Master Table of Projects
TABLE 5.2 – MASTER TABLE OF PROJECTS
Project
Category

Project Name

Short Description

Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding on the built environment, including
critical facilities, infrastructure, business, and housing.
Strategy 2: Improve stormwater management and drainage systems throughout the
Town to decrease risk for homes, businesses, and residents.
Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for emergency preparedness, response,
sheltering, and communication.
Strategy 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance the Town’s natural, recreational, and
cultural resources, and restore natural floodplain capabilities.
Strategy 5: Assist Town residents, officials, and business owners in becoming better
protected from future flood damages through education, programming, outreach, and
policy initiatives.

Additional Hydrologic
(Flood Routing), Hydraulic,
and Stormwater Analysis

Conduct a comprehensive study of all local waterways, lakes, and dams affecting flood conditions in the Plan Area. Complete additional riverine
and overland (stormwater) hydraulic analyses to provide additional information and recommendations to serve as a resource in the planning
and development of further actions to reduce the extent and severity of flooding throughout the Town.

Proposed

$500,000 for
the study;
$1,000,000 for
implementation

Y

Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding on the built environment, including
critical facilities, infrastructure, business, and housing.
Strategy 2: Improve stormwater management and drainage systems throughout the
Town to decrease risk for homes, businesses, and residents.

Detailed Inspection
Program and Investment
Prioritization Protocol

This project seeks a holistic, sustainable approach to increase transportation system resiliency towards future storms and to address repetitive
failures on vulnerable roadway segments throughout the Plan Area. After fully evaluating the components of the existing transportation
network in the Town and by utilizing the findings of the Committee‐proposed Additional Hydrologic (Flood Routing), Hydraulic, and Stormwater
Analysis Project, the Committee recommended the funding and implementation of a detailed inspection program and investment prioritization
protocol for Town‐owned bridges and culverts.

Proposed

$500,000 to
develop the
protocol;
$1,000,000 for
implementation

N

Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for emergency preparedness, response,
sheltering, and communication.

Install Natural Gas or Solar
Back-up Power for Critical
Facilities and Infrastructure

This project aims to obtain and install permanent back-up power sources for the critical facilities and infrastructure in the Town which are
not addressed in other proposed projects. This project would include an evaluation of existing critical facilities’ needs for redundant power
generation. The Community will consider the use of solar or green energy, where feasible. Priority locations include the South Blooming Grove
Village Hall and Town of Blooming Grove Highway Garage at 2741 State Route 94 (also the proposed site for relocation of the Town of Blooming
Grove Central Garage, providing a secondary benefit to installing a back-up power source here).

Proposed

$131,930

N

Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding on the built environment, including
critical facilities, infrastructure, business, and housing.
Strategy 2: Improve stormwater management and drainage systems throughout the
Town to decrease risk for homes, businesses, and residents.
Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for emergency preparedness, response,
sheltering, and communication.
Strategy 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance the Town’s natural, recreational, and
cultural resources, and restore natural floodplain capabilities.
Strategy 5: Assist Town residents, officials, and business owners in becoming better
protected from future flood damages through education, programming, outreach, and
policy initiatives.

Mountain Lodge Drainage
Improvements and Flood
Damage Reduction

This project will provide a series of standard plans and detailed drawings for repairing and/or upgrading existing degraded stormwater ditches.
It will then provide funds to implement a revolving loan, grant, or cost-share program to help low-income residents of Mountain Lodge Park
implement the improvements on a property-by-property basis.
In addition to providing standard plans directly, this project would also provide outreach and education to homeowners through the
Homeowners Association to assist in the implementation of the plans.

Proposed

$300,000

N

Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding on the built environment, including
critical facilities, infrastructure, business, and housing.
Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for emergency preparedness, response,
sheltering, and communication.

Strategic Critical Facility
Flood Proofing and
Structural Mitigation
Program

This project aims to strengthen key critical facilities that experienced service interruptions due to flooding during Hurricane Irene and Tropical
Storm Lee. It will be informed by the Town’s new Detailed Program and Investment Prioritization Tool.

Proposed

$1,345,710

N

Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding on the built environment, including
critical facilities, infrastructure, business, and housing.
Strategy 2: Improve stormwater management and drainage systems throughout the
Town to decrease risk for homes, businesses, and residents.
Strategy 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance the Town’s natural, recreational, and
cultural resources, and restore natural floodplain capabilities.

Update Local Codes and
Ordinances

This project would include a comprehensive review of the zoning and subdivision regulations to identify areas of improvement that would
enhance the Community’s ability to be more resilient to future storm events and would address the feasibility related to code changes.

Proposed

$80,000

N

144

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

Estimated Cost

Regional
(Y/N)

Strategy

144

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.2 – MASTER TABLE OF PROJECTS (CONT’D)
Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Regional
(Y/N)

Implement and disseminate education materials regarding a coordinated alerting system and general disaster readiness. These materials will be
designed for public and private sectors, families and individuals, and Persons with Access and Functional Needs (PAFN) and vulnerable populations.
The materials can also benefit low and moderate income populations without reliable access to Internet.

Proposed

$15,000

Y

Barnes Road Levee

This project proposes to create a berm/levee behind the residences on Barnes Road, from 144 Barnes Road to the Satterly Creek side of Tappan Sewer
Plant, to deflect and keep the floodwaters away from the homes. Instead, the structural project would direct floodwaters to the non-residential side of
Satterly Creek. This project would build on and be informed by the base analysis from the NYRCR planning process to provide additional information and
recommendations for further actions to reduce flood impacts. This would involve a comprehensive hydraulic analysis of the Satterly Creek in the area of
Barnes Road to evaluate the potential flood damage reduction benefits of constructing a levee.

Featured

$1,897,929

N

Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding on the built environment, including
critical facilities, infrastructure, business, and housing.
Strategy 5: Assist Town residents, officials, and business owners in becoming better
protected from future flood damages through education, programming, outreach, and
policy initiatives.

Community Rating
System Participation

This project would fund professional services to develop an application for the Town of Blooming Grove, potentially in partnership with the Village of
South Blooming Grove, to join the NFIP CRS to reduce flood insurance rates in the Town. The project would aim to enter participating municipalities
into the program at a CRS Rating of 8, which would immediately translate into a 10% discount in flood insurance policy premiums for policy holders in
good standing. In addition to gaining membership to the CRS program, this contract would educate the present Town Supervisor, Board Members, and
the public about the CRS program and its associated benefits; and assist residents with resiliency-focused residential property improvements and with
access and awareness to needed funding resources.

Featured

$60,000

N

Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for emergency preparedness, response,
sheltering, and communication.
Strategy 5: Assist Town residents, officials, and business owners in becoming better
protected from future flood damages through education, programming, outreach, and
policy initiatives.

Update the Comprehensive
Emergency Management
Plan and Develop
Hazard and Operational
Specific Annexes

This project would update the Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan (CEMP) for the Town of Blooming Grove. The Town would complete the
CEMP in close coordination and partnership with the Villages of South Blooming Grove and Washingtonville, and would develop multi-jurisdictional
hazard and operational specific annexes.

Featured

$320,000

Y

Strategy 5: Assist Town residents, officials, and business owners in becoming better
protected from future flood damages through education, programming, outreach, and
policy initiatives.

Fund a Town Floodplain
Manager or
Administrator Position

This project seeks to fund a floodplain administrator or manager staffing position for the Town of Blooming Grove, allowing the Town the
dedicated resources and enhanced capabilities that would come from a full-time staff member. The Town’s floodplain manager would serve as
the principal community administrator in the daily implementation of flood loss reduction activities, including enforcing the community’s flood
damage prevention ordinance; updating flood maps, plans, and policies for the Community; and implementing any of the activities related to
administration of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

$45,000 per
year

Potential

Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for emergency preparedness, response,
sheltering, and communication.

Interoperable
Communications Program

A multi‐jurisdictional Tactical Interoperable Communications Plan (TICP) for Blooming Grove, South Blooming Grove, Washingtonville, and other
surrounding jurisdictions, inclusive of emergency responders, state agencies, and closely aligned non‐governmental organizations, will support
effective tactical incident management and strategic emergency management activities throughout the life cycle of an emergency event.
Installing cross‐band/in‐band repeaters, gateways, and back‐up power sources at communications towers will support the implementation of
the TICP. Exercises will evaluate the effectiveness of the TICP and identify necessary areas for further refinement.

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

$300,000 $500,000

Y

Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for emergency preparedness, response,
sheltering, and communication.

New Multi-Purpose
Shelter and Emergency
Operations Facility

The Town does not currently have a reliable, designated emergency shelter with sufficient capacity to meet the Community’s needs during
major flood events. During Hurricane Irene, three of the Town’s firehouses flooded. Two schools also flooded, while the other three schools
were not accessible by all residents of the Town due to flooded roads. High ground in the Town of Blooming Grove is at a premium. This project
will identify a location in the Town but out of the floodplain where the Town can establish a designated Emergency Shelter and/or build a multi‐
use facility. In addition, this facility would act as a staging area for first responders, i.e., it would provide parking for their vehicles. Town services,
such as the senior center, Town and Village Courts, the recreation program and administration, and the town's maintenance garage, could
relocate to this facility as well.

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

$3,000,000

Potential

Strategy 1: Reduce the impact of riverine flooding on the built environment, including
critical facilities, infrastructure, business, and housing.
Strategy 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance the Town’s natural, recreational, and
cultural resources, and restore natural floodplain capabilities.

Strategic Residential Flood
Mitigation Program

This project would construct and/or install flood mitigation improvements for houses located in hazard-prone areas to protect structures from
future damage. This may also include the acquisition and demolition of structures located in the hazard-prone areas. This project would be
implemented on a voluntary basis, with applicants considered based on program priorities and the damage reduction strategies outlined above.

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

TBD

N

Strategy 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance the Town's natural, recreational, and
cultural resources, and restore natural floodplain capabilities.

Town of Blooming Grove
Multi-Modal Emergency
Exit Trail Map

The Town of Blooming Grove currently hosts miles of recreational walking and hiking trails, some of which connect to regionally and nationally
recognized trail systems, although many residents and most visitors to the Plan Area remain uninformed of their existence. Creating and
distributing a map of these resources would not only benefit local residents and potentially attract new tourism activity, it could double as an
outreach campaign to outline emergency pedestrian evacuation routes. These routes would aid the Town in capitalizing on multiple modes of
transportation in appropriate disaster situations. This project would fund the design and dissemination of a map of existing local walking and
hiking trails, as well as local pedestrian amenities, such as local roadways with sidewalks, which may be designed and distributed in combination
with a pedestrian evacuation plan.

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

$30,000

N

Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for emergency preparedness, response,
sheltering, and communication.
Strategy 5: Assist Town residents, officials, and business owners in becoming better
protected from future flood damages through education, programming, outreach, and
policy initiatives.

Vulnerable Populations and
Community Emergency
Alert, Warning and Support

Strategy 3: Improve upon existing capabilities for emergency preparedness, response,
sheltering, and communication.
Strategy 5: Assist Town residents, officials, and business owners in becoming better
protected from future flood damages through education, programming, outreach, and
policy initiatives.

146

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

146

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Collaborative
Communications:
Public Engagement
For A Public Process
The term “collaborative communications” best describes
how the Committee, supported by the Consultant Team,
worked to engage the community in the development
of the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan. Committee
had an eye from the start toward implementing
solutions to increase recovery and resiliency. They
were keenly aware of the results of several devastating
storms, whose impacts were corroborated by the
numerous hazards, land use, and flood-related studies
conducted to date.

With a sentiment that recognized, “We’re
in this together,” the Committee decisively
moved to include the Village of South
Blooming Grove in the NYRCR Plan Area.
While this seemed like a logical move—because both
the Town of Blooming Grove and the Village of South
Blooming Grove share the same watershed and service
boundaries—this measure of collaboration speaks to
the readiness that residents expressed to turn findings
into actions. Moreover, residents and business owners
alike increasingly acknowledged that disaster events
do not discriminate, and that the best solutions and
remedies are mutually tackled.

Community-Driven,
Community-Targeted
The public engagement process that factored into the
development of the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR
Plan and resulted in the community-driven resiliency
initiatives was predicated on an understanding of which
local messaging channels would be most effective.
Formulated at the start of the planning process,
Committee Members actively engaged in strategizing
everything, from the messages to the methods by which

147

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

gathered information and encouraged attendance at the
four Public Engagement Events. These events were held
at strategic points during the planning process, both
to cull public opinion and to inform the public about
the qualitative and quantitative findings made at key
benchmarks in the planning process.

Regular Committee Meetings

Public Engagement Events were ideal forums for the community to
learn about what causes flooding, how it can be mitigated, and what
might be required to achieve greater resiliency. Photo is courtesy of
Tetra Tech, Inc.

they would reach those who live, work, and service the
Town of Blooming Grove.
From the outset, a spirit of inclusiveness underscored
the approach to public engagement.

Residents from very distinct residential
segments in the NYRCR Plan Area comprised
both the Committee and the regular group
of attendees that attended the biweekly
Committee Meetings.
This cross-section included the frequently flooded,
single-family, residential Tappan Subdivision
neighborhood; the private lake communities of
Tomahawk Lake (in the Town of Blooming Grove) and
Merriewold Lake (in the Village of South Blooming
Grove); and the privately owned, socially vulnerable
Mountain Lodge Park community. Additionally,
representatives from regional watershed groups, the
Village of Washingtonville, and the Orange County
Planning Office contributed to Committee meetings and
messaging efforts.
Outreach to residents, homeowners, non-resident
property owners, business owners, and community and
social service organizations across both the public and
private sectors served as the local blueprint for public
engagement and education. In particular, this outreach

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

The Committee, composed of local residents,
businesspeople, and community organizational
stakeholders, has met every other week since the
Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Program inception
in June 2014 to discuss issues, areas of critical need,
and prospective projects. The meetings also served
as a forum to advance the vetting and outreach
processes. Guided by formal meeting agendas and
Robert’s Rules of Order, each meeting included time
for public comment in an open, inviting environment,
with meeting notes recorded. Once reviewed by the
Committee, meeting notes were made available to the
public on the NYRCR Program website. Meetings were
held at the Town of Blooming Grove Senior Center or
Town Hall, both located on Horton Road in the Town
of Blooming Grove.
Public presentations by representatives from the Town
of Blooming Grove, elected officials from the Village of
South Blooming Grove, volunteer emergency services
personnel, and others complemented the regular
Committee Meetings.
This level of participatory collaboration sought two
ends: (1) to capitalize on existing flood mitigation
efforts; and (2) to maximize available resources for the
planning process and project implementation.
The NYRCR Program website, along with many local,
community, and civic organizations’ websites, advertised
all Committee meetings and Public Engagement Events.
Committee Members were directly involved in the
public engagement campaign.

148

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Targeting the Message and Methods
The means and methods by which people send and
receive messages serve as a direct reflection of their
geographic locations and demographic characteristics.
Where and how people live provides a predictable
gauge to understanding how they acquire and share
information about community happenings.

Information Gathering and Information
Sharing at the Grassroots Level
Within the first few weeks of the planning process,
Committee Members distributed surveys to neighbors
and local emergency response personnel as a way to
gauge interest, gather ideas, and engage them in the

A collaborative mapping exercise conducted at one of the Public
Engagement Events enabled residents and business owners to offer
personal accounts of their experiences during and following Hurricane
Irene. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech, Inc.

NYRCR planning process. Committee Members and
local municipal representatives disseminated fliers and
surveys about the NYRCR Program throughout their
respective neighborhoods and via e-mail.
These surveys, available in hard-copy and electronic
format, compiled public opinions about community
needs and opportunities relative to storm recovery,
mitigation, and resiliency.

149

The Committee also shared surveys at Public
Engagement Events. These surveys enabled participants
to rank the importance of the six recovery support
functions (RSFs), as defined initially by FEMA and
adopted by the NYRCR Program. The surveys included
support of vulnerable populations as a category also.
While not an official RSF, this factor plays a significant
role in modern emergency management capabilities.
Public input about these needs and opportunities,
in light of existing and outstanding community
resources, critical assets, and essential redundancies,
became instrumental to the development of Proposed
Project, Featured Projects, and Additional Resiliency
Recommendations.
Top concerns noted by survey respondents included
impassable roads, damage to utilities, inability to access
essential services, and damage to infrastructure. Other
concerns ranking high among responses focused on
the length of utility service interruption, structural
damage to residences, inadequate storm warning and
information about recovery service access, damage to
natural/cultural resources, damage to septic tanks, and
untimely rescue. These survey results were gathered
between July and October 2014.
The Committee also worked with Community officials
and leaders of various service organizations to obtain
input on critical community needs during and following
disasters. Particular inquiry was made to agencies
providing services to vulnerable populations who would
have difficulty with self-evacuation, sheltering-in-place,
and post-event recovery activities. The inquiry included
obtaining survey results from emergency services,
highway department personnel, and fire and police
representatives across the Town Blooming Grove
NYRCR Plan Area.
The Consultant Team also conducted telephone and
in-person interviews with key community stakeholders
who did not participate in the online survey.
These interviews enabled more in-depth discussions
that yielded valuable input relative to prospective
needs and project opportunities.

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

FIGURE 5.1 – VOTING RESULTS

The public provided valuable input on damages from major storms.
Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech.

Opinions gathered from the online survey were
consistent with other data and opinions collected,
concurring that infrastructure should be the primary
focus area for NYRCR Program funding.

Interactive Exercise and Public Opinion
The first Public Engagement Event included an interactive
“voting” exercise. During this event, attendees identified
funding allotment priorities by RSF categorization.

Public Engagement Events drew interest in Blooming Grove. Photo is
courtesy of Tetra Tech.

Figure 5.1 provides a visual verification of the results
from these exercises, which mirror both findings
gathered by surveys and anecdotal evidence gathered
throughout the planning process. The Community
identified its primary priority as Infrastructure, with
Community Planning and Capacity Building ranking
second. Housing and Vulnerable Populations also scored
fairly high on Community concerns.
Attendees of the first and second Public Engagement
Events shared their personal experiences with flood
and storm damage, particularly concerning the events
of Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee. Plan Area
overview maps served as the canvas for participants to
provide accounts, circle areas of roadway damage or
inhibited access, and generally record their personal
experiences with storm damage.

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

150

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Getting the Word Out
The Consultant Team’s demographic profile for the
Plan Area showed that the target population for the
residential outreach campaign included a significant
number of residents belonging to a hard-to-reach
demographic, i.e., aging populations that either do not
have or do not regularly use the Internet. Committee
Members became very proactive and determined to
reach residents in all neighborhoods of the Plan Area.
Committee Members distributed posters and placards
about the NYRCR Program and what benefits it offered
individuals living in the NYRCR Plan Area.

Public outreach efforts incorporated the following
modes of multi-media messaging:
• Media alerts;
• E-mail blasts;
• Posters and placards;
• Lawn signs;
• Newspaper advertisements (print/online);
• NYRCR Program, Town, and community
organizational websites;
• Personal social media; and
• Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) flyers.

Committee Members were particularly proactive in
public engagement and served as the sounding board
for message design and delivery.

The public provided valuable input on damages from major storms. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech.
151

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Public Engagement Events
Four community-wide Public Engagement Events were
conducted between July 2014 and January 2015. These
Public Engagement Events had the following end goals:
• Provide education about the NYRCR Program (all
Public Engagement Events);
• Obtain input from residents, property owners, and
business owners (all Public Engagement Events);
• Review the draft sections of the NYRCR Plan (Public
Engagement Events 2 and 3); and
• Review recommended projects based on public
input and scientific analysis (Public Engagement
Event 4).
At all Public Engagement Events, participants were
encouraged to review the NYRCR Program and Plan
materials, including maps of targeted and prospective
project areas.
As a direct result of an increasing groundswell of
information available about the NYRCR Program and
the Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan, along with
the active Committee leadership, attendance grew with
each successive Public Engagement Event.

Risk Assessment Methodology
The following section outlines the initial risk assessment
for assets in the Plan Area. The analysis incorporated
the baseline methodology, enhanced by specific
assumptions at the request of the Committee. The
baseline methodology included four major components
of the analysis: Risk Area, Hazard Factor, Exposure Score,
and Vulnerability Score.

Data Sources Used
New York Department of State (NYS DOS)-provided
data includes:
• Environmental Systems Research Institute
(ESRI) (2010);
• Federal Communications Commission (2012);
• Federal Communications Commission (FCC);
• Insurance Services Office, Inc.;
• National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA);
• National Park Service (2011);
• National Pipeline Mapping System (2003);

The public provided valuable input on damages from major storms. Photo is courtesy of Tetra Tech.
SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

152

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

• NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
(NYS DEC) (2009);
• NYS Department of Health;
• NYS Department of Transportation;
• NYS Division of Homeland Security and
Emergency Services;
• NYS Education Department (2000);
• NYS Office for People With Developmental
Disabilities;

Community Value
The Committee worked with the Consultant Team
to assign community values for the identified assets.
Assigning a community value allowed the Committee to
get a geographic picture of where important community
assets were located and allowed the Committee to
weigh potential project impacts on the Town in an
informed manner. It did not factor into the risk score of
individual assets.

• NYS Office of General Services; and
• NYS Office of Mental Health.
Local data and data from Orange County includes:
• Building Data;
• Buy-out Properties;
• Critical facilities;
• Damaged Roadways;
• Depth Grids;
• Flood Hazard Areas (FHA);
• Infrastructure;
• Land Use;
• Natural Resources;
• Parcels;
• Soils;
• Tax Data; and
• Zoning.

153

Description of Methodology
The risk assessment for assets in the Town incorporated
NYRCR baseline methodology, enhanced by specific
assumptions at the request of the Committee. The
baseline methodology included four major components
of the analysis: Risk Area, Hazard Factor, Exposure Score,
and Vulnerability Score.
The hazard score of 3 was assigned for the hazard factor
in the tool (100-year flood water level occurring within a
100-year planning time frame).
The exposure score was determined by the sum of a
base score (derived from the risk area in which the asset
is located) plus 0.5 point for each of the six landscape
feature conditions described in Table 5.3, if present.
A base score was assigned for exposure to each asset,
depending on highest-class risk area (Extreme = 2, High
= 1, and Moderate = 0.5) in which a significant portion
of the asset is located.

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.3 – LANDSCAPE ATTRIBUTE VULNERABILITY ASSUMPTIONS
Feature Type

Feature Definition

Defensive Flood Protection Measures

These measures are absent, below base flood elevation (BFE), in
poor condition, or lack maintenance commitment.

Elevation

The asset site is below the Base Flood Elevation (BFE).

Freeboard

Elevation of the habitable or occupied portion of the asset is less
than 2 feet above BFE.

Point of Confluence

Asset is within an area subject to increased flood risk (based on
Consultant Team’s judgment or Committee guidance) because of
a confluence of merging streams.

Stormwater Discharge

Asset is within an area subject to increased flood risk (based on
Consultant Team’s judgment or Committee guidance) because of
stormwater system discharge.

Vegetated Streambank Buffers

Asset is within the floodway fringe (based on FEMA definition).

Low-lying lands, such as those used for farming, can experience significant wash-outs and runoff during major storm events.
Photo is courtesy of Eric Thayer.

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

154

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.4 – VULNERABILITY BASED ON IMPACT ON SERVICE OR FUNCTION
OF COMMUNITY ASSETS
Impact

Insignificant (1)

Minor (2)

Moderate (3)

Significant (4)

Major (5)

Economic Assets

Limited
interruption in
service or shortterm reduced
service

Service loss
for up to one
week or longerterm reduced
services

Service loss for more
than one week up to one
month or longer-term
reduced service

Service loss for more
than one month or
permanent reduced
capacity

Permanent loss
of service of the
economic asset

Health and
Social Services
Assets

Limited
interruption in
service or shortterm reduced
services; Services
under more than
usual stress but
manageable

Service loss
of up to one
week or longerterm reduced
services;
Services under
more than usual
stress on several
fronts

Service loss for more
than one week up to one
month or longer-term
reduced service; Services
under severe pressure

Service loss for
more than one month
or permanent
reduced capacity

Permanent loss of
service of any one
of the essential
services listed

Housing Assets

Limited
inconvenience

Out of use for
up to one week

Out of use for more
than one week up to
one month

Out of use for up
to six months (OR)
permanent loss of 15%
or less of housing in a
group asset

Out of use for more
than six months (OR)
permanent loss of
more than 15% of
the housing in a
group asset

Infrastructure
System Assets

Limited
interruption in
service or shortterm reduced
service

Service loss
for up to one
week or longerterm reduced
services

Out of use for more than
one week up to one
month or longer-term
reduced service

Service loss for more
than one month or
permanent reduced
capacity

Permanent loss of
service of any one of
the facilities listed

Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Assets

Limited
interruption in
service or shortterm reduced
service (OR)
Limited loss of
access, habitat,
or use

Service loss
for up to one
week or longer
term reduced
services;
Minimal natural
habitat impacts,
temporary loss
of public access,
temporary loss
of open space/
tourism assets

Out of use for more than
one week up to one
month (OR) Moderate
impacts on natural
habitats, sustained loss
of public access, longterm loss of private
open space

Service loss
greater than one
month (OR)
Permanently
diminished capacity
of natural resources;
substantial damages
of important
natural habitat

Permanent loss of
service of the cultural
asset (OR) Complete
loss of important
natural habitats

Assets Providing
Services
for Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Limited service
interruption

Service loss for
up to one week

Out of use for more
than one week up to
one month

Permanent service
interruption of more
than one and less than
six months

Service interruption of
six or more months

155

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The Committee worked toward developing a
methodology for assessing risk, which considered
the unique situation and individual dynamics
of areas at risk. To assess true vulnerability, the
Committee determined which asset locations required
consideration, and concluded that because assetspecific information on facility recovery times (after
impact by a flooding event) was not available for all
assets, standard assumptions based on similar facilities
should be used.

The Committee worked together to develop
a tiered-factor approach to assess risk,
generating risk scores that accurately
reflected vulnerabilities and overall risk
within the Community.
The factor is adjusted based on similar facility types
in a descending five-point scale that is reduced by
one point, determined by its risk area location. For
example, as noted in the vulnerability section that
follows, all buildings were assumed to be “5” and all
garages and storage buildings were assumed to be
“4”. Assumptions were reviewed and approved by the
Committee. When specific vulnerability information
was available, the standard methodology was applied;
however, if information was not available, the following
assumptions were applied.

Risk Area Assumptions
RISK AREAS
Extreme Risk Areas: areas within the 100-year FHA that
are within 1,000 feet of a Repetitive Loss Property.

do not produce a risk score. Assets in this category are
given a risk score of “False” in the risk assessment tool).

SOCIALLY VULNERABLE POPULATIONS
Social Vulnerability Index (SOVI) measures the social
vulnerability of populations to environmental hazards.
Assets with a SOVI score of Medium or higher were
identified as ”Yes” in the risk tool.

ASSUMPTIONS FOR THE LANDSCAPE
ATTRIBUTES AND VULNERABILITY LEVEL
Defensive Flood Protection Measures: All assets were
assumed “Yes” if absent, below BFE, in poor condition,
or lacking maintenance commitment.
Elevation: All assets outside the extreme, high, or
moderate risk area were assumed “No,” and all assets
in the High and Moderate Hazard Zone were assumed
“Yes” if the asset site is below BFE.
Freeboard: All assets outside the extreme, high, or
moderate risk area were assumed “No,” and all building,
structure, and bridge assets in the extreme, high, and
moderate risk areas were assumed “Yes” if elevation
of the habitable or occupied portion of the asset is less
than two feet above BFE.
Point of Confluence (POC): All assets within 1,500 feet
downstream of a major POC (this is a HMP dataset with
all streams with 4,300 cubic feet per second [CFS] or
more during a 100-year storm event) and within the
extreme, high, or moderate risk areas are “Yes”; all
others are “No”.

High Risk Areas: areas within the 100-year FHA.

Storm Water Discharge: All assets within 1,000 feet of
a major culvert (HMP dataset) and within the extreme,
high, or moderate risk areas are “Yes”.

Moderate Risk Areas: areas within the 500-year Flood
Hazard Area (FHA).

Vegetated Stream Buffers: All assets in the floodway are
assumed “Yes”; all others “No”.

“Not Applicable (N/A)” risk areas: areas outside of an
identified FHA (all assets not located in an Extreme,
High or Moderate Risk Area were identified as N/A, and

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

156

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

ASSETS IN “EXTREME” AND “HIGH” RISK AREAS
Vulnerability
• All buildings were assumed to be 5.
• All garages storage buildings were assumed
to be 4.
• All transportation infrastructure and water
treatment facilities were assumed to be 3.
• All wells and springs were assumed to be 2.
• All natural and cultural resources other than
buildings were assumed to be 2.
• All natural resources were assumed to be 1.

ASSETS IN “MODERATE” RISK AREAS
Vulnerability
• All buildings were assumed to be 4.
• All garages storage buildings were assumed
to be 3.
• All transportation infrastructure and water
treatment facilities were assumed to be 2.
• All wells and springs were assumed to be 1.

157

• All natural and cultural resources other than
buildings were assumed to be 2.
• All natural resources were assumed to be 1.
Landscape Attributes:
• Point of Confluence: “Yes” if the asset is subject
to increased flooding due to an upstream point of
confluence, and “No” if the asset is not affected.
Comments justifying impact were provided where
available.
• Stormwater Discharge: “Yes” if the asset is
affected by stormwater discharge and “No” if the
asset is not affected. Comments justifying impact
were provided where available.
While the risk scores differ between the two events as a
result of using different hazard scores, the basis for how
assets are categorized into the severe, high, moderate,
or residual risk levels is the same for the two events,
as shown by the similarly colored regions in Figure 2.8,
located in Section 2. For example, a risk score of 60 in
the 100-year event evaluation is shown as 80 in the
500-year event evaluation; however, both scores are
classified as severe risk.

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.5 – RISK SCORE RANGES
100-YEAR EVENT

500-YEAR EVENT

Severe (Risk Score >53)

Severe (Risk Score >70)

Risk scores in the “Severe” category occur only if one of the two factors, exposure or vulnerability, is rated 5, and the other is 4 or higher,
which could indicate that the asset is in a dangerous situation. Both exposure and vulnerability should be reduced, if possible. Consider
relocation a priority option for these assets.

High (Risk Score 24 - 53)

High (Risk Score 32 - 70)

Risk scores in the “High” category are indicative of conditions that could lead to significant negative outcomes from a storm. Using the risk
scoring system, a total of 24 (or 32 for the 500-year event) can be achieved only if the vulnerability is 4 and exposure is 2, or vice versa. A
vulnerability of 4 indicates likely loss of service of an asset for an extended period of time. For many assets, this loss may be unacceptable.
Actions should be taken to reduce vulnerability, such as elevating or flood-proofing the asset to help avoid a long-term loss of function.
A score of 4 for exposure indicates most of the local landscape attributes that help reduce storm damages are absent. Actions to restore
landscape attributes may be appropriate. All other risk scores higher than 24 (or 32 for the 500-year event) indicate either the exposure or
the vulnerability (or both) are higher than the conditions discussed above, lending more weight to need to take actions that reduce risk.
Relocation may be necessary in the future if other means of adaptation or management actions are not effective.

Moderate (Risk Score 6 - 23)

Moderate (Risk Score 8 - 31)

Risk scores in the “Moderate” category pose moderate to serious consequences, but adaptation may be of lower priority based on one factor,
exposure, or because vulnerability remains relatively low. Use a combination of measures to reduce exposure and vulnerability.

Residual (Risk Score <6)

Residual (Risk Score <8)

Risk scores in the “Residual” category occur when both exposure and vulnerability are relatively low. This situation suggests floods would
pose minor or infrequent consequences. However, a vulnerability score of 3 may not be acceptable for critical facilities or assets of high
community value, because the community cannot afford to be without these services, even infrequently. Note that risk is never completely
eliminated. Some residual risk still remains even after management measures have been implemented. It is recommended that the
community monitors conditions and adapts as necessary.
Source: NYS DOS, 2013

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

158

Risk Reduction Analysis
A risk reduction analysis was completed for those
Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery
(CDBG-DR) Proposed and Featured Projects that are
intended to reduce the risk of flood damage to assets.
This analysis was limited by the data and information
available and the inundation and extents of the data.
The analysis was based on the point location of an asset
as identified by the City. The Risk Areas are based on the
available Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRMs);
however, the Hydrologic Engineering Center—River
Analysis System (HEC-RAS) baseline inundation extents
do not always align and therefore, slight differences may
be seen in the analysis.
This analysis identified the number of assets secured
as a result of the impact of the CDBG-DR Proposed and
Featured Projects. Assets were considered secured
if the project impacts result in an elimination of risk,
indicated by a risk score of “0”. The term “secured” is
only applicable to this analysis and may not necessarily
represent a real-world elimination of flooding impacts.
Please note the quantitative analysis was limited to the
data available, and all discussions regarding quantitative
reduction in risk were meant to estimate projected
impacts to the asset(s). For projects where data or other
factors limited quantitative assessment, a qualitative
risk reduction analysis was performed. Anecdotal
evidence, site visits, best practices, and technical
expertise all contributed to a qualitative discussion
of risk reduction that would result from each project.
The analysis may not reflect the project’s postconstruction conditions or the resulting impacts
of a measure, once implemented.

Details of the Analysis
Risk Area: A change to this entry (by one category) was
made if the HEC-RAS analysis estimates a change in
inundation extent and the asset is no longer located in
the floodplain.

Risk Area estimates are determined by landscape
attributes and vulnerability, which are described below:
1. Landscape Attributes: Changes to these entries
will be made if the hydraulic analyses indicated an
improvement to these landscape attributes:
a. D
 efensive Flood Protection Measure: A change
to this attribute was made if defensive flood
protection measures are proposed to the asset(s),
or if the proposed measure provides improved
flood defenses in the area.
b. E levation: A change to this attribute was made
if the HEC-RAS analysis indicates a reduction in
water surface elevation on the assets site.
c. Freeboard: A change to this attribute was
made for elevation projects where the measure
increases freeboard to or above the standard.
d. P
 oint of Confluence: A change to this attribute
was made if there is a reduction in flow due to
an upstream mitigation measure, or the asset is
moved from its original location further from the
point of confluence.
e. Stormwater Discharge: A change to this attribute
was made if the proposed project increases
stormwater conveyance for those assets
currently indicated as “Yes” and are within
1,000 feet downstream of a culvert/ stormwater
specific project.
f. Vegetated Streambank Buffer: If the asset is no
longer in the floodway, a change to this entry will
be made.
2. Vulnerability: The methodology used to originally
assess the Vulnerability score for the assets is
included in Table 5.6 below. In accordance with
this methodology, if the proposed project changes
the Risk Area of an asset, the vulnerability score
was changed in accordance with the vulnerability
methodology, based on the new Risk Area. The risk
score will also change if there is an improvement in
the capacity of the asset to recover from an event, as
the vulnerability score was reduced by one category.

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

Skyview Estates

Not
Applicable
(N/A)

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

5

0

4

FALSE

5

0

Tomahawk Lake

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

5

52.5

4

3.5

5

70

Marycrest Conv
Garge

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

5

0

4

FALSE

5

0

Eastern Box Turtle

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Natural Habitats

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

5

0

4

FALSE

5

0

Hook and Ladder
Saloon

N/A

Economic

Restaurants

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Blooming Grove
Police Department

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Emergency
Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Orange and
Rockland

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Power Supply

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Dunkin Donuts

N/A

Economic

Restaurants

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

5

0

4

FALSE

5

0

Hulsetown Road
Bridge over
Cromline Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

68

4

4.50

5

90

CC Monterey
Maintenance

N/A

Economic

Small Business

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

5

0

4

FALSE

5

0

Marycrest
Convent

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

5

0

4

FALSE

5

0

Nannini Callhn
Shale

N/A

Economic

Large Business

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

5

0

4

FALSE

5

0

Oxford Park

N/A

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

5

0

4

FALSE

5

0

CVS Drugstore

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Healthcare Facilities

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

5

0

4

FALSE

5

0

Jim Johnsons

N/A

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.5

3

22.5

4

2.5

3

30

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Salisbury Mills
Post Office

High

Health and
Social Services

Government and
Administrative
Services

Bank of America

N/A

Economic

Banks and Financial
Services

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

160

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

Little League Field

High

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.5

3

22.5

4

2.5

3

30

Uncle Bobs Self
Storage

N/A

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Rehabilitation
Support

Moderate

Health and
Social Services

Healthcare Facilities

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.5

3

13.5

4

1.5

3

18

Spindler
Enterprises

Moderate

Economic

Large Business

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.5

3

13.5

4

1.5

3

18

Blue-tipped
Dancer

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Natural Habitats

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

3

31.5

4

3.5

3

42

Ralphs Motor
Repairs

High

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.50

5

38

4

2.50

5

50

Washingtonville
Middle School

Moderate

Health and
Social Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

5

23

4

1.50

5

30

Craigville Road
Bridge over
Cromline Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

5

60

4

4.00

5

80

Farmingdale
Road Bridge over
Cromline Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

5

60

4

4.00

5

80

Lake Road Bridge
over Tributary to
Moodna Creek

Moderate

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.5

5

22.5

4

1.5

5

30

Weirs Ice Cream

High

Economic

Restaurant

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

2

5

30

4

2

5

40

Brotherhood Plaza

N/A

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

5

0

4

FALSE

5

0

State Route 94/
State Route 208

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

5

0

4

FALSE

5

0

Vern Allen Park

Moderate

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.5

5

22.5

4

1.5

5

30

Mag Associates

N/A

Economic

Large Business

No

No

Low

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Washingtonville
Police Department

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Emergency
Operations/ Response

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Woodcock
Mountain Road
Bridge over Perry
Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

4

4.00

2

32

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

162

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

Wood Fron

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Natural Habitats

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Walden Savings
Bank

N/A

Economic

Banks and Financial
Services

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Department of
Public Works Washingtonville

Moderate

Health and
Social Services

Public Works Facilities

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.5

2

9

4

1.5

2

12

Express Lube

Moderate

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.5

2

9

4

1.5

2

12

Brookside Auto

High

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

2

2

12

4

2

2

16

Chase Bank

N/A

Economic

Banks and Financial
Services

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Blooming Grove
Court

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Government and
Administrative
Services

No

Yes, FEMA

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Corby Lake

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

St Annes Episcopal

Moderate

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

2

9

4

1.50

2

12

St Marys Parish
Cent

N/A

Housing

Single-Family
Residence

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Little Lambs
Preschool

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Daycare and Eldercare

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Hudson Road
Bridge over
Satterly Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

4

4.00

2

32

Mountain Lodge
Road Bridge over
Perry Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

2

27

4

4.50

2

36

Washingtonville
Fire Department

Moderate

Health and
Social Services

Emergency
Operations/Response

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

1.00

2

6

4

1.00

2

8

Perry Creek Road
Bridge over Perry
Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

4

4.00

2

32

Locust Street
Bridge over
Moodna Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

4

4.00

2

32

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

164

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

State Route
94 Bridge over
Cromline Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

4

4.00

2

32

State Route
94 Bridge over
Moodna Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

4

4.00

2

32

Beaverdam Lake

High

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

2

2

12

4

2

2

16

Tomahawk Lake

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

2

21

4

3.5

2

28

Subway

N/A

Economic

Restaurants

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Corner Candle
Store

Extreme

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54

4

4.50

4

72

Washingtonville
Court House

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Government and
Administrative
Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Roes Orchard

N/A

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Craigville Road
Bridge

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Hil Mar Lodge

N/A

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Fieldstone Plaza

N/A

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Stewarts Shops

N/A

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Washingtonville
Pediatrics

Moderate

Health and
Social Services

Healthcare Facilities

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

1

3

9

4

1

3

12

Moodna Creek

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

4

42

4

3.5

4

56

Satterly Creek

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

4

42

4

3.5

4

56

Cromline Creek

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

4

42

4

3.5

4

56

Lenni Lenape Lake

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

166

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

Brookshire
Condos

N/A

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Bethany
Presbyterian

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Village Hall

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Community Centers

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Village of South
Blooming Grove

High

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Community Centers

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

2.00

4

24

4

2.00

4

32

Oxford Water
District

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Washingtonville
High School

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

Lake Hildegarde

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.50

2

21

4

3.50

2

28

Museum Village
Road Bridge

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Kellers Machine
Shop

High

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Low

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.5

4

30

4

2.5

4

40

Hubshop Road
Bridge over
Cromline Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

4

4.00

2

32

South Blooming
Grove Fire

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Emergency
Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Orange Radiology

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Healthcare Facilities

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Knights of
Columbus

High

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

2

3

18

4

2

3

24

Goose Pond Mtn
Park

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Chase Bank

N/A

Economic

Banks and Financial
Services

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Lake Anne

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

168

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

DPW
Washingtonville

Moderate

Health and
Social Services

Public Works Facilities

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.5

3

13.5

4

1.5

3

18

O C Transmissions

Moderate

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

1

3

9

4

1

3

12

F and J Pizzeria

N/A

Economic

Restaurant

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

St Marys CYO

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

MN MM 6100

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Weathervane
Apartments

N/A

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Washingtonville
Apartments

N/A

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Colonial Gardens

N/A

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Dunkin Donuts

N/A

Economic

Restaurants

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Verizon Wireless

Moderate

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

4

18

4

1.50

4

24

Scottie's Diner

Moderate

Economic

Restaurant

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

3

14

4

1.50

3

18

Frontier

Moderate

Infrastructure
Systems

Telecommunications

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

1.00

3

9

4

1.00

3

12

Ralphs Motor
Repairs

Extreme

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

41

4

4.50

3

54

South Street
Collision

Extreme

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

41

4

4.50

3

54

Newport Beverage

High

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.50

3

23

4

2.50

3

30

Fulton Square

High

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.50

3

23

4

2.50

3

30

Washingtonville
Vet

N/A

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Craigville Bible
Church

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Doctor Nukk, DDS

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Healthcare Facilities

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

TD Bank

N/A

Economic

Banks and Financial
Services

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Rolling Hills
Condos

High

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

2.00

3

18

4

2.00

3

24

Callbox 1

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Telecommunications

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

170

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

Department of
Public Works –
Blooming Grove

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Public Works Facilities

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Woodcock Auto

N/A

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Village Wash N
Dry

High

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.50

3

23

4

2.50

3

30

Moffat Library

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Libraries

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Sunoco

N/A

Economic

Small Business

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

First Presbyterian
Church

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Blooming Grove
Plaza

N/A

Economic

Small Business

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

AHRC

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Schools

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Mediacom

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Telecommunications

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Blooming Grove
Town Hall

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Community Centers

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Washingtonville
Village Hall

Moderate

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Community Centers

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

1.00

3

9

4

1.00

3

12

Hope Chapel

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Museum Village

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Museums, Performing
Arts Centers, Stadiums

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

SBG WD5

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Washingtonville
Water Plant

Moderate

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.00

3

18

4

2.00

3

24

Prides Crossing
Water Tank

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Tomahawk Water
District

Moderate

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

3

14

4

1.50

3

18

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

172

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

Mt View Water
District 5

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

SBG Water District
1

High

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

2.00

3

18

4

2.00

3

24

O&R Well

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Tappan Water

High

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.50

3

23

4

2.50

3

30

Tappan
Wastewater

Moderate

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.00

3

18

4

2.00

3

24

Round Hill
Elementary

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Schools

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

South Blooming
Grove Wastewater

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

3

36

4

4.00

3

48

DPW
Washingtonville

High

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

2.00

3

18

4

2.00

3

24

St Marys Church

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Taft Elementary
School

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Digital Radio
Broadcasting, Inc.

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Telecommunications

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

4

0

4

FALSE

4

0

S J M Landing
Heliport

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Steel Style Inc.

N/A

Economic

Large Business

No

No

Low

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Alexandra
Development
Corporation

N/A

Economic

Large Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Markovits Blustein
Gottlieb PC

N/A

Economic

Large Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Felter Hill Road
bridge over Perry
Creek

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Mt Lodge Park
Fire

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Emergency
Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Cherry Hill Road
Bridge over
Cromline Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

4

4.00

1

16

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

174

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

Clove Road Bridge
over Moodna
Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

4

4.00

1

16

Round Hill Road
Bridge over
Satterly Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

1

14

4

4.50

1

18

Tuthill Road Bridge
over Cromline
Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

4

4.00

1

16

Route 94 Bridge
over Cromline
Creek

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Route 94 Bridge
over Tributary to
Moodna Creek

High

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.50

1

8

4

2.50

1

10

South Street
Bridge over
Moodna Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

1

14

4

4.50

1

18

Route 6/Route
17 Bridge over
Orange and
Rockland Lake

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Blooming Grove
Ambulance

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Emergency
Operations/Response

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Route 6/Route 17
Bridge

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Museum Village
Road Bridge over
Route 17/Route 6

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Railroad Bridge
over Route 94

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Clove Road Bridge

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Horton Road
Bridge over
Satterly Creek

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

3

40.5

4

4.5

3

54

Glenwood Road
Bridge

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Craigville Road
Bridge over Route
6/Route 17

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

176

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

Mt. Lodge

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Telecommunications

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Blooming Grove
Town

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Community Centers

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Mayer Landfill

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Hazardous Materials,
Solid Waste, and
Recycling

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Blooming Grove
Hostel #9607

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Supportive Housing

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Blooming Grove
Hostel #8310

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Supportive Housing

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

County Park

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Blooming Grove
Tappan Homes
Sewer District

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

4

4

3

48

Glenwood Hills
Sewer District 5

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Washingtonville
Village Hall

Moderate

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Community Centers

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.5

2

9

4

1.5

2

12

Blooming Grove
Daycare

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Daycare and Eldercare

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Salisbury Mills Fire

High

Health and
Social Services

Emergency
Operations/Response

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

2

3

18

4

2

3

24

Loughrans

N/A

Economic

Restaurant

No

No

Low

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Grace Comm
Baptist Church

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Ramblers
Restaurant

N/A

Economic

Restaurant

No

No

Low

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Stop & Shop

N/A

Economic

Grocery/Food
Suppliers

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Brotherhood
Winery

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Museums, Performing
Arts Centers, Stadiums

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Merriewold Lake

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

3

31.5

4

3.5

3

42

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

178

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

Sunoco

N/A

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Korean Buddhist
Camp

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Low

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Station Road
Square Pl

High

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

1.5

3

2.5

3

22.5

4

2.5

3

30

Lasser Park

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Rocky Point
Apartments

N/A

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Rocky Knoll
Apartments

N/A

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Stone Hill
Apartments

N/A

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Post Office
Blooming Grove

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Government and
Administrative
Services

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Commuter
Parking Lot

N/A

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Hook and Ladder
Pub

N/A

Economic

Restaurants

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Vern Allen Hockey
Rink

High

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

2

1

6

4

2

1

8

Skateboard Park

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Post Office
Washingtonville

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Government and
Administrative
Services

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

Orchard Lake

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

3

31.5

4

3.5

3

42

HH Fedl Credit
Union

N/A

Economic

Banks and Financial
Services

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Washingtonville
Collision

Moderate

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

1.5

2

9

4

1.5

2

12

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

180

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

ICDI Corporation

N/A

Economic

Large Business

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

T and M Deli 2 Go

N/A

Economic

Restaurants

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Round Hill House

N/A

Economic

Restaurants

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Horizon Medical

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Healthcare Facilities

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Little Harvard

Moderate

Health and
Social Services

Daycare and Eldercare

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

1

2

6

4

1

2

8

English Rose

N/A

Health and
Social Services

Daycare and Eldercare

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

Fergusons Funeral
Home

N/A

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

2

0

4

FALSE

2

0

VFW Post

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Korby Lake

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Hildegard Lake

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

1

10.5

4

3.5

1

14

Merriewood Lake

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

1

10.5

4

3.5

1

14

Orange Rockland
Lakes

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

1

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

<Null>Waterbody

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Schunnemunk
Mountain

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Goose Pond
Mountain

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Goose Pond
Mountain

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

1

0

4

FALSE

1

0

Goose Pond
Mountain

N/A

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Medium

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

FALSE

3

0

4

FALSE

3

0

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

182

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

TABLE 5.6 – RISK ASSESSMENT TOOL (CONT’D)
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Table 5.5 - Risk Assessment Tool
Optional: Risk Assessment
(500-year event)

Risk Assessment

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation

Freeboard

Point of
Confluence

Stormwater
Discharge

Vegetated
Streambank
Buffers

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset
Sub-Category

Otter Kill

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

3

31.5

4

3.5

3

42

Seely Brook

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4

1

12

4

4

1

16

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

184

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

GLOSSARY
ALS

Advanced Life Support

BFE

Base Flood Elevation

CAP-SSSE

Community Assistance Program – State Support Services Element

CART

Community Animal Response Team

CCHA

County Community Health Assessment

CDBG

Community Development Block Grant

CDBG-DR

Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery

CEMP

Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan

CERT

Community Emergency Response Team

cfs

Cubic Feet Per Second

Committee

Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Planning Committee

Community

Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Community

Consultant Team

Tetra Tech, Inc.

CRS

Community Ratings System

CWOP

Closed Without Payment

DHS

Department of Homeland Security

DPW

Department of Public Works

DFIRM

Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map

EMS

Emergency Medical Service

EOC

Emergency Operations Center

ESD

Empire State Development

ESRI

Environmental Systems Research Institute

FAQ

Frequently Asked Questions

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency

FHA

Flood Hazard Area

FHWA

Federal Highway Administration

185

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

GLOSSARY (CONT’D)
FIRM

Flood Insurance Rate Map

FIS

Flood Insurance Study

FMA

Flood Mitigation Assistance

FTE

Full-Time Equivalent

GEIS

Generic Environmental Impact Statement

GIS

Geographic Information Systems

GOSR

Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery

gpd

Gallons of Water Per Day

HAZUS-MH

Hazards Us-Multi-Hazard Risk Assessment Model

HEC-RAS

Hydrologic Engineering Center - River Analysis System

HMGP

Hazard Mitigation Grant Program

HMP

Town of Blooming Grove Hazard Mitigation Plan (2013)

HSGP

Department of Homeland Security Grant Program

MHz

Megahertz

MS4

Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System

MTA

Metropolitan Transit Authority

N/A

Not Applicable

NCDC

National Climatic Data Center

NFIP

National Flood Insurance Program

NFWF

National Fish and Wildlife Foundation

NOAA

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

NWS

National Weather Service

NYRCR

NY Rising Community Reconstruction

NYS

New York State

NYS DEC

New York State Department of Environmental Conservation

NYS DOS

New York Department of State

OC GIS

Orange County Geographic Information System

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

186

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

GLOSSARY (CONT’D)
OPSG

Operation Stonegarden Grant

PA

Public Assistance

Plan Area

Town of Blooming Grove NYRCR Plan Area

PDM

Pre-Disaster Mitigation

RL

Repetitive Loss

RSF

Recovery Support Function

SART

State Agency Review Team

SEQRA

State Environmental Quality Review Act

SHSP

State Homeland Security Program

SOVI

Social Vulnerability Index

SRL

Severe Repetitive Loss

SWOT

Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities, And Threats

TBD

To Be Determined

TBGCP

Town of Blooming Grove Comprehensive Plan

TICP

Tactical Interoperable Communications Plan

UASI

Urban Areas Security Initiative

U.S. DOT

United States Department of Transportation

187

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Endnotes
“Federal Emergency Management Agency.” FEMA.gov. N.p., n.d. Web. 29 Oct. 2014. http://www.fema.gov/.
“NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program.” New York Storm Recovery Resources Center. New York State 		
Department of State, n.d. Web. 29 Oct. 2014. http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/community-reconstructionprogram.
Orange County Geographic Information System. Orange County, NY, n.d. Web. 31 Oct. 2014. http://gis.
orangecountygov.com/.
“NY State Responds – Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee: One Year Later.” New York State Office of the Governor.
n.p., August 2012. Web. 31 Oct. 2014.
http://www.governor.ny.gov/assets/documents/Irene-Lee-One-Year-Report.pdf.
“Social Vulnerability Index.” Hazards and Vulnerabilities Research Institute. University of South Carolina, n.d.
Web. 30 Oct. 2014.
http://webra.cas.sc.edu/hvri/products/sovi.aspx.
United States. Comprehensive Response Document for Moodna Watershed. By U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
n.p.: Orange County, 2010. Print.
United States. Federal Emergency Management Agency. Orange County, NY, Flood Insurance Study. Washington, D.C.:
n.p., 2009. Print.
United States. New York State Department of State. Plan Outline and Guidance Relating to NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan. n.p.: NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program, 2014. Print.
United States. Orange County Department of Planning. Orange County Agricultural Economic Development
Strategy. By ACDS, LLC. N.p.: Orange County, NY, 2004. Web. 2014. http://www.orangecountygov.com/
filestorage/124/1362/1460/10182/ag_econ_development_strategy.pdf.
United States. Orange County, NY. Orange County Water Authority. Moodna Creek Watershed Conservation and
Management Plan. N.p.: Orange County Water Authority, 2010. Print.
United States. Orange County. Orange County, NY, Comprehensive Plan. N.p.: Orange County, 2010. Print.
United States. Orange County. Orange County Single Jurisdiction Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan. By URS. n.p.: Orange
County, 2011. Print.
United States. Orange County Transportation Council. Orange County Transportation Council Long Range
Transportation Plan. n.p.: Orange County, 2011. Print.
SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

188

Town of Blooming Grove NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

United States. Town of Blooming Grove. Town of Blooming Grove Comprehensive Plan. By AKRF. n.p., 2005. Print.
United States. Town of Blooming Grove. Town of Blooming Grove Multi-Jurisdictional All-Hazard Mitigation Plan. By
Tetra Tech, Inc. Town of Blooming Grove, NY, Aug. 2013. Web. 2014. http://townofbloominggroveny.com/
HazardMitProject/DraftPlan.aspx.
United States. United States Census Bureau. 2010 Census. United States Census Bureau, n.d. Web. 2014. http://www.
census.gov/2010census/.
United States. United States Census Bureau. American Community Survey 2012 Estimates. American Fact Finder, n.d.
Web. 2014. http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml###.
United States. Village of South Blooming Grove. Emergency Action Plan for Merriewold Dam. By McGoey, Hauser, and
Edsall. N.p.: Village of South Blooming Grove, 2012. Print.
“U.S. Surface Climate Observing Reference Networks.” U.S. Surface Climate Observing Reference Networks. National
Climatic Data Center, n.d. Web. 29 Oct. 2014. http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/crn/
United States. Village of South Blooming Grove. Emergency Action Plan for Merriewold Dam. By McGoey,
Hauser, and Edsall. N.p.: Village of South Blooming Grove, 2012. Print.
“U.S. Surface Climate Observing Reference Networks.” U.S. Surface Climate Observing Reference Networks.
National Climatic Data Center, n.d. Web. 29 Oct. 2014. http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/crn/

189

SECTION 5: ADDITIONAL MATERIALS


