Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan SEN,
Beach, and Sea Gate a
Pot . . ‘> |
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan Vame”
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program March 2014
‘ ig ee ee eee
ee gee age li eee me en ee) SOO es -
ee em Page Rr ee ee
<= i ee ia oh 5B TP ge et ha
Ae ge ee IS ae
are ee See (aa mA
ere Se —— —@ Ae eee -
—_—- in ale =
NE emer ee a | 4
ai  —.. a Pe f
ei Se Nic) i a
ta eS od “ee

SS
Members of the NY Rising Community Reconstruction Planning Committee

Jon Dohlin (Co-Chair)

‘Sue Fox (Co-Chair)

Judy Baron

Nate Bliss

Pinny Dembitzer

Mathylde Frontus

Dianna Glukhman_

Yelena Makhnin

Eddie Mark

Judi Orlando

Deborah Reed

Pat Singer

Rabbi Moshe Weiner

David Wynn
This document was developed by the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee as part of the NYRCR Program within the
Governor's Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR). The NYRCR Program is supported by New York State (NYS) Homes and Community Renewal, NYS
Department of State, and NYS Department of Transportation. The document was prepared by the following consultant firms: AIM Development, Jamie
Caplan Consulting LLC, Planning4Places LLC, The LiRo Group, and URS Corporation (Consultant Team).

Foreword
Oe]
Introduction (HUD) Community Development Block Grant ~ Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in August 2011, the State Program.
of New York experienced three extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene, Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising one or more of the 102
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the lives of localities, were created and led by a NYRCR Planning Committee composed
New Yorkers and their communities. These tragic disasters signaled that New of local residents, business owners, and civic leaders. Members of the
Yorkers are living in a new reality defined by rising sea levels and extreme Planning Committees were identified in consultation with established local
weather events that will occur with increased frequency and power. They leaders, community organizations, and in some cases municipalities. The
also signaled that we need to rebuild our communities in a way that will NYRCR Program sets a new standard for community participation in recovery
mitigate against future risks and build increased resilience. and resiliency planning, with community members leading the planning

process. Across the State, more than 500 New Yorkers represent their
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo led the charge communities by serving on Planning Committees. More than 400 Planning
to develop an innovative, community-driven planning program on a scale Committee Meetings have been held, during which Planning Committee
unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The NY Rising Community members worked with the State's NYRCR Program team to develop
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program empowers the State's most impacted community reconstruction plans and identify opportunities to make their
communities with the technical expertise needed to develop thorough and communities more resilient. All meetings were open to the public. An
implementable reconstruction plans to build physically, socially, and additional 125-plus Public Engagement Events attracted thousands of
economically resilient and sustainable communities. community members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR planning

. process and proposals. The NYRCR Program's outreach has included

Program Overview communities that are traditionally underrepresented, such as immigrant
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo in April of 2013, is a Populations and students. All planning materials are posted on the NYRCR
more than $650 milion planning and implementation process established to Program's website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several
provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities severely ways for community members and the public to submit feedback on
damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy. materials in progress.
Drawing on lessons learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were supported by
is a unique combination of bottom-up community participation and State- staff from the Governor's Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR), planners from
provided technical expertise. This powerful combination recognizes not only New York State (NYS) Department of State (DOS) and NYS Department of
that community members are best positioned to assess the needs and Transportation (DOT), and consultants from world-class planning firms that
opportunities of the places where they live and work, but also that decisions specialize in engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green infrastructure, and
are best made when they are grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by more.
the latest innovative solutions.

With the January 2014 announcement of the NYRCR Program’s expansion to
One hundred and two storm-affected localities across the State were include 22 new localities, the program comprises over 2.7 million New
originally designated to participate in the NYRCR Program. The State has
allocated each locality between $3 million and $25 million to implement
eligible projects identified in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for these projects ULL
is provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Petey Coca eae ce tee ie cose OR emranetsen. and
eee Ed

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY ising Commurity Reconstruction Plan
ES
Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent to 14% of a series of comprehensive reconstruction and resiliency strategies, and
the overall State population and 12% of the State's overall geography. identified projects and implementation actions to help fulfill those strategies.
The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR Plan. Governor Cuomo The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan are divided into three
has allocated over $650 million of funding to the program for implementing categories. The order in which the projects and actions are listed in this
projects identified in the NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Communities are also eligible NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the NYRCR Community's
for additional funds through the program’s NY Rising to the Top Competition, prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects
which evaluates NYRCR Communities across eight categories, including best proposed for funding through a NYRCR Community's allocation of CDBG-DR
use of technology in the planning process, best approach to resilient funding. Featured Projects are projects and actions that the Planning
economic growth, and best use of green infrastructure to bolster resilience. Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and has
The winning NYRCR Community in each category will be allocated an analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through the NYRCR
additional $3 million of implementation funding. The NYRCR Program is also Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are projects and actions
working with both private and public institutions to identify existing funding that the Planning Committee would like to highlight and that are not
sources and create new funding opportunities where none existed before. categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects. The Proposed
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated with State and Federal Projects ar feel cating Sembee othe Has Commaten Those wetog
agencies to help aude the development of feasible projects. The program members with conflicts of interest recused themselves from voting on any
las leveraged the Regional Economic Development Council's State Agency affected projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics Handbook and Code of
Review Teams (SARTs), comprised of representatives from dozens of State Conduct.
agencies and authorities, for feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR 7
Communities. The SARTs review projects with an eye toward regulatory and The NYRCR Southern Brooklyn Peninsula Community is eligible for up to
permitting needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources. $19.3 million in CDBG-DR implementation funds.
The NYRCR Program is continuing to work with the SARTs to streamline the
permitting process ed eneure Shovels ‘re in the ground as quickly as While developing projects for inclusion in this NYRCR Plan, Planning
wossible. Committees took into account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the
Pe effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical
On the pages that follow, you will see the results of months of thoughtful, assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees also
diligent work by NYRCR Planning Committees, passionately committed to considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be eligible
realizing brighter, more resilient futures for their communities. for CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented with this source of
Federal funding must fall into a Federally-designated eligible activity
The NYRCR Plan category, fulfill a national objective (meeting an urgent need, removing
slums and blight, or benefiting low to moderate income individuals), and
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more resilient have a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding is linked. These are
Semmunity. Each NYRR Penning Commitee began the planing process by among the factors that. the Governor's Office of ‘Storm Recovery wil
identieng erica! tesues, Next, the, Planning Committes inventoried ctaca consider, in consultation with local municipalities and nonprofit organizations,
assets in the community and assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On the a
basis of this work, the Planning Committee described recovery and resiliency 2 The NYRCR Community’ total allocation comprises the following: Brighton Beach:
needs and identified opportunities. The Planning Committee then developed $e milion; Coney Island: $6.15 milion; Manhattan Beach: $5.41 milion, and Sea Gate:
Cel

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY ising Commurity Reconstruction Plan

ES
when determining which projects and actions are best positioned for

implementation.

The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR

Community's CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed

Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review, HUD

eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the

projects and actions found in this NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable

Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with

Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan

does not guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for

CDBG-DR funding or that it will be implemented. The Governor's Office of

Storm Recovery will actively seek to match projects with funding sources.

In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions outlined

in this NYRCR Plan will become’ a reality helping New York not only to

rebuild, but also to build back better.
SS

SS
Executive summary ES-1 B. Cost-benefit analysis 70
A. Overview ES C._ Risk-reduction analysis a
B. Working together to rebuild stronger, smarter, and safer ES-2 Bulkhead Replacement at Sea Gate 72
. Final plan as blueprint for implementation £53 Designation of Emergency Response and Recovery Centers 74
Section I: Community overview 2 Beach Grass Planting and Infrastructure Improvements 76
‘A. Geographic scope of NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Community Streetscape Enhancements *
Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate Plan 3 Feasibility Study for Energy Resiliency for NYCHA and Mitchell-Lama
B. Description of storm damages 9 Properties 80
CC. Ctical issues 2 Implementation of Cost-Effective Storm Surge Protection for Ocean
Parkway and West 25" Street 82

D. Community vision statement 15

Increase Resiliency of Small Businesses Throughout the Peninsula 84
E. Relationship to regional plans 18

Installation of Resilient Streetlights 87
Section IT: Assessment of risk and needs 26 pilot Small-Scale Renewable Power Project 59
A. Description of community assets and assessment of risk 26 Public Emergency Preparedness Outreach Campaign ot
B. Assessment of needs and opportunities 5 Reconnaissance Study of Storm Surge Protection for Sheepshead Bay 93
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies 56 Resiliency Upgrades for Manhattan Beach Bathhouse %6
A. Reconstruction and resiliency strategies 57 ‘Sewer Connection Cut-Off Valves for Owners of One- and Two-Family
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles 70 Homes 98
A. Introduction 70 Southern Brooklyn Emergency Response Plan 101
Cn eed
Table of Contents Page iv (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
See eS
Vocational Training Program 103 Figure II-7: Economic Asset Risk Assessment Map 40
Environmental Youth Education (Featured Project) 106 Figure I1-8: Health and Social Services Asset Risk Assessment Map 41
Figure II-9: Housing Asset Risk Map 42
Implementation of a microgrid, smartgrid and/or cogeneration Figure II-10: Infrastructure Asset Risk Assessment Map a
solutions for NYCHA and Mitchell-Lama Properties (Linked Figure II-11: Natural and Cultural Asset Risk Assessment Map 44
Featured Project) 108 Figure I-12: Vacant Land Map 50
Implementation of Manhattan Beach Bathhouse Adaptive Reuse Figure IV-1: Economic Corridors in the Southern Brooklyn
(Linked Featured Project) 110 Peninsula 86
Mermaid Avenue Corridor Improvements (Featured Project) 112 Figure Iv-2: a oe would be the subject of the reconnaissance 9s
Section V: Additional materials 117 Figure 1V-3: Examples of One- and two-family homes in the
‘A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations 117 Southern Brooklyn Peninsula 100
Figure IV-4: Potential locations include William E. Grady Technical
B. Master table of projects 120 School, Lafayette High School, Liberation High School,
C. Public engagement process 127 cr other schools in the surrounding area. 105
D. Community asset inventory 38 Figure IV-5: sate, evelopment site plan for Special Coney us
E. Endnotes 156
F. Glossary 162 Tables
Table II-1: New York State Department of State Risk Areas 38
Figures Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations 118
Table V-2: Proposed, Featured, and Resiliency Recommendations 121
Figure I-1: Geographic scope of the NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Table V-3: Southern Brooklyn Peninsula Demographic Profile B36
Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate Plan 4 Table V-4: Risk Scores for Economic Assets in the Community 139
Figure I-2: Southern Brooklyn Peninsula Flood Inundation Map 10 Table V-5: Risk Scores for Health and Social Services Assets in
Figure I-3: Communities in the Jamaica Bay Regional Working Community 140
Group 19 Table V-6: Risk Scores for Housing Assets in Community 144
Figure II-1: Economic Assets by Land Use Category 28 Table V-7: Risk Scores for Infrastructure Assets in Community 146
Figure II-2: Health and Social Services Assets 30 Table V-8: Risk Scores for Natural and Cultural Features Assets in
Figure I-3: Housing Assets 32 Community 147
Figure II-4 Infrastructure Systems Assets 34 Table V-9: Risk Scores for Systems Asset Groups 149
Figure II-5 Natural and Cultural Resources Assets 36
Figure II-6: 2012 Superstorm Sandy Risk Assessment Map 39
Eee eed
Table of Contents Page (2)

Executive summary
NN )
A. Overview Storm impacts
The neighborhoods of Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and When Superstorm Sandy made landfall on October 29, 2012, the storm
Sea Gate, together referred to as the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula inflicted tremendous damage on Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan
Community (Community), are the four southernmost neighborhoods within Beach and Sea Gate. Flooding was exacerbated due to the storm coinciding
Brooklyn, in New York City. The Community is on a former barrier island that with a high tide. Flood levels averaged three to five feet throughout the
was permanently connected to the rest of Brooklyn by infil before World War Community. In some areas, such as along Neptune Avenue in Brighton
Il. Despite this land connection, water extends around most of the Beach, where floodwaters reached a height of 10 feet, homes and
Community. businesses were inundated with over five feet of floodwater. Backwater
Collectively, the Community is eligible for up to $19.3 million in U.S. inundation, or flooding from creeks and inlets, affected the Community from
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community Gravesend Bay by way of Coney Island Creek and Rockaway Inlet by way of
Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding to ‘Sheepshead Bay.
implement the projects described in this NYRCR Community Plan. Saltwater inundation and other flood-related damage caused major
The western area of the Community is a peninsula bound to the north by disruptions to critical building systems, including power, heat, hot water, and
Coney Island Creek and to the west and south by the Atlantic Ocean. This elevator services in nearly all high-rise buildings. These disruptions required
area contains the neighborhood of Sea Gate and most of Coney Island. Sea extensive replacement of damaged wiring and electrical systems, and repair
Gate covers all land area west of West 37th Street, and Coney Island or replacement of boilers, elevators, and generators. Affected buildings
extends between West 37th Street and Ocean Parkway. The eastern area of included all nine of the Community's New York City Housing Authority
the Community is also a peninsula. Its water boundaries are Sheepshead Bay (NYCHA) developments, which encompass 40 medium- and high-rise
to the north and the Atlantic Ocean to the south and east. The neighborhood buildings. Service outages persisted for weeks or—in some cases—even
of Manhattan Beach is roughly coextensive with this peninsula; its western months after Superstorm Sandy. More than two weeks after the storm,
boundaries are Corbin Place and East 12th Street. NYCHA reported that it had yet to restore heat and hot water to nearly 6,200
public housing residents in 22 buildings in Coney Island. These outages not
The remaining neighborhood, Brighton Beach, lies on Brooklyn’s mainland. It only inconvenienced all NYCHA residents in the affected buildings but also
covers the area between Corbin Place and East 12th Street to the east and endangered the health and safety of residents with access and functional
‘Ocean Parkway to the west. For the purposes of this NY Rising Community needs, including the elderly and the handicapped.
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Plan (Plan), the Belt Parkway generally defines the
northern land boundary of the Community. However, the NYRCR Planning The neighborhood of Sea Gate took a direct hit from devastating wave
Committee (Committee) elected to expand the geographic scope of the Plan action. The Sea Gate Association's police department and community
to encompass two critical assets north of the Belt Parkway but adjacent to association building both sustained significant damage, and neither facility
the peninsula. These two assets are the Metropolitan Transportation has reopened. According to HUD, more than 80% of non-seasonal housing
Authority (MTA) Coney Island Rail Yard and Coney Island Hospital. units in census block groups in Coney Island and Sea Gate incurred some
degree of damage from Superstorm Sandy.
ed
Executive Summary Page ES-1 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Several adult-care and nursing-home facilities were damaged by Superstorm commercial corridors, schools, and cultural and civic structures. Community
Sandy and lost functionality after the storm, including the Mermaid Manor and Committee feedback make clear that many assets are ill-equipped to
Home for Adults, on Mermaid Avenue in Coney Island, where storm-surge handle severe flooding and storm surge. Therefore, increasing the resiliency
flooding breached the front doors in a manner that observers described as of these assets is an important issue for all four neighborhoods in the
being “like a tsunami.” In Manhattan Beach, the Menorah Center for Community.
Rehabilitation | iin cQlusing Care sustained significant damage to its Beyond these concerns related to physical assets, another critical issue
damage? 9 a 9 discussed within the NYRCR Plan was the lack of a comprehensive
- Community response to Superstorm Sandy. Planning Committee Members

Superstorm Sandy damaged more than 12 public schools across the and the public reported that the storm response was inadequate. They
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula. Some school buildings sustained significant stated that the preparation and implementation of plans to protect
damage. Electrical systems at the Coney Island Library were damaged, as vulnerable populations, evacuation protocols, and disaster relief should be
were many of the library's computers, and more than 35,000 books and improved in the future.
DVDs. The library did not reopen until a year after the storm, in October
2013. B. Working together to rebuild stronger,
Flooding from Gravesend Bay and Coney Island Creek flooded the MTA smarter, and safer
Coney Island Complex, which is mostly in the 100-year floodplain. The rail
yard was quickly inundated with water and debris, and tracks, switches, The NYRCR Planning Committee developed a draft Community vision
motors, and signal equipment were damaged. Throughout the 75-acre statement using a visioning exercise during a Planning Committee Meeting.
complex, more than 190 individual switches were flooded. A combined Through further refinement by Community residents and business owners,
workforce of in-house personnel and contractors washed saltwater and sand the Committee developed the following vision statement for the Community:
from the switches and replaced switch motors where required. “Our vision is to empower and rebuild the diverse
Business activity along many of the commercial thoroughfares in the communities of the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula to
Community was hampered by food damage and the dsplacement of be prepared, vibrant, unified, and resilient in facing
customers months after the storm. “I don’t know of one business not - i ai i
affected by the hurricane,” said Yelena Makhnin, Executive Director of the the common economic, social, physical, and
Brighton Beach Business Improvement District.’ Brighton Beach Avenue was environmental challenges in our coastal
inundated by storm surge, induding mud and debris up to five feet deep,* neighborhoods.”
and only 40% of avenue businesses were open a week after Superstorm
‘Sandy.

This Vision Statement framed the work of the Committee throughout the
Critical issues planning process.
The impacts from Superstorm Sandy highlighted numerous issues in the Public outreach
Community regarding coastal protection and emergency preparedness;
government and non-profit coordination during the disaster; and the inability To ensure the success of the Plan, a broad Public Engagement Strategy was
of homeowners and businesses to recover after the storm. Superstorm established and implemented. Residents and business owners in the
Sandy also highlighted the vulnerabilities of key assets, including homes, Community were provided extensive opportunities to contribute to the
Eee eee
Executive Summary Page ES-2 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
planning process, including through three Public Engagement Events and 12 C. Final plan as blueprint for implementation
Committee Meetings, which were open to the public, between September
2013 and March 2014. Committee Members and NYRCR representatives met In the early stages of the planning process, the Committee identified a set of
with numerous Community groups, residents, and business leaders strategies to reduce the Community's exposure to risk from flooding and
throughout the planning process, including representatives of NYCHA tenant severe weather events. The Committee subsequently refined these strategies
associations, senior centers, business groups, and civic organizations. The into a list of projects that would enable the Community to rebuild smarter,
Committee also performed a survey of businesses in the Community and stronger, and safer. These projects represent sustainable and resilient
solicited feedback at each Public Engagement Event. approaches to support residents and businesses and protect the
The Public Engagement Events were designed to solicit feedback from the Community's considerable assets.
Community regarding critical assets, strategies, and potential projects. ‘The NYRCR Plan includes three sets of projects to address critical community
Translators were available at each Public Engagement event and event needs:
notices were translated in five languages (English, Russian, Spanish, + Proposed Projects: Projects that the Committee has proposed to be
Mandarin Chinese, and Urdu), and posted in multiple media outlets and fully funded through the Committee CDBG-DR allocation;
locations throughout each neighborhood, including: Y
+ Featured Projects: Projects where cost is beyond the Committee
+ The Brooklyn Paper (local community newspaper); CDBG-DR allocation and/or their implementation will require a
«The Russian Bazaar (local community newspaper); combination of CDBG-DR funding and other sources. These projects
may include the funding of a Proposed Project, as the first phase,
+ Subway stations, storefronts, Coney Island Hospital, NYCHA lobbies, and the Featured Project as the second phase;
and senior centers;
+ Additional Resiliency Recommendations: Recommendations of
+ Email distribution; projects, policy or actions that will not be funded using the
+ NYRCR website: Committee CDBG-DR allocation
‘ntto://stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr/community/brighton-beach- All of the Projects included in the NYRCR Plan are important to the
coney-island-manhattan-beach-and-sea-gate; Community. Their order of appearance in this Executive Summary is not a
+ Twitter: @NYStormRecovery; and reflection of project priority or ranking.
+ Facebook: NYStormRecovery. Strategy: Enable more effective response to natural disasters by
enhancing emergency response protocols and communication
The Committee Members distributed flyers about Public Engagement Events + Proposed Project: Public Emergency Preparedness Outreach
in their neighborhoods. Fiyers and electronic notices were also distributed to Campaign
the husinesses in the Community. The Committee's engaged volunteerism Create a local public outreach campaign that uses multiple forms of
formed the foundation of this planning process. The Committee considered media to provide targeted and. specific disaster preparedness,
local issues, opportunities, and communication strategies and offered the response, and recovery information to Community residents.
public opportunities to provide comments at the conclusion of each "
Committee Meeting.
SS
Executive Summary Page ES-3 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
See eS
Strategy: Improve facilities, infrastructure, information sharing,
and the emergency capacity of social service organizations and Strategy: Explore opportunities to expand economic activities
health/mental health service providers throughout the Peninsula
* Proposed Project: Designation of Emergency Response and + Featured Project: Mermaid Avenue Corridor Improvements.
Recovery Centers Revitalize the Mermaid Avenue commercial corridor through
Perform a location and feasibility analysis to designate emergency streetscape and landscape improvements that would incorporate
response and recovery centers in each neighborhood in the stormwater attenuation measures.
Community. Also create a fund to develop continuity plans and
assess facility vulnerabilities for civic groups and non-profit Strategy: Protect existing housing stock by making it more flood
organizations. resilient
Strategy: Enhance coordination between civic groups and non- * Proposed Project; Sewer Connection Cut-off Valves for
profit organizations with local government agencies to make the Owners of 1- and 2-Family Homes
Southern’ Brooklyn Peninsula. better prepared for’ future Provide financial assistance to homeowners for installation of sewer
emergencies connection cut-off valves, as well as education and public outreach
“ . related to proper operation and maintenance of these devices.
proposed Project: Southern Brooklyn Emergency Response + Proposed Project: Feasibility Study for Energy Resiliency for
\d Mitchell-Lama Properties
Create a Southern Brooklyn Emergency Response Plan to provide NYCHA ant pel
specific information targeted to local neighborhoods and incorporate Conduct a feasibility study on developing microgrid, smartgrid,
[essons learned from Superstorm Sandy. and/or cogeneration solutions to ensure that NYCHA and Mitchell-
Lama properties maintain power in storm-related events.
: fi in thei + Featured Project: Implementation of a microgrid, smartgrid,
fll sovever Prom superstonn Senay all scales in their efforts to and/or cogeneration solutions for NYCHA and Mitchell-Lama
* Proposed Project: Increase Resiliency of Small Businesses Properties
Throughout the Peninsula Development of microgrid, smartgrid, and/or cogeneration solutions
Establish a small business support office; offer direct assistance to to ensure that NYCHA and Mitchell-Lama properties maintain power
merchants for floodproofing their businesses; implement Peninsula- in storm-related events.
wide streetscape enhancements, including replacing trees, installing . . ti
Stormwater attenuation “measures, and making. landscaping Strategy: Protect the shoreline and coastal communities through
improvements along business corridors. structural shoreline protection enhancements
+ Proposed Project: Bulkhead Replacement at Sea Gate
Strategy: Expand workforce development opportunities in the Replace the bulkhead on Sea Gate Association property and along
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula that would enhance regional some private residential properties.
resiliency and recovery . :
* Proposed Project: Vocational Training Program proposed Project; Tmplementation of cost srrective Storm
Expand vocational training programs at a high school on the irge Protacti v .
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula to include green and resilient building Install a flood barrier to protect against flooding at primary under-
and emergency preparedness curricula. boardwalk access points.
eee
Executive Summary Page ES-4 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
+ Proposed Project: Reconnaissance Study of Storm Surge + Featured Project: Adaptive Reuse of the Manhattan Beach
Protection for Sheepshead Bay Bathhouse
Evaluate a range of options to mitigate future flood events caused Implementation of adaptive reuse of the Manhattan Beach
by flooding and storm surge in Manhattan Beach and Sheepshead Bathhouse for year-round community uses.
Bay.
Strategy: Educate residents and visitors about the importance of
Strategy: Replace, repair, and upgrade existing infrastructure to natural and cultural resources
improve its resilience to future storm events
+ Featured Project: Envi ital Youth Education P1
+ Proposed Project: Installation of Resilient Streetlights tured Project: Environmental Youth Education Program
Install new streetlights along key business corridors and road Partner with local non-profit organizations to provide educational
intersections, evacuation routes, and high-density housing areas materials and mini-courses for Community youth on natural and
throughout the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula. cultural resources.
+ Proposed Project: Pilot Small-Scale Renewable Power
Project Strategy: Evaluate opportunities for creating or enhancing natural
Create a small-scale renewable power project for a small- to mid- shoreline protection measures
sized senior-housing or nursing home facility. * Proposed Project: Dune Grass Plantings and Infrastructure
Improvements
Strategy: Repair and make more resilient damaged and/or Plant beach grass along the boardwalk in Brighton Beach and Coney
underutilized natural and cultural resources Island at six locations; relocate of six water utility valves from under
«Proposed Project: Community Streetscape Enhancements the ocean side of the boardwalk to a less vulnerable location on the
inland side of the boardwalk, and install two beach access mats.
Provide funds for peninsula-wide streetscape enhancements,
including replacement of trees on public property that were
destroyed or damaged by Sandy, implementation of storm water
attenuation measures, and landscape enhancements along selected
business corridors.
+ Proposed Project: Resiliency Upgrades for Manhattan Beach
Bathhouse
Upgrade the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse by multiple methods,
potentially installing solar panels, installing other renewable-energy
systems, upgrading utilities, and implementing floodproofing
methods.
ed
Executive Summary Page ES-5 (2)

. ~ iemeniesemmereien 2 at oo
—— —S co \ - =e :
hy B NW: ‘ Re 8
E ) J e SS ~~
mae \V\Y, h SEs
Section I:
Community overview

As a part of the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program, the * Describes cost-effective strategies, projects, and actions that will
‘State of New York convened the NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) to increase the resilience of these unique communities, provide
represent the communities of Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan protection to vulnerable populations, and promote sound economic
Beach, and Sea Gate, also referred to as the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula development.
Community (Community). The Committee consists of 14 residents who are
leaders from civic organizations, business groups, and professional and non- The Six Recovery Support Functions
profit associations. The Committee worked closely with residents and local
Stakeholders in an eight-month community-based planning process. The goal Community Planning and Capacity Building: This function addresses how
of the Committee was to create this NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, the Community will restore or enhance its ability to organize, plan, manage, and
Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate Plan (NYRCR Plan), which includes a long” implement its recovery. This strategy involves Community engagement of a
term vision for the Community and implementable projects and actions for wide range of public, private, and non-governmental organization stakeholders.
the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula to recover from Superstorm Sandy and Psonic Deuelormnentaiitay intra tesees new natcomrtnk il
reduce the risk posed by extreme weather events in the future. The State of Reraeleccrenicre istainsesecitaiestanriostelonretisconen
New York as allocated up to $19.3 milion in US. Department of Housing opportunites, provide goods and sences, resume commerce and employment,
and Urban Development (HUD) Community Development Block Grant- ercoenerstenetente
Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) monies to fund eligible projects identified in
the Committee's NYRCR Plan. Health and Social Services: This function addresses how the Community will
This NYRCR Plan aims to address damage from Superstorm Sandy, mitigate restore and improve essential health and social services, including health and
future threats to the Community, and foster a brighter economic future for social services for vulnerable populations.
eaters Hah the Sx Recewens Suspon uncon catatlshes ty Present Housing: This function addresses how the Community will meet the demand for
Barack Ob: Soll throuaheut the National. Disaster” R affordable housing (and promotion of affordable housing), address post-disaster
Framework. Communty Panning an 4 capacty Bulling; Eeonomh. housing needs, and encourage disaster-resistant housing for all income groups.
Development; Health and Social Services; Housing; Infrastructure; and Infrastructure: This function addresses how the Community will restore, repair,
Natural and Cultural Resources. The Recovery Support Functions are defined and manage essential infrastructure services
in the box on the right.
This NYRCR Plan: Natural and Cultural Resources: This function addresses how the Community
° will approach natural and cultural resource management in the contexts of risk
+ Isa product of a locally driven, grassroots planning process; reduction and economic development.
+ Provides a Community vision that addresses regional and Community In addition to HUD CDBG-DR funding, other public and private funding
recovery and resilience; ‘sources have been identified to implement the projects discussed in this
* Assesses each community's vulnerability to the negative effects of NYRCR Plan. These funding sources range from Federal agency grants and
future natural hazards; low-interest loans to State and City of New York (City) funding sources and
foundation grants.
+ Assesses the need for economic development; and
SS
‘Section I: Community overview Page 2 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Se]

A. Geographic scope of NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island Hospital is an equally critical asset. The hospital has 371 beds
and serves over 300,000 outpatients annually.’ It is also one of the region's

Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate largest employers. As of late 2012, it had over 3,000 employees.” The

Plan hospital suffered extensive damage as a result of Superstorm Sandy. The
Committee recognized that these impacts imperiled Community access to

The Community comprises the four southernmost neighborhoods in Brooklyn vital health services.

(Kings County), in the City of New York. The Community is on a former

barrier island, as depicted in the 1880 map to the right. The Community was ‘At a Public Engagement Event held on October 22, 2013, the public

permanently connected to the rest of Brooklyn by infill before World War II. confirmed the geographic scope for this NYRCR Plan.

Despite this land connection, water extends around most of the Community. ‘The geographic scope of this NYRCR Plan is shown in Figure I-1.

The western area of the Community is a peninsula bounded to the north by — ————

Coney Island Creek and to the west and south by the Atlantic Ocean. This —————

area contains Sea Gate and most of the Coney Island neighborhood. Sea ait |

Gate covers all land area west of West 37” Street, and Cones Istand extends ee

between West 37% Street and Ocean Parkway. The eastern area of the 7 ,

Community is also a peninsula. Its water boundaries are Sheepshead Bay to ey, {} SS |

the north and the Atlantic Ocean to the south and east. The neighborhood of SF hy fe ANS hes

Manhattan Beach is roughly coextensive with this peninsula; its western oer RSC sea ne en. 7

boundaries are Corbin Place and East 12" Street. SP pear |

The remaining neighborhood, Brighton Beach, lies on Brooklyn‘s mainland. It reew + $a PES Bk hasan EET.

covers the area between Corbin Place and East 12" Street to the east and emg AO as _ T

Ocean Parkway to the west. For the purposes of this NYRCR Plan, the Belt reat

Parkway generally defines the northern land boundary of the Community. .

However, the Committee elected to expand the geographic scope of the |

NYRCR Plan to encompass two critical assets north of the Belt Parkway but

adjacent to the peninsula. ee oo

These two assets are the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) Coney _—

Island Complex (Complex) and Coney Island Hospital. The Complex is a 75- Map of Coney Island, New York (1880)°

acre transit facility used for repair, maintenance, inspection, and storage of

subway cars. The Complex is responsible for regular maintenance and Despite their geographic proximity, the four neighborhoods that constitute

inspection of trains on six of the city’s 22 subway lines. Its yards have the the Community have strikingly different demographic profiles. In general, the

storage capacity to accommodate nearly one-third of the City’s 5,800 car Community is lower-income and older than much of the rest of the City of

fleet.® Because of its proximity to Coney Island Creek and its low elevation, New York. Sea Gate, Coney Island, and Brighton Beach are in Brooklyn

the Complex is highly vulnerable to flood risk. The Committee recognized ‘Community District 13, which also includes the neighborhoods of Gravesend

that major damage to the Complex would have a crippling effect on local and and Homecrest. In 2012, more than 49% of Community District

regional transportation and economic activity.

ed

‘Section I: Community overview Page 3 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
SS
degheon Wssch | Cansy isere | Merhetian deach | Ses Gone
Geographic scope of the NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate Plan
: NN
5 = iS
cote iy en ae
ee ‘ Ae i %
e Gunsint 27 Peon, rss =
Me —
sari ae dite tig pa me oh ae 7 peers eres STE
A EL Cl #2 sper on egy WT ae em
Vea A 5S ce fo ei tag pein RELA BES f
epee =, ‘ Beer By =T sea Cee “My §
to oh festa ett ohm MinT Mah gaest aee 1 i Raat A ach Peel Mh ax th
| Deearetecoi Nt aboot serge eras: bat a) al ‘
$e eer TNC IL ae Tra Spree mc, SEN a ‘
RTT Thy ets Lae | sme simcrpeenens ere
Seg et a
Se bee Nee BRIGHTON BE!
OL persia
Remmunity Locatian Yeithin MY
ee
LTT owognone see oo
fm Geen ee: Al
=~ mar N
seats NYO Dt fs A, MaghEGTO
Figure I-1: Geographic scope of the NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate Plan
—KX—X—XK_Vwowonssssssssssss_c_c_c_ccc_c_c_c_ccccccccccc
Section I: Community overview Page 4 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
13 residents received income support in the form of cash assistance, Brighton Beach
‘
Supplemental Security Income, or Medicaid. Brighton Beach is often referred to as “Little Odessa” because of the
All four neighborhoods also contain large numbers of non-native English significant immigrant population from the Ukrainian port city on the Black
speakers, many of whom have limited English proficiency. Although these Sea. The neighborhood was developed in the 1860s as a resort community.
general points hint at some of the relevant general planning considerations, The eastward extension of the Coney Island boardwalk and the completion
each neighborhood requires its own discussion to demonstrate the full scope of Ocean Parkway facilitated easy access to the neighborhood, and attracted
of the Community's diversity. large seasonal crowds.”
In the — early-20"
oe century, a large S mi a
number of European Sf amen ess hari |
Ez a and Soviet Jewish | || eM
Pe = immigrants from the } |) E “ Pre |
—— Ukraine moved to | if ie
ss a Tl Brighton Beach and = er
ae = ae . established a year- pee = | aioe,
iP = oe round cultural and | he * aa ec |
MO TPE eras ee religious presence in J |) Pe eee
EEL ee eer the neighborhood. | Siess ee ed 3 q
Ne MESS ak) mh ey Brighton Beach is Pere ren mera
Sonica aaa ce densely populated,
Sees ee with 39,584 reson 5 weny 985.11 BRESLIN & BRO'S. HOTELS
. 4 “ 2 - a “BRIGHTON BEACH, C.I. [New York]" (Resort
a ae of the Community's Hotel) (1882) 2?
— emma neighborhoods, it
features a relatively
older population: the median age in Brighton Beach is 45.0 years, compared
with the Citywide figure of 35.5.’* Unsurprising in this context, more than
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula, looking east! ‘one-fifth of the neighborhood's residents are senior citizens.’*
The neighborhood's building stock is as diverse as its population. Housing
In addition to the narrative descriptions below, demographic information types range from recently built high-rise luxury condominiums along the
about all four neighborhoods on the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula is waterfront to older, relatively dense urban pockets of single- and multi-family
‘summarized in tabular form in Table V-3. housing. The neighborhood also features several subsidized medium- and
high-rise Mitchell-Lama developments.
Economic activity in Brighton Beach is concentrated along two primary
commercial corridors, Brighton Beach Avenue and Neptune Avenue. Brighton
ed
‘Section I: Community overview Page 5 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Commurity Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Beach Avenue, which runs underneath the elevated subway tracks of two amusement parks and hotels first opened there, including Luna Park,
train lines, is the main commercial artery. It features a dense concentration Dreamland, and Steeplechase Park. The neighborhood was a popular resort
of small businesses, including retail, food, and restaurant establishments at and amusement destination until World War II. Shortly thereafter, much of
the ground floor level. Most buildings along the avenue feature upper-story the amusement area was rezoned to accommodate dense, low-income
apartments or additional retail or professional services. housing."” Over time, the amusement and entertainment district shrank in
size to several blocks, with only seasonal activity, and Steeplechase Park
closed in 1964. Amusement and tourism uses are still prominent in the
ry F X revitalized amusement area, but Coney Island has an equal identity as a
{ vi ' year-round residential community.
US Fl suva ;
Foes fp ease
Si MEAT th
me co \ ub
ol A |
we QE Pp
oh hag F -
rel is ” )
‘ aoe
=
\-
wey! a 3
i, ng le ‘a —
/ re da
[sd | fe Bird's eye view of Luna Park, Coney Island N. Y. (early 20” Century)"
g Se Coney Island is even more densely populated than Brighton Beach, with
Z ce 47,154 residents as of 2012."° Like its neighbor to the east, Coney Island is a
FF relatively older community, with a median age of 47.0." Senior citizens
‘Neptune Avenue in Brighton Beach* constitute almost one-quarter of the neighborhood's total population.”
Coney Island has numerous high-rise residential towers,” including public
housing and Mitchell-Lama developments. The presence of a high number of
Coney Island subsidized housing units coincides with incidences of extreme localized
Coney Island is perhaps best known as an iconic amusement destination. Poverty. For example, New York Census Block Group 360470342.004 had a
‘The neighborhood popularized in the mid-nineteenth century when several median household income of $9,736 in 2012. This Block Group is bordered to
ed
Section I: Community overview Page 6 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Commurity Reconstruction Plan
Se]
the west by a Block Group that had a median household income of $45,492 adjacent blocks, stimulated an economic resurgence in parts of the
that same year.”? neighborhood, including expansion of the amusement attractions and new
establishments along the adjacent business corridors.
Manhattan Beach
| In the 1870s, Manhattan Beach was a bustling tourism and resort
a destination. The neighborhood featured the Manhattan Beach Hotel, built by
—— wa ‘Austin Corbin in 1877, a railway station, a bathing pavilion, and the Oriental
— oe Hotel.” Much of this seasonal use declined during the 1910s, and passenger
See 7 railway service was discontinued in 1924. The neighborhood was increasingly
7) SA developed for residential use during that period.
ZL 5 See Ta au
a We) ee =
> > "ae,
I ge ae
a conse 4 ye
-@q-} Beet a se
Coney Island Boardwalk — New York Aquarium mural?4
In 2012, Coney Island had a total of 21,531 housing units.”* Of these, 81% = .
were multiple-home dwellings.”* The presence of these dwellings is a stark : 2 ri =
contrast to many other Southern Brooklyn neighborhoods, including Sea OB ag ad —s
Gate and Manhattan Beach, which feature primarily single-family and two- Manhattan Beach Hotel & Promenade, Manhattan Beach, N. Y.
family homes. (1899-1901)
In addition to its many largely residential blocks, Coney Island features a
variety of commercial, institutional, and industrial uses. Industrial and
manufacturing uses tend to be clustered along the banks of Coney Island
Creek. The neighborhood's primary commercial thoroughfares are its east-
west avenues. From north to south, these are Neptune, Mermaid, and Surf
Avenues.
The implementation of the Coney Island Revitalization Plan and a
neighborhood rezoning in 2009, which covered the amusement area and
ed
Section I: Community overview Page 7 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Commurity Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Today, Manhattan Beach is almost exclusively residential between Corbin Commercial uses in Manhattan Beach are limited, with small, neighborhood
Place and Pembroke Street. The neighborhood features mostly detached retail uses mostly at the eastern end of Oriental Boulevard, near the
single-family homes on relatively large lots. Like Coney Island and Brighton entrance to KCC.
" Sea Gate
L Sea Gate is a private, planned community that was first developed in the
early 1890s.” The Sea Gate Association, incorporated in 1899, installed
several entrances and a fence around the perimeter of the community,
as making it the first gated community in the City of New York.
eT "|
eas Caan iT
Pr] Lt Tm
hed PGE YET In|
is ep: —
nt BN
TEA
mais.
: Ee la
Manhattan Beach Footbridge”” a or ery
“is
Beach, Manhattan Beach is an older neighborhood, with a median age of , ha
48.0. Senior citizens constitute roughly one-quarter of the total Se
neighborhood population.” —
Manhattan Beach is not nearly as densely populated as Brighton Beach or a
Coney Island. The neighborhood's population was 4,613 in 2012." The . . _
neighborhood's median household income exceeds $100,000. ‘Sea Gate Casino & Kalina's Baths buildings: Surf Av - W. 33rd
St., Brooklyn, 1934
Aside from its residential areas, Manhattan Beach also contains notable
assets, including the 70-acre Kingsborough Community College (KCC) In terms of physical characteristics and land use mix, Sea Gate is most
campus, which is part of The City University of New York (CUNY) system. similar to the Community's other bookend neighborhood, Manhattan Beach.
KCC occupies the eastern end of the neighborhood. Other non-residential Nearly the entire neighborhood's building stock consists of detached single-
assets include Leon Goldstein High School; Manhattan Beach Park, which family homes. Current land use analysis by the New York City Department of
contains the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse; and the Manhattan Beach City Planning shows only one commercial parcel in the entire
Footbridge, which allows pedestrians to walk from the Sheepshead Bay neighborhood.*
neighborhood to Manhattan Beach, facilitating public waterfront use and
access opportunities.
ed
Section I: Community overview Page 8 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
eS eS
Sea Gate is both the smallest and youngest neighborhood in the Community: their homes, businesses, core infrastructure, government property, and an
the neighborhood's population was 4,609 in 2012, while the median age economy just beginning to recover from a financial crisis.
was 41.”° Senior citizens constituted only 15% of the resident population. Statewide, the storm caused 53 fatalities® destroyed an estimated 305,000
SOMES homes,2” affected more than 2,000 miles of roads,” produced catastrophic
eH F flooding in subways and tunnels, and damaged major power transmission
ASA systems.
fir °F See liable The New York City Office of Management and Budget estimated the total
a C2 a £ damage to the City to be $19 billion,** inclusive of all private, public, and
ee arlerateaaee = ue es indirect costs. About one-quarter of that—$4.5 billion—was damage
nL aes ie sustained to City agencies, such as the NYCHA and the Health and Hospitals
7 eae ae ‘oo a Corporation. The MTA suffered extensive damage, estimated at $5 billion, as
Py once sti i re? eae a result of storm-surge flooding that inundated eight tunnels Citywide.
fae 2 j AB = , Superstorm Sandy coincided with a high tide, exacerbating flooding in
lt on a 9 SS Southern Brookiyn. Flood levels averaged three to give feet throughout the
ea - = a4 Community. In some areas, such as along Neptune Avenue, where
: Se floodwaters reached a height of 10 feet, homes and businesses were
nl inundated with over five feet of floodwater. Backwater inundation, or
Sea Gate entrance” flooding from creeks and inlets, also flooded communities from Gravesend
Bay by way of Coney Island Creek and Rockaway Inlet by way of
As in Manhattan Beach, non-residential uses are relatively limited. Sea Gate Sheepshead Bay (Figure 1-2).
has its own police force, which is wholly separate from the New York City
Police Department. Other non-residential uses include a beach club, park, Saltwater inundation and other flood-related damage caused | major
and. the ‘Sea Gate Association. bulldng. ‘Coney Isiand Light, an 1890 disruptions to critical building systems, including power, heat, hot-water, and
ighthouse at the western tip of the Scathem Broskiyn Penirauly and elevator services in nearly all high-rise buildings. These damages required
former chapel now used as a community gathering place and polling station, extensive replacement of wiring and electrical systems and repair or
are two prominent neighborhood landmarks, replacement of boilers, elevators, and generators.” Affected buildings
included all nine of the Community's NYCHA developments, which
Although Sea Gate is a private community, the community is unusual in that encompass 40 medium- and high-rise buildings and have a resident
the streets and some of the utility infrastructure are co-owned by the population of over 9,200." Service outages persisted for weeks—and in
residents and the City of New York. some cases even months—after Superstorm Sandy. More than two weeks
after the storm, NYCHA reported that it had yet to restore heat and hot
B. Description of storm damages water to nearly 6,200 public housing residents in 22 buildings.** These
‘outages not only inconvenienced all NYCHA residents in the Community, but
Superstorm Sandy made landfall in the City of New York on October 29, also endangered the health and safety of residents with access and
2012; it was one of the largest storms in New York's recorded history and functional needs, including the elderly and the handicapped.
the effect was devastating, causing widespread damage to people's lives,
Cn eed
Section I: Community overview Page 9 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan_
Se]
“rgheon Basch | Caney isarc | Marbatan Waach | Sex Gote
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula flood inundation map
eS. i tabe eT — i F : I t
sooner if J Bs a Te "
(at Then = ; ets te
S 3 rt | i s a a
¢ pi ee as - ee z
eae ae ae Sele Mo) Sapo RE Se
sues Sena fl : ae ri Soasecir
gee rd fa , ‘
“¢g b ba S
i : CT
y ’ ; am » tg 4
\ ney ee ‘
Lg cath ty te La ‘
x ~ i age ee ne —_—, caeverenneenee
x ee ' ceeeens RGR
si oo a = Te
ut ae
S eiereese
Cocmmcecs Lauialian Vile NC
LEGEND
12) Geograph. Soose
Slorn Surpe ard Sillvsier y:
= Hoodia ——— A
ck 20M sue N
Seaman imarncy avenger RG 24M) NYE Capa BONG MANET
Figure I-2: Southern Brooklyn Peninsula Flood Inundation Map
‘Section I: Community overview Page 10 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Coney Island Hospital, a major regional medical service provider, sustained a
devastating flood damage. The storm destroyed the hospital's electrical -
systems, necessitated hasty patient evacuations, and ultimately forced the ——
total suspension of emergency services for several months. The hospital's i
prolonged closure compromised Community access to vital health services ee
and disrupted employment patterns for over 3,000 hospital employees. *® i } al
{
Vs — } ha
ol — ee Ee wn SoS
Nel e Si ee
‘ & " em BE a3
-17 ial a ae
=z a a 3
J =~ aed, Cae ~
4 we > = a ~ Sea Gate bulkhead and beach front damage”
S }
=] a 2 Several adult-care and nursing-home facilities were damaged and lost
functionality after Superstorm Sandy, including the Mermaid Manor Home for
Adults, on Mermaid Avenue in Coney Island, where storm-surge flooding
breached the front doors in a manner that observers described as being “like
a tsunami.” In Manhattan Beach, the Menorah Center for Rehabilitation and
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Administrator Nursing Care sustained significant damage to its waterfront facility serving
William Craig Fugate, center, gets a tour of Coney Island seniors, including first-floor wind and water damage.”
Hospital from Director of Facilities Daniel Collins, right, along
‘with FEMA Federal Coordinating officer Michael byre:?” Superstorm Sandy damaged more than 12 public schools across the
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula, and some buildings sustained significant
The coastal areas of Sea Gate took a direct hit from wave action when damage. The Coney Island Library also sustained significant damage,
Superstorm Sandy made landfall. The Sea Gate Association police including destruction of the building's electrical systems, many of its
department and community association buildings sustained significant computers, and more than 35,000 books and DVDs. The library did not
damage, and both remain closed today. According to HUD, more than 80% reopen until nearly a year after the storm, in October 2013.
cf non-seasonal housing units in some Census Block Groups in Coney Island The Coney Island Complex also sustained significant damage during
and Sea Gate incurred some degree of damage from Superstorm Sandy. Superstorm Sandy. The rail yard is mostly located in the 100-year floodplain,
and is vulnerable to flooding from nearby bodies of water, including Coney
Island Creek. The rail yard was quickly inundated with water and debris, and
tracks, switches, motors, and signal equipment were damaged. Throughout
the 75-acre complex, more than 190 individual switches were flooded. A
Re eee
‘Section I: Community overview Page 11 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
combined workforce of in-house personnel and contractors washed saltwater This NYRCR Plan aims to respond to these critical issues as part of the
and sand from the switches and replaced switch motors where required. recovery from Superstorm Sandy and the longer-term effort to make the
Business activity along many of the commercial thoroughfares in the area more resilient to future storms.
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula, including Mermaid, Surf, Brighton, and Critical issues surrounding Superstorm Sandy were identified during meetings
Neptune Avenues and Ocean Parkway, was hampered by flood damage and and discussions, including 11 Planning Committee Meetings, which were
the displacement of customers, even months after the storm. “I don’t know ‘open and accessible to the public; three Public Engagement Events; and
of one business not affected by the hurricane,” said Yelena Makhnin, interviews with City, State, and Federal agencies, business owners, and
Executive Director of the Brighton Beach Business Improvement District.** residents.
That neighborhood's main commercial corridor, Brighton Beach Avenue, was
inundated by storm surge, including mud and debris, of up to 5 feet.°* Only Community planning and capacity building
40% of its businesses were open a week after Superstorm Sandy.*? Shortly
after the storm, the City of New York offered low-interest emergency loans One of the most critical issues communicated through the public
with matching grants to. businesses. Fifty-six loans were approved. in engagement process was the lack of a comprehensive Community response
Brighton Beach and Manhattan Beach, totaling more than $1.2 million.” > to the storm. Planning Committee Members and the public reported that the
storm response was inadequate. They stated that preparation and
Superstorm Sandy caused significant damage to the New York Aquarium, implementation of plans to protect vulnerable populations, evacuation
Which sits on the boardwalk at West 8th Street and Surf Avenue.® Before protocols, and disaster relief would need to be improved for future disasters.
the storm, the aquarium attracted more than 750,000 visitors annually. Flood
damage and interruptions to the aquarium’s life support systems caused Civic groups and other non-governmental organizations provide vital social
damage estimated at approximately $65 millin.:* The aquarium partially and informational services to local residents, including vulnerable
reopened in May 2013, but will not be fully reopened until 2016. The Coney populations. The damage that these local organizations suffered from
Island amusement and entertainment district—a major economic driver for ‘Superstorm Sandy compromised their ability to provide vital services and to
the community—incurred significant damage to rides and electrical communicate important information to constituents in the weeks and months
systems.” after the storm. For instance, Urban Neighborhood Services, Inc., on
Mermaid Avenue in Coney Island was displaced from its offices for seven
epee months, though it was able to secure temporary space with the Amethyst
C. Critical issues Women's Project. The facilities of the Jewish Community Council of Greater
The impacts from Superstorm Sandy exposed numerous issues within the Coney Island (JCCGI) were flooded by 6 feet of water, which caused over
Southern Brookiyn Peninsula related to coastal protection, emergency $1 million in damages. The JCCGI resumed providing services several weeks
preparedness, government and non-profit coordination, and the ability of after Superstorm Sandy, but some staff members were displaced for over a
homeowners and businesses to bounce back quickly after a storm. year.
Superstorm Sandy also highlighted the vulnerabilities of key assets, including .
homes, schools, and cultural and civic structures. Community and Committee Economic development
feedback make clear that many assets are ill-equipped to handle severe Local businesses suffered flooding damage from Superstorm Sandy,
flooding and storm surge in the future. Therefore, increasing the resiliency of including inventory loss, building damage, and ruined equipment. Because of
these assets is an important issue for all four neighborhoods in the ‘Community-wide power outages, most businesses were forced to close at
‘Community. least temporarily. The combined effects of building damage, inventory loss,
temporary displacement of customer base, and loss of income caused many
ed
‘Section I: Community overview Page 12 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
of these businesses to close permanently. In the months following nursing-home facilities were also damaged by the storm and lost
Superstorm Sandy, many businesses remained closed on Mermaid and Surf functionality.
Avenues m Coney istand and on Neptune and Brighton Beach Avenues in The storm damaged more than a dozen public schools across the Southern
ighton E '¥ . Brooklyn Peninsula. Damage was catastrophic at many buildings. For
i instance, Public School 288 in Coney Island was unable to reopen at its
. ) original location until January 2013. This damage displaced students and
| staff members, and caused crowding at school facilities where these students
oes were temporarily relocated.
ern | Backwater inundation caused significant damage to a New York City Police
. + OP Ls Department Housing Bureau on West 23rd Street, forcing relocation of
5 z services outside the neighborhood.
| ot ee eee
r og a 6
nog hy Riety tote 4 Lig ioe GAR 1 q
ea ms We Uy '
Coney Island Amusement Area from the Ocean’ ian ‘
Precise local figures are not readily available, but the New York City 4 Pay
Department of Small Business Services estimated that 20% of impacted 0 “gy
businesses Citywide remained closed as of March 2013." The New York City AE el
Economic Development Corporation calculated that roughly 5,000 businesses sory Sy i le
in Southern Brooklyn, a broader area that includes the neighborhoods of ==¥ Teg
Gravesend, Gerritsen Beach, and Sheepshead Bay, were affected. fare if p” a
According to the same source, a 1,000-square-foot retailer forced to close for 7 al Ft
two weeks because of Superstorm Sandy would typically incur total damages ee Ds rd Be
of more than $100,000. 4| a
Health and social services y ate as as UR a“
‘Superstorm Sandy impacted essential health and social service organizations. eee
‘As discussed in the “Description of storm damages” section above, Coney _ =
Island Hospital was severely damaged by Superstorm Sandy. The impact on neh Geriatn ing Home®?
the hospital not only affected medical services for the Southern Brooklyn Shorefront Jewish Geriatric Center Nursing Home:
Peninsula but also the employees of the hospital. Several adult-care and
ed
Section I: Community overview Page 13 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Housing
Resilient and affordable housing was a critical issue for the Southern Le
Brooklyn Peninsula after Superstorm Sandy. Disruptions to heat and q ~ ay
electrical systems in the peninsula's many NYCHA and Mitchell-Lama high- Ce" A.
rise buildings persisted for weeks—and in some cases months—after the - pn wna 7
storm. Many of these public housing developments lacked adequate i her
‘emergency backup power systems. al
Flooding that overtopped the peninsula's creeks, referred to as “backwater” as
or “backdoor” flooding (i.e., not associated with storm surge), flooded =,
ground floors and basement spaces, causing disruption to power service and ate
destroying critical building systems. Thousands of local residents were ee ee
displaced. A Mes y, he
- . eg eA a ee
e ¥ i} , Oe ge Sh
, é By STARS
ra | | Ok BD A ORAS
S . if Debris from housing damage®
, | j S Infrastructure
1) =z ! Infrastructure damage on the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula from Superstorm
Oe | = 4 Sandy was considerable and caused hardship to residents and business
in Pes’ i ‘owners. Flood damage to transportation, sewer, and power infrastructure
= VES / created several issues for the Community, including blackouts, lack of clean
/ water, and an inability to communicate with emergency personnel. Even
4 \ . } before the peak storm surge associated with Superstorm Sandy, water from
i! a Ft | Coney Island Creek inundated Sea Gate and Coney Island, eventually
= “ . merging with storm surge from the oceanfront of the peninsula, damaging
cxtlomeownes and Sea Gate resident Angele DeAngelis public and private electrical systems and storm drainage systems. In addition
rads in way ‘was once his living room. to inundation from storm surge and creek flooding, many residents and
The critical issues related to housing are the needs for resilient construction business owners experienced flooding from sewer backflow.
methods, emergency practices, and recovery programs to reduce damage to This flooding caused Community-wide power outages. Sections of the
homes, increase safety, and get people back into their homes sooner after Community were without power, including streetlights, for weeks after the
future flooding events. storm. The sewer line network in Sea Gate sustained extensive damage from
twater intrusion, resulting in a lack of clean running water and creating
Faced with the cost of flood insurance and home repairs, some Community sal
residents have put their homes on the market. Potentially dangerous health issues.
Rn
Section I: Community overview Page 14 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
The Community and the Committee have stated that investment in 2014, will alleviate many coastal protection issues, additional protective
infrastructure, including roads and sewers, is a top priority for residents. measures are needed throughout the Community. *”
E &e Damage to cultural resources, such as places of worship, senior centers, and
" social meeting spaces, restricted residents’ use of these resources. The
‘nn en basement of the Mesivta of Sea Gate was destroyed, but the small
54 at ‘community room attached to the main building was spared and continues to
fe Hi by o be used as a community resource center for clothes and other personal
|= 3 a) ee necessities.
g ’ ee ae oe D. Community vision statement
Peers er The Committee collaborated with the larger Community to develop a vision
ge metro he statement that meets the unique needs and opportunities of the Southern
ad Brooklyn Peninsula.
a
A —_ —
Damage in Manhattan Beach at Sheepshead Bay oF
following Superstorm Sandy*
Natural and cultural resources 4
‘Superstorm Sandy caused major damage to natural and cultural resources a=.
‘on the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula. Damage to area beaches, the Coney Ss :
Island amusement and entertainment district, and the New York Aquarium ———
negatively affected the local economy and compromised quality of life for
Community residents. FE LE
The beach bordering Coney Island and Brighton Beach is not only a major z iu i wis
recreational amenity, it is also critical for storm protection. The U.S. Army i H rp. i ‘
Corps of Engineers (USACE) implemented a beach replenishment project in E re ey
the mid-1990s that changed the profile of the beach, helping to attenuate E ea
waves and protect adjacent land uses. However, even with this project in Ps me is es
place, there was substantial damage to waterfront facilities, especially in the se a
Coney Island amusement and entertainment district and adjacent low-lying — ae Ee
neighborhoods. USACE will be constructing a series of T-groins west of West Vision rae, working srw Guriog Pubic Engagement
37* Street to mitigate long-term beach erosion and sand accumulation Event held at Abraham tine? School on October 22,
issues. Although this project, which is scheduled to begin in the summer of
SS
Section I: Community overview Page 15 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

ES
The Committee developed a draft Community vision statement using a

visioning exercise during a Planning Committee Meeting. The exercise

involved brainstorming key words for inclusion in the statement. The draft

vision statement was first presented to the public at the October 22, 2013,

Public Engagement Event, held at Abraham Lincoln High School. At this

event, public attendees visited stations representing the six Recovery

‘Support Functions and were asked for their comments. At the second Public

Engagement Event, held on November 12, 2013, the public had the

opportunity to review a revised version of the vision statement and offer

additional suggestions. Many attendees offered their ideas by describing

their experiences after Superstorm Sandy. For instance, the Committee

heard stories about carrying water up multiple flights of stairs to disabled or

elderly residents in high-rise buildings and the need to include diverse

communities in the vision statement. In light of these shared experiences,

the Committee drafted the following vision statement:
SS
Section I: Community overview Page 16 (2)

“Our vision is to empower and rebuild the diverse communities
of the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula to be prepared, vibrant,
unified, and resilient in facing the common economic, social,

physical, and environmental challenges in our coastal
neighborhoods.”
Section I: Community overview Page 17 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
; . . crabs, and migratory birds that use the area as a critical refuge during their
E. Relationship to regional plans seasonal travels, Beyond the water, Jamaica Bay is surrounded by woodland
City and regional planning documents were reviewed to avoid duplicating and forests that host a wide array of wildlife. This dynamic system has
‘ongoing planning efforts and to identify how the NYRCR Plan could best fil attracted people for generations, and many of its surrounding communities
gaps in the planning literature. These City and regional plans include are partially defined by their close proximity to Jamaica Bay's waters.
resiliency and storm-recovery plans as well as comprehensive hazard However, this proximity also served as a hazard during Superstorm Sandy. At
mitigation, waterfront, and sustainability plans. The analysis and the height of the storm, the Bay swelled and water surged through a
recommendations included in these plans contributed valuable information network of creeks and streams to Inftrate neighborhoods and inundate
and ideas to the NYRCR planning process. lomes, businesses, and roadways.
‘As described in “Description of storm damages” section of this Plan,
‘Some of the plans were more than 4 years old, meaning that they did not Y
address either the lingering financial effects of the recession that began in Superstorm Sandy had a devastating impact on communities, and the
3008 or the impacts of Hurricane Irene in 2011 and Superstorm Sandy in individual NYRCR Committees have developed strategies to rebuild and
2012. Although some of the plans referenced below are older, significant become resilient to future storm risks. At the same time, communities in and
work related to planning since Superstorm Sandy has been completed, and around Jamaica Bay realize the need for collaboration. Understanding that
the City has developed several documents related to the storm and post- projects and other actions in one area can have profound impacts across the
storm recovery. estuary, these communities have sought to create a unified, collective voice
" in support of resiliency efforts throughout Jamaica Bay. Mindful of the
The most relevant existing plans, studies, and projects are summarized communities’ call for cooperation, the Governor's Office of Storm Recovery
below, including the key analyses and lessons learned. created the Jamaica Bay Regional Working Group (JBRWG), a collection of
. . ;, representatives from the NYRCR communities closest to Jamaica Bay, as
NYRCR Jamaica Bay Regional Working Group shown on Figure I-3. The JBRWG views this final plan as the vehicle for its
From Sea Gate on the western edge of the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula to collective voice in support of ongoing and emerging resiliency efforts by
South Valley Stream at the headwaters of Jamaica Bay in Nassau County, stakeholders in Jamaica Bay.
‘communities in and around Jamaica Bay suffered enormous damage from
‘Superstorm Sandy. Jamaica Bay, known as a unique ecosystem in an urban
landscape, is famous for its salt marsh islands, intertidal flats, horseshoe
ed
‘Section I: Community overview Page 18 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Fe
4 a South Valley Stream
> Howard Beach
y Five
, OF i
Sheepshead Bay me
ritsen Beach F044 Char “}
eS
rocket
ockaway West
Southern Brooklyn
Breezy Point
N
Figure I-3: Communities in the Jamaica Bay Regional Working Group
eee
Section I: Community overview Page 19 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
SSS
The JBRWG consists of members from the following NYRCR Committees: ‘community centers damaged during Superstorm Sandy. The NPS
Breezy Point/Roxbury, Rockaway West, Rockaway East, Broad Channel, New, property line hugs the campus site and the northwest quadrant of
Old Howard Beach and Hamilton Beach, Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead the neighborhood. Interventions here would further protect these
Bay, the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula (which includes Brighton Beach, Coney community assets.
Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate), and in Nassau County, the Five ‘i .
Towns (which includes Village of Cedarhurst, Hewlett, Vilage of Lawrence, * Edge Protection for Upper Jamalca Bay. The JERWG supports
Woodmere, Village of Hewlett Neck, Vilage of Hewlett Harbor, Meadowmere, e linclusion of protective measures for communities in upper
and Invwodl, and! South Valey Stream, G " Jamaica Bay, including Gerritsen Beach, Sheepshead Bay, and
qi ley . Manhattan Beach, in the USACE East Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway
The JBRWG believes that collaboration with the agencies active in Jamaica Inlet Reformulation Study. This project would include protections for
Bay, namely USACE and the National Park Service ([NPS), is paramount. Plumb Beach and the water body of Sheepshead Bay, which were
Through various habitat restoration projects and coastal protective measures points of entry for storm surge during Superstorm Sandy.
sate Reus Gee oa ayaa gard exh Shor Pretectn Tee 7 Se
Fronogement ofthe Gateway National Rureaton Wea, NES has an ongoing Deparonent of Enonmetal Conenation is axamly wong
interest as a responsible steward ofits federally protected lands. oe age Sain ee, Pre rowel Neen MYReR
The JBRWG supports the following USACE and NPS projects, which would ‘committee has also proposed work on NPS property at Upper Spring
further protect communities in and around Jamaica Bay from future storm Creek, Charles Memorial Park, and Shellbank and Hawtree Basins.
hazards: * Rockaway East and West Bay and Coastal Protection. A
+ Breezy Point/Roxbury Long-Term Comprehensive Edge system of bay walls, groins, and dunes are being implemented to
Protection. This project envisions a system of dunes, berms, marsh protect Rockaway West. The JBRWG also supports additional
restoration, raised roads, floodwalls, and baywalls, partially on NPS bayfront protections, including bulkheads and natural solutions at
land, for comprehensive protection of the Breezy Point and Roxbury vulnerable locations in Rockaway East, along the western, northern,
communities, This project would include work at the Cove and the and eastern shoreline of Arverne; in Sommerville; and in Bayswater.
property lines along the cooperative, including Breezy Point Tip. ‘Also, Jacob Riis Park, the westernmost boundary of the Rockaway
- i West Planning Area geographic scope, remains NPS property. The
* Breezy Point Comprehensive Flood Protection System. This dq
JBRWG supports work at this location, through either dunes along
roposed cna stam would po slab, nal fad a the beacifont or berms with te property and belles the poet
project plan consists of an ocean-side double dune system and would ensure protection of the entire community.
complementary set of bayfront flood and erosion protections that are + Surge Barrier at Rockaway Inlet. The JBRWG supports the
designed to safeguard the community from future storm events, The Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resliency’s (SIR) call for the
State of New York has formally submitted an application for this USACE to initiate an expedited study to examine the feasibility of
project to FEMA on March 20, 2014, through FEMA's Hazard developing a surge barrier and alternative measures at Rockaway
Mitigation Grant Program. Inlet as part of the previously mentioned Rockaway reformulation
* Broad Channel Shoreline Protection. A potential project from study.
the Broad Channel NYRCR committee is a “Resiliency Campus,” a The JBRWG also supports the Science and Resiliency Institute at Jamaica
rebuilding program to enhance the resllency of several important Bay, 2 partnership among academic institutions, government agencies, non-
Section I: Community overview Page 20 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
Ls
governmental organizations, and community groups dedicated to the The plan includes specific rebuilding and resiliency plans for five City regions,
promotion and understanding of resilience in Jamaica Bay and its including Southern Brooklyn. These initiatives are reflected in the
surrounding communities. Institutions taking part include Columbia reconstruction strategies and projects for Brighton Beach, Coney Island,
University, Rutgers University, the State University of New York (SUNY) at Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate.
Stonybrook, Stevens Institute of Technology, Cornell University, CUNY, the
hs G Specific project recommendations within the NYRCR Community include a
National Aeronautes and Space Adminstration Goddard Intute or Space Ahad Real Recovery Progam on key commerce coors sho
Science and Resiliency Institute Se sostey'Bay was created in response to a Mermaid, Surf, and Brighton Beach Avenues; hardening or otherwise
Request for Expression of Interest (RFEI) from the NPS, City of New York, Cente acicemce to copeon repair Cet nfctctin ia rowing
and Trust for Public Land, with grant funding from the Rockefeller Institute. ee ee Ce na eeoate
A Stronger, More Resilient New York (2013) recommendations to work with USACE to complete its Sea Gate project and
Mayor Michael Bloomberg created the Special Initiative for Rebuilding and emergency beach replenishment in Coney Island.
Resiliency (SIRR) in 2012 to identify means to create a more resilient City of New York City Regional Economic Development Council 2011 and
New York in the wake of Superstorm Sandy, with a long-term focus on 2012 Plans and 2013 Project Report
preparing for and protecting against the impacts of climate change. On June http://regionalcouneils.ny.gov/content/new-york-cit
11, 2013, the City released A Stronger, More Resilient New York® (SIRR
Report), which provides the most detailed analysis of all the documents The New York City Regional Economic Development Council (REDC) has a
‘led todake te ily deecnbes d "o the Brookl Ie five-borough strategy that encourages partnerships between government,
Completed to date. Tt generally describes damage to the Brooklyn area, risks, business, labor, academia, and civic organizations as well as inter-regional
initiatives, and priorities. cooperation to maximize the benefits of economic growth and job creation
Priorities discussed in the SIRR Report that are relevant to the Community for the entire state. This report acknowledges the serious blow that
include: Superstorm Sandy dealt to the New York metropolitan area. The NYRCR
effort follows a similar process as the REDC in terms of project identification
+ Addressing coastal vulnerabilities for residential, commercial, and ‘and public engagement.
public properties and civic facilities;
REDC priorities for bolstering the local economy that are germane to
+ Providing additional coastal/shoreline protection from wave action, Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate include:
beach erosion, and oceanfront vulnerabilities;
* The revitalization of the Coney Island waterfront to include 5,000
* Adding protection from inundation from backflow that can lead to new housing units, 25 acres of entertainment attractions, more than
flooding of inland areas; 25,000 construction jobs, and 6,000 permanent jobs;
+ Focusing on infrastructure inadequacy, particularly stormwater «The opening of Steeplechase Plaza, a 2.2-acre public open space
drainage, power, and transportation; that is the western entryway to the revitalized amusement district;
* Improving communications during and following emergency + Construction of a new state-of-the-art 44,000-square-foot YMCA in
situations; and Coney Island (which recently opened); and
+ Addressing the lagging recovery of housing, social services, and
businesses along key commercial corridors.”
SS
Section I: Community overview Page 21 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Ls
+ The City’s HireNYC Program, which listed 500 open positions and Planning's Flood Resilience Zoning text amendment that the City Council
filled 400 new hires for the summer of 2013 from the surrounding adopted in 2013.
neighborhood. This report identifies key design principles to guide flood-resistant
Sustainable Communities: Climate Resilience Studies: Urban construction in urban areas that are applicable to the Community. These
Waterfront Adaptive Strategies (2011) design principles include:
http://www.nye.gov/html/dep/html/sustainable_communities/sustain_com7.s + An overview of National Flood Insurance Program regulatory
htm! requirements for construction in flood zones;
The Urban Waterfront Adaptive Strategies (UWAS) report, prepared by the + The effects of flood-resistant construction standards;
New York City Department of City Planning, provides a systematic . .
assessment of the coastal flood hazards from climate change and sea-level The creation of a vibrant streetscape and public realm; and
rise that the City faces. The UWAS lays out a risk-based, flexible process for + Recommendations for how zoning can incorporate these principles to
identifying, evaluating, and implementing potential coastal protection enable more versatile and desirable design solutions for flood-
strategies. The UWAS recognizes that waterfronts vary and may require a resistant construction.
range of strategies at different scales. The report also identifies a range of
potential adaptive strategies, and analyzes each for its ability to protect mre Committce considered this Information for the development of housing
waterfront communities. Projects.
The report identifies a range of potential adaptive strategies that are decadent (ota) Hazard Mitigation Plan (2009) and Draft
applicable to the Community, including:
p:/mww.nye.gov/htmy/ Vplanning response/planning
+ Interventions inland, at the shoreline, and in the water. Each type fits Luu. nycgovintml/oem/htm\/planning_response/planning hazard mit
was analyzed for its ability to protect waterfront communities by (gation 2014.shtm
reducing flooding from storm surge and high tides or absorbing The Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP) provides hazard risk-reduction strategies
destructive wave forces. and projects that are based on risk analyses and developed through a
community-wide planning process. The HMP includes the following elements
The Committee considered this information for the development of natural ee ee erro one Joveleprment of the NYRCH Plt
resource projects for flood reduction.
Sustainable Communities: Climate Resilience Studies: Designing for * Natural hazards risk assessment;
Flood Risk (2013) + Mitigation strategy;
http://www.nye.gov/html/dep/html/sustainable_communities/sustain_comé6.s + Hazard mitigation projects; and
‘html + Potential funding sources for projects.
Designing for Flood Risk identifies key principles to guide the design of new
buildings in flood zones so that construction will be more resilient to the Mmigotcn Stateoy sahich Ieee negro oione erotate” ire aces u
effects of imate change and coast Hood events. Recognizing ue distinct decrease or eliminate potential losses from hazards identified in the Risk
provides recommendations fo. how wrelatone ‘and individual project deagn ‘Assessment section. Overarching mitigation strategies pertain to the Planning
can incorporate these principles. The study informed the Department of City ‘Area, but no specific projects were listed for the Community.
eae eT ee =
Section I: Community overview Page 22, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Ls
The goals in the HMP coincide with the Community vision developed for this Plan recommendations relevant to the Community are in the sections
NYRCR Plan and mention the economy, public safety, property protection, describing Brooklyn Reach 15, 3.b for Calvert Vaux Park and Reach 16 for
and the need to be prepared and resilient. Many of the objectives in the HMP Coney Island to Sheepshead Bay. Reaches refer to specific segments along
coincide with strategies and projects in this document. the shoreline and are described on page 150 of the plan.
PlaNYC 2030 (2007) and PlaNYC Full Report (2011) Recommended actions for the Community include:
htto://www.nyc. gov/html/planyc2030/html/theplan/the-plan.shtm! Coney Island
This report documented a range of programs, proposed regulatory changes, . oP secbpeent sea ale tenes ans Performance space,
and specific recommendations for the South Brooklyn region. The 2011 " ‘
PlaNYC provided valuable background information on the extent of damages + Complete development of an amusement park;
and, most important, provided an initial set of recommendations for the «Begin construction of the frst phase of separate santary and storm
Committee to consider in generating and refining project proposals sewer upgrades to improve local water quality;
throughout the NYRCR planning process for the Southern Brooklyn
Peninsula. + Complete construction of @ pump station and force main along
NYC Hurricane Sandy After Action Report (May 2013) Coney Island Creek;

+ Complete a feasibility study regarding the viability of local fer
http://mww.nyc.gov/html/recovery/downloads/pdf/sandy ar 5.2.13.pdt Senees Y study regarding 'v v
The Committee reviewed the 59 recommendations in this report and : :
developed several project ideas based on these recommendations. For Support continued restoration of the boardwalk,
instance, one of the after-action items in the report included standardizing + Promote the New York Aquarium and other programs to educate the
communications in the City of New York. The Committee discussed the public about local waterfront opportunities and resources; and
potential for a project that would refine New York City Office of Emergency + Enhance, manage, and restore salt marshes and ecologically
Management preparedness materials for use in the Community that reflected sensitive or valuable areas along Coney Island Creek.
local conditions and the five most common languages spoken in the diverse
neighborhoods. Brighton Beach
Vision 2020: New York Comprehensive Waterfront Plan (2011) + Promote contextual redevelopment of the Brighton Beach Municipal
https html/dep/html 2shtml Parking Field, between Brighton 2™ and Brighton 4” Streets on
hntto://mww.nye.aov/html/dco/htmi/ewp/ewp._2.shtml Brightwater Court to support public waterfront use and access
The Comprehensive Waterfront Plan is an analysis and overall vision for the ‘opportunities.
ity of New York’s 520 miles of shoreline. This plan includes a strategic i vtalicati
framework for the City’s waterfront and short- and long-term strategies and New York City Waterfront Revitalization Program
is used to guide land and water use decisions. Priorities in the plan focus on http://www nye.qou/html/dco/html/wrp/wrp.shtml
expanding public access, supporting the working waterfront, improving water itn: //veww.ve.cov/html/dcp/nkml/wrp/wep, shtml
quality, restoring the ecology of the waterfront, enhancing the Blue Network The Waterfront Revitalization Program is the City’s principal coastal
(the waterways between the five boroughs), and increasing the resiliency of management tool and implements the Comprehensive Waterfront Plan. This
the City with respect to climate change and sea-level rise. program establishes the City's policies for development and use of the
NN —————————————————————Eeee———Eee
Section I: Community overview Page 23 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

ES
waterfront, and provides the framework for evaluating the consistency of all

discretionary actions in the coastal area. When a proposed project is located

in the City’s designated waterfront area and it requires City, State, or Federal

discretionary action, a determination of the project's consistency with the

policies and intent of the Waterfront Revitalization Program must be made

before the project may move forward.

Coney Island Comprehensive Rezoning Plan, New York City

Department of City Planning (June 2009)

hittp://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/coney_island/coneyisland4.shtm!

The Coney Island Comprehensive Rezoning Plan establishes a framework for

the revitalization of the Coney Island amusement area and the surrounding

blocks. The plan builds on the few remaining amusements to create a 27-

acre amusement and entertainment district that will reestablish Coney Island

as a year-round, open, and accessible amusement destination. Outside of

the amusement area, the plan provides new housing opportunities, including

affordable housing, and neighborhood services. On July 29, 2009, the City

Council adopted the Coney Island rezoning with modifications. The zoning

text and map amendments are now in effect.

The Coney Island Comprehensive Rezoning Plan and the more recent efforts

of the Coney Island Alliance to build on that planning framework stimulated

much discussion in the Committee. Although Planning Committee Members

saw the broader economic development benefits of a revitalized amusement

and entertainment district, the consensus was to focus attention and the

NYRCR Plan on the surrounding residential neighborhoods.
SS
Section I: Community overview Page 24 (2)

CRE AK. AY Pi NC es
a AN CTA —=w gs

PREY NOK Se \ ws
e ie - x aN: J :] ig ea, | ) : 2
inlets SN ‘ a oo y Wh ic hi | ee
See) ee ee
ie ae yg a

Ss F

Section ITI:
PT Uae mo
and needs

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs
This section identifies community assets in the NY Rising Community evacuation shelters, schools, day-care centers, and facilities that serve and
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Southern Brooklyn Peninsula Community house special-needs populations.
Coen eee the risk eee eee ee jetive secre to The asset inventory also includes vital infrastructure systems, such as water,
support decision-making for asset reconstruction and implementing projects wastewater, and stormwater systems; electrical systems; and transportation
to reduce risk and increase resiliency to future storms. "
The Committee identified a list of Community assets that fell into one of the
ATK analysis Was Performed fo calculate risk to current assets, the Impact six Recovery Support Functions: community and capacity building, economic
future goals and strategies are’ Implemented. This proosss helped the development, health and social services, housing, infrastructure, and natural
Committse document methods to mitvate future risk and cultural resources. However, no physical assets fell into the community
" and capacity building Recovery Support Function. Asset locations were
cas mapped based on this information. The resulting asset inventory and
A. Description of community assets and associated maps were further modified and confirmed based on the public
assessment of risk input captured at the first Public Engagement Event, which was held on
October 22, 2013.
The Community Asset Inventory highlights the Community assets (including
critical facilities) that, if impaired by extreme weather events, would Asset Inventory Maps, showing a list of Community assets and their
compromise the essential social, economic, or environmental functions of the corresponding locations, are provided in the sections that follow for the five
Community. These impairments could adversely affect short- and long-term of the six Recovery Support Functions that had physical assets.
recovery efforts. This risk assessment depicts the assets in the Southern -
Brooklyn Peninsula (Peninsula), including those damaged by Superstorm Economic development
Sandy, and describes their vulnerability to future flood and storm-surge ‘The amusement and entertainment district in Coney Island houses
events. many of the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula’s major economic assets.
Each Community asset was categorized by its location in a moderate, high, In 2010, 12.8 million people visited the public beaches and amusement parks
or extreme risk area. Risk areas were conceptualized by the New York State in Coney Island and Brighton Beach. Other major tourist attractions in the
Department of State (NYS DOS) and developed in partnership with the area include Luna Park, an amusement park in Coney Island that opened in
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Coastal Services Center. 2010; the New York Aquarium, which has approximately 750,000 annual
The NYRCR Southern Brooklyn Peninsula Planning Committee (Committee) visitors;’" and the Brooklyn Cyclones, a minor league baseball team that
categorized community assets into low, medium, or high Community values. brings almost 250,000 fans to MCU Park every summer.”
Critical facilities are assets that are crucial to the health and welfare of the ‘Although these large-scale amenities provide local jobs and generate
entire population, emergency response, and recovery functions following significant economic activity, most local businesses are small. Over 70% of
‘extreme weather events. Critical facilities include health-care facilities, police the businesses in the 11224 and 11235 zip codes (the zip codes covering
and fire stations, emergency operations centers, public works facilities, Brighton Beach, Coney Istand, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate) have fewer
than five employees.”* Major employers include health and social services
ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 26. (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
institutions, such as Coney Island Hospital, Shorefront Jewish Geriatric Center, Sea Crest Health Care Center, and Saints Joachim and Anne Nursing and
Rehabilitation Center.” Of the 17,833 primary jobs in the Community, 60.1% are in the Health Care and Social Assistance sector.”>
The Southern Brooklyn Peninsula's principal commercial corridors are Surf and Mermaid Avenues in Coney Island, Neptune Avenue in Coney Island and Brighton
Beach, and Brighton Beach Avenue in Brighton Beach. Riegelmann Boardwalk in Coney Island and Brighton Beach also houses a variety of oceanfront uses, which
include amusements, retail shopping outlets, bars, and restaurants. Figure II-1 shows the economic assets in the Community.
‘ee TR} ae x
Sean Se all
cS i egy
“ 5: Pe oH
® P Paci
fa pe ee
be a a
3 4 > ra Sat
oy See Pr =e ae
= | er) | See
5 =] eer aL rr Ty
? : I sR 5 0 | A! eae ae
EEE aie, CEEOL I LE ea
To i ——s a 3
w _—
Brighton Beach Avenue”
SS

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
See eS
ingen ueney | Cancy sk | Mankatan ack | ea Gate
Asset inventory: Economic assets by land use category
ee see i Bh Se
+ ee) , tS Pee
fopesind iy 1-8 fot +5
, i re d
es i ‘ heres Migeitead Boy
a pe VO a kee LD
ae, WA y es ap oh tenet
1 hea SEE Rae ey as AAMT eS
+) BSS , Tee fe ‘ Fk EUG N sen ft 4
: =a \ Re, > filet ae = lrg \
1 a Gree Bi has Pp 5 so =| 5 \
k Seer * 7 peer ¥: x Ni ‘ ¥
_ “ee ab a a \
a te ‘SLaray | oe : 7 Re ee ier ea
% q . i a dee oe.
. ‘ J acenaent mot
Se ‘ cone en tet TONE i est
care 1 see aes | A Bowe
ene — es ome
SRE FN o ean 4a ON =
LogenD .
Pa ees Tourism Destination Downtown Center
1 Lune Park (Entertainment Facilites) 5. Neptune Ave Commercial Corridar
e ee eo 2 MCU Park 5 ‘Mermaid Ave Commercial Corridor
: 2 Riegelmann Soardwalk 7 Surf Ave Commercial Corridor
a Cae er Comncnone. 4 NY Aquarium Brighton Seach Ave Commercial Corridor
Hm Lind Use rust! Rarutactring
> Commercial Corridors Pape cae eae
Figure II-1: Economic Assets by Land Use Category
Cn eed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 28. (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Health and social services
The Southern Brooklyn Peninsula houses a diverse array of health
and social services organizations that serve the Community and the ;
region. Coney Island Hospital is the largest medical service provider in I H
Southern Brooklyn. The facility, which has approximately 2,900 employees “ —
and 371 beds, serves more than 300,000 outpatients annually.”” The on.
Community is also home to six senior centers, five residential health care
facilites, five residential adult care facilities, and three community residences i.
for people with developmental disabilities. Several non-profit organizations #8 Pi
also provide health and social services to the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula  garwgeamggsd ;
communities. The Committee also identified the Ida G. Israel Medical Center ‘ we |
as a key asset. It was closed as a result of the devastating damage it — ese . puny wae alae
suffered during Superstorm Sandy. The City of New York is currently working ° ET 4
with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on a temporary ” aan vi
location for the center. Be eta
The 17 public schools in the Community, which include one charter school, — il ws comer 8
serve over 12,200 pupils. These schools include five high schools and two eee “ ores i oe
other schools that serve high school students. Nearly 20,000 students attend pe pate | eae
the Kingsborough Community College.”* Sh seats a - ener Nae ee
The 60" Police Precinct, Police Transit District 34, and Mounted Troop E are ' Pe eer PAPA 6: © Sy Bor
headquartered in Coney Island. The Sea Gate Police Department is PN th eens ere:
headquartered at the Surf Avenue entrance to the neighborhood. The fa ft a CTE bsg
‘Community is also home to two City fire stations and one emergency medical a SSe ete i
services station. naa ieee ied. Tage
oe
Figure II-2 details the health and social services assets in the Community. -
=——
Coney Island Hospital”?
ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 29 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
See eS
lnghran deach | taney fond | ankakan Ussch | one
Asset inventory: Health and social services
Garssto, A ar =
ol et : a
cogmine gee ‘ 5
¥ fies {O\ shee
ores OO ee Se pe RN i te ays zs a ceae caste ucewe
eons ME A CBR 2 k= Ai oe
OGY Me Tica ganna TG ear paeee so ae | Eee: 8
ete ae We nape RO Bee sce Ae 8 8.
2) eee Paani Wily Yay ea EIS eat Ses | ebay et oy y
‘ erik N Og. res? te 2 e/a ‘
, gaat eET i aia Te A ay MSG .
te $ @. 1 é et tri —t : ee
% ace 4 es 1 | ‘ ee -
SS Pere ; caeeneeeen iil a
Bt ceeee ete pial ied
ot Jpeansress ee oo
eee me one oe NL
LEGEND ‘Etec ows Resae satcstaiSorsl Pauline 2 gremer soma cemanty oat
fon a feeeer aac D lev GlawalCtwoanky “kath Ch wumaidy dowd) | 21 Aue comea
122 Geographic Seopa titel 40 Kioaent asesliemvecethe E Mieacthone etl oa te
11 Saracen A arabtaen = separ
@ Hestr and Social Services 2 Men an | eee 3a DaGAWelesee Doe Mere
Asset Locater: ico 13. Shore tiring lier 25 Tham Vite Sone
@ Crergercy OpusiuneRespurse — G Enanegas Laddet 169 44 Wermag Hostn cemer 2 Liman Nangreomane Gersene ie
e cHeeaes 5 Eu banat 45 Semone Satare027S Fi Teton
gare wg Cloetoare See cata 48 GhsceovcadSae Rout Se ol 2B cones oa oes
© sehoos tSementary. Mito, Hig 1 Sa 2 Shacret Fao et anton seve
fe Sapeneg wtemon Chums Ine ST Unrest Negrete Remsen
Figure II-2: Health and Social Services Assets
Cn eed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 30 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Se]

Housing

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate

differ significantly in terms of their housing types. There are 40,462

housing units® in the four communities that constitute the Southern oy a

Brooklyn Peninsula. Coney Island contains 53% of these units” in Bison

predominately mid-rise and high-rise multi-family buildings, many of which 6 fe

were built in the 1970s and include high-density subsidized housing. Brighton ee Stapp 523 TCE

Beach, which contains 38% of the Community's housing units,® consists “ 2 jm) hi

primarily of rental apartments in mid-rise multi-family buildings of 20 units or ao 23h

more. Manhattan Beach housing units consist predominately of single-family ee 3. ee

detached homes and contain 4% of the housing units®® in the Community. se at

Sea Gate contains a mix of single-family, two-family, and small multi-family a i

homes and constitutes 5% of the housing units™ in the Community. eo P ya -

The housing units in the Community include a high density of public and !

subsidized housing, particularly in Coney Island.®° The subsidized housing Coney Island Houses NYCHA Development®

units include nine New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) developments,

which encompass 40 medium- and high-rise buildings that house 9,254 sy the pee :

residents. There are also three Mitchell-Lama co-op developments and a RS pep Bhs

number of privately managed high-rise apartment or condominium ee o |

developments. Sk s 2 A

Many Community housing units were built before the enactment of bed a . 1h

contemporary building codes and standards. These pre-Flood Insurance ene wt N a

Rate Map (FIRM) and pre-modern-code structures are at risk to flooding and S&S . ah 4 Saar

storm surge damage due to construction below the base flood elevation g rien: e | 7 | t -

(BFE), and non-compliance with modern flood-damage-resistant building Fe xy same | 7 "A

materials, design, and construction standards. ga 2p D {oa I Se

: BO cer tier cnt
eee hee
‘Two-family homes in Sea Gate”
ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 31 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Fe
gh ncach | anc ad | Mahan cach | ie
Asset Inventory: Housing (Significant Assets Identified as of Jan 2014)
¥ = Mon} ‘: bon
apa y ee e—.. el’
Cp Bia. Wiss K a i\=
N tebe: | peactonite) ;
+B. Wm | Bila ee ol =
ee ‘ t clan. a
edtow ays 2 te. ae a a pegs Tae ST ae
we eee Sea i“ 1 eee ir ‘ - ‘
pe Le) bone AF AR e Ene Wi a
ee ee = a] he tage Ait yea ,
“ ta z } a eg At v4! ‘4
7) Fee oe ate tet ea h\\\ Wi | a
1 tent oi th s eave sce taee amlies 1) | | lege :
‘ gai ie gi ae a3 aot a Diag = 4 1
ey Dy Say a é oa ‘ay me il Ne \
1 Sale pore alee 0h i ‘
3 Me | o f A. ecdeceenoo
N. ‘ | Caen een ITT EH to
ae i cece nnn RNS TIM Ronit
Wf cee Se sxe
Seb cearaeee nH
Sane eee
EGEND AFFORDABLE HOUSING / ASSISTED LIVING
a 1 SHA, Quvesand 2 NYRR Hover B wearers
TJ ccecgraste Soope 2 RYGIN Sursae acer 3 MENT iemacece | Mectnnermann
5 NvcwStamrGorane: a. Anes Lome. eqrmnmecse’” 23 enue eae ot orhscanBeaey
@_ Aftorcable Housing Asset Loostar 4) NYGdA, Dinar candor SE Michelbiane Gemutkesc 28 Sensuct House af Rdgihen Seach
$ Nrema con anne 4% stenet Lana. rite ver 2 Coney sant doe At
Ee od an peyote 1B NYCHA, Corwy isisns Gitu%bj 47. MilchodtLotre: Nott Eotoles 25 Abtehoam Reidonoe |
om he Aes Se remain stay: Sevacaentteemeete 3 Resmam peatanes
Se © tivcun cones ate eh” ie Mite Larn See 3 GueariolCaet oe
- - ” ai 9 NYCIIA, Carey Senders | 2h MichelAL Ame "Miaroasse. FouRes “S1 Oncanwiew Manar Hams fe Artite:
fo Mya cay exec By Miche. Sclwoe tome” $2 Saf iow owe or al
17 RCIA Carey rors 32 Shotmon vse SS iermat anc nue esos
Figure II-3: Housing Assets
eee
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 32, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
g Ss Infrastructure
=
p aD ui The Committee has identified investments in infrastructure as a
, | priority. These investments would take the form of repair, hardening, or
QP % ‘A new construction. Examples of infrastructure include roads, transit, electrical,
i vases a and sewer systems.
' me Thy
SEN 1 Pes Eight local buses, two express buses, and five subway lines serve the
SPN E acveasl es ; t ‘Community. There are five elevated subway stations along the Peninsula.
Se ass Were A The busiest of these stations, Coney Island ~ Stilwell Avenue, handled 4.7
SE Ke SS million riders in 2012. The Coney Island Complex is the largest transit yard
ag aay . Pi in the Metropolitan Transportation Authority system, handling regular
= with eae a maintenance operations for a fleet of nearly 800 subway cars.
F a $ ‘Ocean Parkway is the major artery in and out of the Community. The limited
= pl aad ol access highway at the northern end of the Community, the Belt Parkway,
‘ F i eal bt carries approximately 140,000 private vehicles per day.” Main arterials
1 { “Vi Mad at running east and west that connect the four neighborhoods include Surf and
| 5 Neptune Avenues.
; ,
t | E The Committee has also identified stormwater and power systems as key
y | assets, as depicted on Figure II-4, Infrastructure Systems Assets.
.
\
le
ee
Coney Island — Stillwell Avenue Station
ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 33, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
SSS
drghean Wssch | Caney iskend | Manrattan deach | sea Gate
Asset inventory: Infrastructure systems
=a a | am
Aeiadd aig # wt =
yet , edict
oe +e ee ———
geet Poesy ait E serena Pett Parent Sanne anna ee Sennen
ey Seika g! r ST Naor sae eee
oN SAN arora
ee s== \ PNA By
to) ee \ .
ie : : Mad i \
% = i\\ pi } et \\ ‘
S, ie Te : eee
* \ eo ‘ eons gaeurtN ea sa y
ns tana fe ent Bae wr
ca ee ri = |
a eee ee A
“Sone AMD . we «2003 aon Ne j
Lesenp 1 Caney een Ret Yrs Tessperaton =e ao
(LL) Geogmptic Soope 2. Deine: Facity Banrazon Garage razatdositold weer [ES eampcemr ana Panes py
Near Lonke ||? SeerBatene se Cry ea oe rose! ony
ee Brighten Beach Power Stay Hower Supp
@ dus Transportation Systems a Mirthatian Srsach Powe Suzaly Power Suapy
+-# Rairoud ‘Cormmunicelions Fuilies - Community Wide Tetecurnrunications Lud Fue Stations Community Wide Liquid Fusle
@ prnens Bea Gate Sirmsatar Pacha Steven
A erie ‘Coney Island Stomvsier Factities ‘Stomwester
(J #arkng Let | Snghton seach Stormwater Factibes: ‘Stormwater
ue Heute ETT
Figure II-4 Infrastructure Systems Assets
C—O
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 34 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Natural and cultural resources a
Natural and cultural resources are important to the Community, of, =
both as economic drivers and recreational amenities. The Community -—~¥ i -
was historically characterized by marshlands and wetlands, but development = q
significantly degraded these natural assets. Though the local topography and
environment have been substantially altered, many natural assets stil exist.
These remaining natural resources often serve a protective function. +
The Committee identified over a dozen critical natural and cultural resource \b=
assets. These assets include Coney Island Creek and the Coney Island a
beaches and boardwalk. The beaches and boardwalk serve important a —_
mitigation and storm surge attenuation functions, but are themselves highly Bi re
vulnerable. Along Coney Island and Brighton Beach's coast, natural features i
are supplemented by a variety of structural features, including berms, jetties, (2
sea walls, and bulkheads. In Manhattan Beach, the Manhattan Beach ;
Bathhouse and its adjacent recreational waterfront area are considered a key Z @
asset to the Community. =
The New York Aquarium is an important local cultural institution. Before Y
sustaining major damage during Superstorm Sandy, the aquarium hosted 7
roughly 750,000 annual visitors. Vy Li
Kingsborough Community College in Manhattan Beach also draws large u i
numbers of non-local students and visitors. It hosts cultural events, including Le oS 1
concerts and theatrical productions. Hy — 1]
The Southern Brookiyn Peninsula has two branch libraries; one of them, the = ’ Nl
Coney Island Library, was closed for almost a year because of damage
suffered from Superstorm Sandy. Cultural memorials damaged during
Superstorm Sandy include the 9-11 Memorial Wall and the 9-11 Memorial
‘Square in Asser Levy Park and the Holocaust Memorial Park overlooking —
‘Sheepshead Bay. ee -
a

Coney Island Light House, established in 18907
ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 35. (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
SSS
gon each | Cans tnd | Manhattan och | $00 ine
Asset inventory: Natural and cultural resources
prea "
sone ae t =
Gravesend Ki i ' En ‘ =
fa e . ey a yo} Sterewahend roy.
wae) fe aah ON ne PIS
art See | } feue STS Nat Bp ees *
0 Peo ; | 2 3 pee sey is
a e > , pee ai f \
i ey oe WET A ‘
sh tom 4 ete ¢ iat inst po
i peaeaey ote 4 - Liat reek ° ‘
‘ Se NE ie 4 ea ' \
. See id Vise _ a
‘ a 1 a ee els . oes
a y ‘ i eee ae
< \ Ted q _eeeenense tna =
Say ‘ cece note o 7 Raton anaes eae
Sh gee ee AP 2
Geta a e er 4000 NO
LEGEND
2 ‘Museum and Periosming Ars Centers Paks and Recreation
123 Ceographic Socpe
me Parks. 1 Consy Island History Project 4 Nopiune Playground 9 Asser Levy Park
— bBkelee 2 Coney Island USA 3S Calvert Vaux Park 10 Holocaust Memorial Park
a paces 3 Lean Mf Goldstein Pertorming Arts Center 6 Coney sland Creek Park 11 Sheepshead Bay Footbridge
ae paces wes 7 Kaiser Park 12 Public Promenade
© Natt hese Lecisior 8 Manhallan Beach Park 4130 Mantallan Beach Balhbunuse:
© Cutura|Ascat Locator ese 9E Pact i Pog, a YS
Figure II-5 Natural and Cultural Resources Assets
C—O
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 36. (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
Ls
. to increase or decrease the effects of coastal hazards on assets. Exposure is
Assessment of risk to assets and systems generally a better predictor of damage than elevation alone.
The NYS DOS risk areas defined in Table II-1 were used to evaluate risk to
A series of landscape attributes was also used to calculate a total landscape
assets In the Community. The 2f112 Sunerstorm Sandy Risk Assessment Map attribute score. The following landscape characteristics would each raise the
(Figure 1-6) shows that most of the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula is in a high total score, signifying a more vulnerable asset:
risk or extreme risk flooding area. Many high and extreme risk areas on the " *
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula are vulnerable to storm surge, backwater + Erosion rate 21 foot per year or unknown;
Inundation, and damaging wave action. + Waterline frequently at shore defense or upland vegetation;
A risk assessment was conducted to determine the potential impact of .
‘extreme weather events on Community assets. This assessment helped the cee absent, not constructed to anticipated conditions, or
Community choose mitigation options to reduce future risk. The Committee a
selected proposed strategies, such as infrastructure improvements and + Protective vegetation between asset and flood source absent;
changes in the building environment. Many of these general strategies were «Dunes absent, below BFE, eroding, little vegetation; bluff slope
fefine into project ideas, which were then subjected to a cost-benefit unstable, lite vegetation; and ‘a ss ‘ ps
‘Throughout the planning process, input from the Committee and the general * Asset on coastal barrier island or filled wetland.
public on areas with the highest risk of flooding was used to refine the Vulnerability pertains to the capacity of an asset to be operational after a
identified at-risk areas, along with the NYS DOS risk assessment tool. storm. Vulnerability scores are an expression of the capacity of an asset to
return to service after a storm. Assets that can quickly recover or that
Risk assessment methods ‘experience limited interruption to their delivery of core Community services
The tisk assessment tool developed by NYS DOS was used to quantify the have a low vulnerability index.
risk faced by vulnerable physical assets after Superstorm Sandy. The three The risk assessment tool calculated a risk score using the following formula:
factors used to assess risk were hazards, exposure, and vulnerability. A =
detailed description of the methods the tool uses can be found in the NYS Hazards x Exposure x Vulnerability = Risk
DOS manual titled Guidance for Community Reconstruction Zone Plans. The The risk score represents the risk of Community assets relative to one
risk assessment tool is available at: another. The scores range from 1.5 (negligible) to 75 (severe).
http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/resources-0. The Community contains a large number of assets, many of which share
functional commonalities that put them into the same risk categories.
hazards include flood and stom surge. Mazards Scores were calculated by Housing and infrastructure system assets, such as stormwater and electrical
evaluating risk from a range of storm events, from frequent, low-intensity networks, were grouped together to simpiffy the assessment process.
events to infrequent, high-intensity events. Assets in extreme risk areas
experience hazards more frequently and with greater impact than those in
high or moderate risk areas.
Exposure refers to the location of an asset. Exposure scores were calculated
as an expression of the local topographic and shoreline conditions that tend
—KX—X—XK_Vwowonssssssssssss_c_c_c_ccc_c_c_c_ccccccccccc
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 37, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
Table II-1: New York State Department of State Risk Areas
Cee) Cree ad De ee)
‘Federal Emergency Management Agency ‘© FEMA 1% (10-year) annual flood risk (FEMA | * FEMA 0.2% (500-year) annual flood risk
(FEMA) Coastal V Zones Zone V and Zone A)
‘National Weather Service (NWS) advisory _| Areas within 3 feet of elevation of NWS ‘Areas within 3 feet of elevation of FEMA 1%
thresholds for shallow coastal flooding advisory thresholds for shallow coastal annual flood risk (base flood elevations)
flooding
* Areas within 3 feet of elevation of mean * Area bounded by National Hurricane Center's
higher high water shoreline as defined by the Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Hurricanes (SLOSH) Category 3 hurricane
‘Administration storm surge inundation zone
* Areas prone to erosion
‘Source: New York State Department of State
Risk assessment of risk to assets: results
‘A risk assessment was completed for the at-risk assets identified during the asset inventory (Figures II-7 through II-11). Using the risk assessment tool, risk
scores were calculated for each of the assets. Risk scores for assets on the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula ranged from a relatively low 9 for a food pantry on
Mermaid Avenue to a very high 53 for the Ida G. Israel Medical Center and an extreme 54 for the Coney Island Gospel Assembly. The disparity between these
scores is largely the result of the facilities’ different outage times: whereas the food pantry was able to resume its primary functions almost immediately after
‘Superstorm Sandy, the medical center remains closed pending relocation to a temporary modular facility. Indeed, most variation in final risk scores was driven by
the vulnerability score component. The assets are almost all located on a dense, heavily urbanized bartier island whose natural systems are either no longer
extant or seriously degraded. Most assets, therefore, have similar, or identical, landscape attributes.
Section V.D contains tables that show the individual results of the assets from the risk assessment by Recovery Support Function. Assets with a risk score greater
than 53 are highlighted in red (extreme), assets with a risk score of 24 to 53 are highlighted in orange (high), and assets with a risk score of 6 to 23 are
highlighted in yellow (moderate). Assets with high or severe risk scores are highlighted in red in Figures II-7 through II-11.
The assessment of risk to systems is discussed following Figure I-11.
SS
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 38 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Ls
Unghton Weach | Cumey isand | Manhatten Ueach | Sex Gate
2012 Superstorm Sandy risk assessment map
f — S
oma, Sey, <
re Graven? 54 =n
ee shecpibead Bu
7 a 3 A,
ek i a SSE ne
ee aes x
a are ;
Be i ae
“ae Seadeor
Ne eer
Socal: Lucian Yatra NOS
LEGENR ra
[22 Cooaraphie Soaps ay SF
Band Fine Re oie.
I ore FOP a
=. i
 Meneats are ma N
Figure II-6: 2012 Superstorm Sandy Risk Assessment Map
—KX—X—XK_Vwowonssssssssssss_c_c_c_ccc_c_c_c_ccccccccccc
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 39. (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
Ls
urghon wench | ove and | Marban wench yea Gate
Economic asset risk assessment map
Gomnstiy my he i “G bi a
> . ‘a mi $0) Bae -
ce coed le 8 Tota -
P “AK ei
ay , -: Ds Ian ee Ee e-
Se ete o ie F Cet eng
o ‘ Men *
1 er oP a mih
ig 2 f g eas ae en) |
RS 2 } Ueenenenrent aan OT ee
a. ‘ Cenc en RTE RH Eo ns
Sraacenesen ee =a
* siete one eo mo NL
LEGEND
@ = coromic Aseat Larator ‘Tourism Destination Downtown Center
Land Use. CommnercisOtroe 1 Luna Park (Entertainment Facilities) 5 Neptune Ave Commercial Corridor
Hy Land Use: Industral Manutacticing 2 MCU Park & Mermaid Ave Commercial Corridor
ee Carries! Condon: 2) Riegelmann Boardwalk 7 ~~ Surf Ave Commercial Corridor
\@ Peas Higher soo 4 NY Aquarium 8 Brighton Beach Avo Commercial Corridor
| Mm Extore em High Wenn —
Figure II-7: Economic Asset Risk Assessment Map
ee
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 40, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
feghton fh | Carey Isa | Mahara each | Sea Got
Health and social services asset risk assessment map
Gowecety » F ad
yee Comet 95 ; te
es : 6 eS Sheewtees Soy
of ofa Se 7
eel ee a A v3 6 aa ~
z ret UR Ls, @ k
3 i a ey : es We \
Les io oO; ae th 5
a ae és este raat) *
oe < “a 2 r oe eae |
Ss eG ; seceas oe
ee. , cient guabade isin
MY ee ARS
tS =vagiane —_—$— a :
Sonn endear a Toman ee men
LEGEND Contac Ctl eu Peepurneee ‘HecsaeacatneSencas Pian (20 Thoetom Jew Commnny Corel
eer ee Meet asec ean ree st | 8 ROR
Gomes noe "e Suaerort einer Geral Cir $2 Ngo en ep Fs Aged ne
@ Emergency CprseraRerparee Reasons {> SanleJocent § Arne Masna ive Renstlliion cs | 22 ASA Tuma Ques
1. fayoon et eee 4 Hiunry Reso: lion Zuri hrmes* 12 Seid Hoa Sen Fi Daa tamesee ose now
seeds earn de, Hi > Urone 0 Laser tee 52 Shs Ran Hae 2 Ture viagenere
 eghens case toe “1 tdemaa isan carter 26 er Negeri orc
® BUR tui ad IE Cemorcrave Care Mat DETO 21 Te Prmlae Cin
Asceth ighest scare jee seropy-rat ns J Shaepuvcad #sy Acraleare Cl 2B Seney cana) esa
Toot acos tose ON at ST Cathie Clarion 2 Sharron Yen Yuta Cf BAhton Marhatlan B2sch.te,
fm Carre i 10 linker liane sence Cente So pena Samurly Cale
1 Satna Sea Maske Chae Ine 31 argwor Gocen Nelgeetead aecitan
Figure II-8: Health and Social Services Asset Risk Assessment Map
ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 41 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
Ls
eghton exch | Caney idant | Manattan Bach | Sa Gate
Housing asset risk map - Significant Assets Identified as of Jan 2014
ar ORS a 5 een wees 7 =I
; aa = ae .
a Rumson ‘ < fs a 2 me a se 2 a
3 Nis = =. Steevtieas Boy
S HE Bie! ee See
a v3 — yy Nez ad ' on:
” a ‘
\ cs “ a 3 ‘
\ Fae ee 1 a oP] B x
xy a ue (ey ois P ‘
i 2 ie Cace F art
S aor % - ‘ senso ono
‘ Ce G2 : ween eno miata Bg coun y
~, q Scere tenn eee > i
Sp. y ee nnn TRENT —
nae yiaioss Pe
Wt peewee eee Al
Se ena eneent ae mo N
EGEND AFFORDABLE HOUSING / ASSISTED LIVING
7 , ssa 1 NYCIA. Seavesend 12 MYAHA Fase 23 austere
@ Alerts teetaig Masel Looe) 2 NVCHA. Buriiie Santer 42 Wtenel Lama, Lina Pat Co tp: 28 Faendstl toasters
a 3 Neth Giese Garcere 14. tMe-Late afi ievze”” 5. Schwunt ov of bret Deo
PSE a Teme eves 4 NYCI OTreyer Gancere Il 13) MAtenet Lama, Gam gurt Howe (2 Gchever House ct er ginon Beam
GRE Mhutt-rerrily ecidences > NYCHA, Corey Isiand 18 Ritetl-Lame. Feber Vier BE Carney bela Site 44>
CR 3 Werth Soroy lowed ee 1hy 47 tenct-Lama: Nomecy Estes 35 ‘rohame Regence
f y + wou. coreyisand ions #25) 10. ttnel-Lams, Gee eat 2 atom Neqeaerce
: © veri Gorey rand one ey. 3A tntialame’ Aen ee 3 Sauer noone
@ semveingnent rar scree 2 NvCHA Sarsy Gardna 1 30 tenet Lama, voroasee Kowses 31 Gceanvety Mancr Hzme for Acute
pene dete fa wer Carey aardes Bt knc-tama @eneuctcass’” 33. Stance Mowe te Adare
a be om hon $7 NYCHA, Carey Gardens It 22 Sheretvont lowers 33 Mermaid Mance Home to" \duhs
Figure II-9: Housing Asset Risk Map
—KX—X—XK_Vwowonssssssssssss_c_c_c_ccc_c_c_c_ccccccccccc
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 42, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
See eS
ltngran doach | Carey isfond | MankatanWesch | sex te
Infrastructure asset risk assessment map
eonnmasar ve : ro
ae Repiesend. 3 —
w \ } Sepa 07
as oof ee laktsles
weet eee oe Ny = EE cae (| estate carte oe ea hla FO
i “ : Ye
‘ Ls 9 oh ‘
4 re
Ee ¥ it ey yy Be hs
‘Ve Oo) 8 peer i] ay fad ',
% r Cae ‘
% ‘es, ; 1 weoe-hespannai as
Box ' - cs iscameanen UNSERE aa a
Se. \ eran aR ia
MRS OY eee eer eet Seed
sat amen eae ———— A ww
ane o.oo eo NL
LEGEND 1 Corey ilane Rall Yard Transporation fre
‘ e ‘ oe iphattan Raacn StarmsatarFasiltias — Slurrwalet
© Wikewticaressertnccce 2 Mat Fit ana Gage Hazardovstsona wate GONE pines Sunpiy roar euopy.
° wae kr Dchieg 5 <Concy eland Powe Sup omer Suppiy
‘Bus Transportation Sysicms ‘Oia Saree Brighton Seact Power Supply Power Supply
O  MTASutreay Stop ae ‘ Martuslisn eat Puwcr Suppy omer Supply
Conmanicalors Facities Community Wue Teewuinmunizssons —_LIgula Fuel Statens - Community Wide ie Fuale
© Rtiitigiaitiinae Sea Cate Stormater recites stamweter
. Coney Istana Stamwster Facts Stamweter
Gm Corere oy Heh Woserats|—nghton each Stermnester raciiies Sromwter
Figure II-10: Infrastructure Asset Risk Assessment Map
Cn eed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 43, @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
lngiton teach | Carey ean | arnamn sch | ia ate
Natural and cultural asset risk assessment map
amet oy a
> : ‘| .
ea fenced a =
, eo x \ Sheepshead flay:
£0 re | Saar Te -
sees tt Rane Le eo Rabiner taney Stee
“ Po OAS, Aas a
ci ; ew
‘aS . . eas cael
Be pera eu} *
% Z cane nese ameuriae ay
mS : ean aee >
55. ‘ Cowen een TEEN SO
be (see Fen compat
sb esengs —— A a |
eS ar aay N |
HeceaO Pusan sa Prsfoerinn Ars Genii ark stl Recent
@ Nanwal Assat| seater
@ cuturat asset Locator 1 Conny Island Hislory Project 4 Neplune Playyround 9 Asser Levy Park
te Paces of Worsnp 2 Conoy Island USA & — Galvoit Vaux Park 49. Holocaust Momorial Parks
3 Leon Ml Goldstein Performing Arts Center 6 ~— Coney Island Greek Park 11 Sheepshead Bay Footbridge
@ sectoom gnes wx score 7 Kaiser Park 42 Public Promenade
mm Fitcrne Ge Nigh Masermts @ — Mantuallan Beach Park 13 Manhallan Beach Balyhouss
Figure 11-11: Natural and Cultural Asset Risk Assessment Map
SS
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 44 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Assessment of risk to systems
This assessment of risk to systems highlights the initial risk assessment When reviewing this section, it wil become apparent that one of the needs
results for system asset groups (i.e., infrastructure, public services) that do that cuts across a number of Recovery Support Functions is to protect
not lend themselves to assessment as individual point assets. The risk vulnerable populations, who include the elderly and individuals with physical
assessment methods and risk assessment results described in the previous and mobility challenges. Fortunately there are a number of opportunities to
subsection were utilized to determine the risk score of systems. Results are address that need through a range of public and non-governmental
shown in Section V-D. initiatives, that could be augmented by NYRCR Community Development
Systems risk scores are more narrowly concentrated in the moderate and Block Grant-Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding support.
high categories. The higher risk scores associated with systems assets in the ey build
Sea Gate neighborhood are generally reflective of longer outages and Community planning and capacity building
greater service interruption in that neighborhood. Generally, however, This Recovery Support Function relates to how the community will restore or
because infrastructure systems are administered at a Citywide or regional enhance its ability to organize, plan, and manage its recovery. This Recovery
level, performance tends to be similar among adjacent neighborhoods. In ‘Support Function involves the community engagement of a wide range of
general, the scores reflect that power, stormwater, and communications public, private, and non-governmental organization stakeholders.
systems are at considerable risk of interruption during future storm events.
Needs
Ey The Committee identified an overarching need to increase the general
< disaster preparedness of all Community residents by developing community-
a based emergency response and recovery strategies. The Community
_ oF a contains high concentrations of vulnerable populations and individuals with
Po. seal access and functional needs. Specifically, the Community includes the
a? & ahi | following populations:
ees on ea I + 21,489 Community members®? (24% of the population’) are over 65
—— ey se ae years old, a number that is expected to increase by 15% by 2020.°°
a oh ee ~ = 16,989 Community members® (19% of the population”) are
fi: ~hd - ee disabled. Of this population, 68%" are 65 years or older.
~ . 2 = + 56,733 (64%) of people in the Community speak a language other
‘Sea Gate beachfront damage than English at home” and 44% of foreign-language speakers report
that they speak English “less than very well.”
B. Assessment of needs and opportunities For the purposes of this NYRCR Plan, vulnerable populations are defined as
The Committee and the public identified the needs and opportunities individuals with physical or mental challenges, limited mobility, or no or
following Superstorm Sandy based on the six Recovery Support Functions. limited English proficiency; individuals who are homeless or near homeless,
households with young children or elderly residents, and households of low
or moderate income.
Re ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 45, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
These vulnerable populations require special consideration in emergency communication outages. Moreover, many local service providers and non-
preparedness planning and during the emergency response and recovery profit organizations are neighborhood-focused groups that lack significant
phases after disasters. In the case of individuals with limited English resources or connections to a broader network of service providers. Although
proficiency, many of whom reported not receiving or understanding these providers are an essential component of the everyday social fabric,
evacuation instructions, interpreters may be needed. Similarly, the most local non-profit organizations were stretched beyond their capacity by
inconsistent evacuation of nursing, elder-care, and assisted-living facilities the extraordinary events of Superstorm Sandy. Because these organizations
points to the need to ensure that evacuation protocols and methods are traditionally focused on local constituencies, many had limited experience in
tailored to accommodate individuals with limited mobility. collaborating across neighborhood lines and other boundaries.
A number of civic groups and other non-governmental organizations provide The Brooklyn Community District 13 and 15 Community Emergency
vital services to these vulnerable populations. These groups and Response Teams (CERTS) are active, for instance. However, the Committee
organizations include nursing, elder-care, and assisted-living facilities; recommends that these CERTs be expanded throughout the Community so
religious institutions providing social services, such as hot meals; and local that they can better serve vulnerable populations and immigrant
chapters of national and international fraternal and social organizations. communities. This need is particularly acute given Committee and public
TEN TEN reports that the Community was underserved before, during, and after
ip f a } Superstorm Sandy.
‘RA. ti} i! t Even as these organizational capacity shortfalls are addressed, additional
. i physical evacuation planning will be needed for future disasters and
J ‘\ emergencies. The limited number of ingress and egress routes to the
Bde) ry. . tt Southern Brooklyn Peninsula is a primary concern, and a more detailed
aT | a review of evacuation planning for the Community is needed. Compounding
ti, i the need for enhanced evacuation planning, many Community residents
MH ~—Y 7 either do not have access to cars or rely on public transportation as their
== Pr } ® primary means of transportation.
| | ae CIR i Finally, the Committee identified a need for community response and
ag } a i recovery centers in response to the large number of residents who were
; ‘ mines unable to return to their homes immediately after the storm, or who
BE reported difficulty accessing useful information about recovery activities for
; Superstorm Sandy. Residents who sheltered in place or who returned to their
‘4 homes after Superstorm Sandy encountered sustained cell phone or Internet
ro ‘outages. The lack of reliability of local communication networks was not only
‘Coney Island YMCA!" inconvenient, but also potentially dangerous in the days immediately after
the storm. Many individuals were unable to access communications from
Even short power and other utlity outages can compromise the ability of relief agencies. The Committee identified this issue during its first Planning
these groups and organizations to provide vital services. In the weeks after Committee Meeting and continued to explore ways to develop and refine
Superstorm Sandy, many of these facilities were unable to communicate potential project ideas related to this need for the duration of the NYRCR
important information to residents and constituents because of power and planning process.
ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 46, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
See eS
Opportunities
The following are opportunities related to community planning and capacity a
building: b * 5
+ The Committee identified a number of civic groups and non- f~
governmental organizations that were active in addressing the needs s\)
of vulnerable populations and immigrant communities after |
Superstorm Sandy and who would be interested in building capacity x rt
to better respond to future disasters. As one example, the Mesivta of Be *
Sea Gate became a hub for clothing and other essential items |
following Superstorm Sandy. a fr
+ The Committee identified sites in the Community that could ta ~
potentially serve as community emergency response and recovery i i is Fs
centers and that are affiliated with existing community service =
providers. i i, i ' a
* Community interest in localized emergency preparedness and Lc dame ee ad = ——
response planning is high. Many Community members have specific Y |
local knowledge that could be incorporated into emergency planning —. — i
for the City of New York and non-profit organizations. Ss
= Community-based organizations (CBOs) are in a unique position to — 102
understand the needs of the community on a micro level, including Leeaheaheiiaeeaaial
needs based on religion, language, or vulnerability. Enhancing the
capabilities of CBOs to provide services and information to residents Economic development
before, during, and after disasters is a priority for the Committee. This Recovery Support Function addresses how the Community will restore
economic and business activities and develop new economic ities,
+ The Committee identified an opportunity to foster collaboration rome goed and sonics resume corms ond iendaaie tes,
between the local CBOs, first responders, and City agencies for a jenerate revenue. Residents of this Community feel that economic
more effective emergency response and recovery. The Committee 9 7 ity
local thi h profi development is an important aspect of recovering from Superstorm Sandy,
saw an opportunity to organize local CBOs, through a non-profit and have suggested many needs and opportunities for the Southern
network, to better understand the lessons learned from Superstorm ane ve eugges
Sandy and be better prepared for future disaster events. There is an i 7
‘opportunity, for instance, for local CERTs and the New York City
Office of Emergency Management to undertake additional targeted Needs
outreach to grow the ranks of the teams to ensure that they reflect ‘Community risk assessment maps show that all of the four communities that
the diversity and character of the Community. constitute the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula are at extreme or high risk of
flooding.
Cn eed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 47, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Key economic drivers in the Community include the New York Aquarium, the

Coney Island amusement and entertainment district, Coney Island Hospital,

and Kingsborough Community College. All of these institutions directly

benefit the local economy, as do many small businesses. Damages from

Superstorm Sandy to these institutions ranged from moderate to severe. 4

Considerable funding has been allocated and considerable efforts have been Ps

underway since the storm to bring these facilities back to their pre-disaster v

conditions or to improve them beyond their pre-disaster conditions. Given i v

their importance to the local economy, there is a need to ensure that . ’

resiliency is incorporated as a key component of the long-term recovery of 2 = { Ts

these facilities. i ra ¥

Micro and small local businesses that suffered severe impacts as a result of ” my i

‘Superstorm Sandy have not benefited from the same level of institutional 7 § Yo ee

support as the key economic institutions. Businesses that were not directly i 4

affected by the storm surge or backwater flooding still had to contend with ed 4 . _

power outages, intermittent heat and hot-water service, and limited access o ay

to retail delivery. According to the City of New York's Special Initiative for r i

Rebuilding and Resiliency (SIRR Report), 5,000 businesses” employing over ee

30,000 people’ in Southern Brooklyn (figures include Gerritsen Beach and Subse

Sheepshead Bay) were directly impacted by Superstorm Sandy. Coney Island * ay

was affected severely by business interruption, making it difficult for ae Bs

residents to buy groceries after Superstorm Sandy.'°> me

Analyses by the City of New York, FEMA, and the Brooklyn Chamber of i » No —

Commerce suggest that the goal of business resilience is often undercut by a a .

lack of coordination among area merchants on key commercial corridors. The ‘A market on Brighton Beach ‘Avenue!

diverse language backgrounds and English-proficiency levels of many area

Property owners and merchants complicate prospects for “merchant Most retail activity benefits from an attractive physical environment.
organization. In this context, it is understandable that many business owners Although the City has increasingly focused on street-tree planting and
reported relatively limited understanding of disaster-funding sources or streetscape design in Southern Brooklyn in recent years, Superstorm Sandy
business resiliency strategies even several months after Superstorm Sandy. reversed some of this progress by killing or damaging trees and plantings on
Even with improved business continuity planning, local enterprises will many streets, including along major commercial corridors. This landscape
remain vulnerable to physical risk. With so much of the Community damage, combined with the extreme hardships imposed on local merchants
susceptible to storm surge, backwater inundation, or both, improved building by Sandy, has exacerbated the issue of commercial vacancy rates that were
practices and technologies are needed to limit the damages associated with already high before the storm.

flooding.

ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 48, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Opportunities
The following opportunities were identified for economic development:
+ The Community offers an attractive mix of commercial and PRO Meg TE ea
recreational amenities that are accessible to major public PAR SS. op ae we
transportation lines and the local highway network. Nh ibe 19 E /
SONY eer he Fi 2
+ The Community has extensive waterfront access, boardwalks, a By vi oii = ie ;
unique history associated with the Coney Island amusement area, fy ethan”.
and tourist amenities such as the New York Aquarium and ae = —— j be
Manhattan Beach, which provide recreational and educational me Kins cee * a 4
opportunities that can draw visitors and support the local economy. ee es - a
+ The City of New York, through a number of initiatives that both pre- a ae a es
date and post-date Superstorm Sandy (eg., the Coney Island east ind mS
Revitalization Plan, rezoning of the Amusement District in 2009) and po Teper 1S et HP tates :
through specific economic development detailed in the 2013 SIRR De ruse cae a. x 5
Report, has created significant opportunities to revitalize the Coney . se
Island district. This local revitalization will provide economic benefits Goel Ss A
to the broader Community. £ # WANT,
+ The New York City Department of Small Business Services is in the * ees
process of establishing the Business Resiliency Investment Program é Pi PRESEN Td
(BRIP), which is expected to provide $110 million in funding to oe
tenants and owners of businesses to implement flood protection Damage after Superstorm Sandy’
measures, such as elevating mechanical and electrical systems.
+ The Brighton Beach Business Investment District and the Brooklyn
Chamber of Commerce have both been actively engaged in
supporting small businesses in the recovery from Superstorm Sandy.
ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 49, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
eghton fh | Caney Iara | Mahara seach | ex Go
Vacant land map by zoning
—
a ; SS,
ee sf :, j és
: sre Hee =.
comey i ! fast Westy
Feiss , i ee ives
arttees ia ree ET WON age a hann ne Poe n eeed
et nn, 2 a oa = ‘
ae 1 re 4 fi A ¥ ot Vee Wc i:
“ Kooy, oye! OF Liza . }a> hl ¥ i ise
Hig a3 ‘ Stee " ine Sti al Stra ae 1
: iy Ue i ee cn a TO
x (pect Vt Mee emeet MN be Fe FINI) Gotu ema ihe (Maegan if ¥
sy a Sar a \ ia ee aera a tse ot : \
‘ Fe eer oe pe a ieee yeah on
y Sra i Se ) i Mg eae -
S re 2 } cee en en pana oH Ms *
= - beeen asm
be 4 aneeden earn ae
Mens josneenense F ake
igh ewe es AP
Ene IO oa aM “fon NL
LEGENU
2 3 Geographic Scone
Guxceuar BRIGHTON BEACH | CONEY ISLAND. MANHAIIAN BEACH | SEAGATE
BB Conruscial gonnc #io1a. | zone = wToTAL | ZONING «#ToTAL «| ZONING #TOTAL
3. cb7.cF cat te? Hasidantal 2 | ots Residentis! 170 Lote | Reedentisl 19 Lois Resicental 61 ate
mm Industrial vfornufacturing Commercial 2 Les ‘Commercial 25 Lots ‘Commercial 1 Lot
tat 5 © Industrial 52 Lars
i eatdental
aK RRO 2 RA AI: 88;
Fe Rea: RID: RPS ATARI: RIX roan NTE Depa ie cro eel
Figure 11-12: Vacant Land Map
ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 50, @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Housing affordability is another topic that was frequently mentioned during
Housing the planning process. Nearly 39%" of homeowners in the Community have
This Recovery Support Function relates to meeting the demand for mortgage costs that exceed 35%” of their household income. According to
affordable housing (and promotion of affordable housing), addressing post- the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) definition of
disaster housing needs, and encouraging disaster-resistant housing for all housing affordability, homeowners who pay more than 30% of their income
income groups. for housing may have trouble affording other necessities, such as food,
clothing, medical care, and transportation. “®
See " Owners who must dedicate large portions of their incomes to basic housing
= NEY as costs tend not to have funds available for repairs and upgrades that can
PS oe | z improve the basic conditions and resiliency of their homes. This concern is
| be ve |S particularly acute in the context of the uncertainty surrounding flood
. Le io : insurance rates. Many Public Engagement Event participants had expressed
hh >, ce tT 5 particular concern that with flood insurance premiums set to rise
Nile Se dramatically, the cost of basic repairs or floodproofing would force them
sip | 4 a from their homes. President Obama signed the Homeowner Flood Insurance
a | y % | Affordability Act of 2014 into law in March 2014, limiting annual premium
Sah ji | increases and insulating homes that complied with previous flood maps from
9 | major increases. The National Flood Insurance Program remains deeply
— ti ? indebted, though, meaning that long-term uncertainty about the affordability
Ra i lL N of flood insurance persists.
CAN y ‘The damages that Superstorm Sandy created continue to impact residents,
Brighton 10th Court“? homeowners, and renters, especially those in vulnerable populations,
including low- and moderate-income families, seniors, and the disabled.
Needs Committee Members and attendees at Public Engagement Event stated that
Over 77% of the housing stock in the Community was built before 1960." the slow pace of housing recovery underlined the need for greater
The City of New York implemented a modern building code in 1968*"° and homeowner education to increase resiliency after future storm events.
made additional enhancements to these regulations to improve flood Indeed, at the first and second Public Engagement Events, both held over a
resiliency in 1983." Therefore, most housing units in the Community pre- year after the storm, many attendees expressed a lack of awareness of
date modern building codes. Not surprisingly, an analysis by the Furman funding and technical assistance programs relevant to their needs.
Center’ found that housing damages from Superstorm Sandy were more
severe for buildings constructed before the introduction of modern building Opportunities
codes. According to the SIRR Report, bungalows and other one-story The following opportunities were identified for Housing:
combustible buildings constructed before 1961 were most vulnerable and
sustained the most damage from Superstorm Sandy." These types of + Homeowners appear to be receptive to implementing floodproofing
buildings make up only 18% of buildings in inundated areas of the City, measures if they have the financial means to implement them.
but represent 73%" of the buildings destroyed or with structural damage.
ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 51 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
See eS
+ The City and the State have introduced a variety of housing- so that the needs of the Community, especially those of vulnerable
assistance programs for which many Community residents are populations who rely on these services more frequently, are met.
eligible. Many of the nursing homes, assisted-living facilities, and eldercare facilities
* The NYCHA and Mitchell-Lama management are open to pursuing in the Community still need to elevate their mechanical systems and are in
‘opportunities and funding to incorporate solar-power, micro-grid, need of reliable sources of backup power.
and cogeneration initiatives to provide more sustainable and resilient
electrical power to their housing projects. Opportunities
+ A large number of non-profit and social-service organizations have The following opportunities were identified for health and social services:
developed educational ad assistance programs to meet the needs + As discussed In the section on Conmunty Planing and capacity
a ly, citywide, 'gionally. Building, the Community's CERTs could be expanded to better serve
. , vulnerable populations, including seniors and people with mobility
Health and social services impairments,
This Recovery Support Function addresses how the Community will restore = Coney Island Hospital will receive FEMA Public Assistance funding to
and improve essential health and social services, including services for improve the resliency of the hospital and to find both Interim ond
vulnerable populations. permanent solutions to replacing the important medical services
Superstorm Sandy severely damaged facilities at Coney Island Hospital, provided by the Ida G. Israel Medical Center.
forced the closure of the Ida G. Israel Medical Center, and affected other
: + Arnumber of public and non-profit organizations in the Peninsula are
rear ana socal tere in providers throughout the Peninsula, At Coney Teland willing to network and collaborate in strengthening the provision of
lospital, floodwaters inundated the basement and entered the first floor, health and social services with the goal of making the Community
damaging the hospital's emergency department, imaging services, and public rare reallient ta natural disesters
and administrative areas. Electrical and mechanical systems were hardest hit. *
It took 8 months to restore service to all hospital units. The affiliated Ida G.
Israel Medical Center on Neptune Avenue was severely damaged by Infrastructure
floodwaters. Given its vulnerable location, the decision was made to provide This Recovery Support Function relates to how the community will restore,
those services in a more resilient facility. repair, and manage essential infrastructure services.
Needs Needs
Many of the general needs related to health and social services and socially Superstorm Sandy caused significant damage to many of the Community's
vulnerable populations that arose during this planning process are discussed infrastructure assets and systems. The Community faces severe risk not just
in previous sections, notably in the sections on community planning and from direct storm surge but also from backflow inundation. Stormwater and
capacity building and housing. sewage low flooded homes ar usinesses during Superstorm San
pacity building and housing ge backflow flooded homes and b during Sup. dy,
building damage and potential human exposure to toxic materials.
The disruption in health and social services impacted service recipients and causing
Many neighborhoods throughout the Peninsula remain highly vulnerable to
employees, whose work wos scaled back de t the inte serves tatty yp of nundton in fture orm events, nung ese severe rms
Community's medical and social service needs is a priority for the Committee than Superstorm Sandy. Throughout the planning process, the Committee
Se eed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 52, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
and attendees at Public Engagement Events strongly expressed the need to of potential City and State programs and incentives that can be
upgrade stormwater and wastewater conveyance systems to handle current pursued throughout the Peninsula.
flow volumes. + The Committee, together with the Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay
The aging and vulnerable infrastructure in the Planning Area must be Planning Committee, identified storm surge reduction as a top
rehabilitated for the area to be resilient to future storms. Flooding damages priority. To ensure consistency of approach and to address the
from Superstorm Sandy had a significant impact on the Communities’ sewer, problem on a regional level, the NYRCR Committees have included in
communications, and power infrastructure. In Sea Gate, there was extensive their final list of Proposed Projects a reconnaissance study to
damage from the storm to the network of sewer lines throughout the evaluate methods for flood risk reduction in Manhattan Beach,
community, leading to deterioration of pipes and subsidence of the Sheepshead Bay, and Gerritsen Beach. Both Committees would
pavement. Electrical systems for street utilities were damaged by saltwater share the cost of the study.
intrusion. Private-sector communications infrastructure for cell phone
coverage was disrupted and is still problematic throughout the Peninsula. Natural and cultural resources
This Recovery Support Function relates to natural and cultural resource
Opportunities management from a risk reduction and economic development context.
The following opportunities were identified for infrastructure: ‘The Committee and members of the public identified a number of natural
+ Relatively inexpensive, cost-effective methods of backflow and cultural Community assets. Most of the needs and opportunities
prevention exist and have been employed successfully in the City of statements developed in relation to these assets were framed in the context
New York. of infrastructure.
+ Improved storm drainage in areas impacted by storm surge and eRRyh
more frequent flooding events would reduce the risk to SORE iiaiee
infrastructure, housing, natural resources, businesses, and essential te (2 eT
facilities in the Community. Infrastructure improvements would form 2 By) vy a
the basis for increased resilience throughout the area. | 7 ed
+ At each Public Engagement Event, the infrastructure “station” was iE a jig a
the busiest, with many people expressing the need to stop or haere ee
prevent the water from flooding their community. This level of public é: E
interest may translate into public support for infrastructure fe E
improvements, such as improved storm drains and methods to = QO
alleviate flooding in the neighborhoods and along the major - | ge.
thoroughfares. iV ‘a Se
+ Committee Members and the public were strongly supportive of
‘opportunities for solar-power, micro-grid, and smart-grid Shore Boulevard, Manhattan Beach”?
technologies that could provide more sustainable and resilient power
options for specific facilities and neighborhoods. There are a number
ed
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 53. (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Needs relies on its natural and cultural resources for its economic livelihood and the
In defining its Community asset inventory, the Committee distinguished Personal enjoyment of Its inhabitants
between natural assets (e.g., beaches) and cultural resources (e.g., houses
of worship). Natural assets serve dual functions in the area: they may Opportunities
provide protective barriers from flooding to economic and housing assets and The following opportunities were identified for natural and cultural resources:
they draw people to the area for recreation and entertainment. Cultural
+ The City of New York (City) has committed to work with State and
coe once gu he versa sey oe County. Te Feira prs ee hy bene ug Pu ech Te
fhe Community Woe distinct new The cettaral asst ype be eneiits SIRR Report specifically identifies Plumb Beach as a location where
distribution cesters for both infermation and supplies ‘after Superstorm the City intends to improve and restore recreational infrastructure.
Sandy. Both need to be preserved for the Community to be resilient to future + The City has committed to work with State and Federal partners to
storms. restore City beaches, make the boardwalk more resilient and
attractive to residents and visitors, and evaluate opportunities to
\ _ oe implement regional coastal protection measurs.
* Beaches damaged and trees lost during Superstorm Sandy present
“ A ll = = an opportunity for the Community to rebuild to a higher level of
Lg a. = resilience. For instance, the devastation of trees presents an
a = opportunity to replant trees that may be more resilient to coastal
q Nt storms. It also presents an opportunity to create more permeable
Ps
ee, Ls surfaces to improve stormwater management.
, MA ee
a ; BEEN ROSS * In the aftermath of Superstorm Sandy, civic groups and non-
2 BEANO. governmental and religious organizations on the Peninsula assumed
E Be responsibility for local residents and assisted them in ways beyond
= | Benoni the scope of their organizational missions. The strength and
By oN Wiha presence of these organizations provide an opportunity to enhance
=| =! 2 bi i their capacity to support the Community after future disaster events.
f el yw eS Natural areas, including Coney Island Creek and the beaches, provide the
Pere so opportunity to build cost-effective storm surge protection measures that can
Oe oe ee an protect the communities of the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula, while
Bo eR Sc enhancing their resilience.
Sand movement at the border of Sea Gate and
Coney Island after Superstorm Sandy?”
The impacts associated with Superstorm Sandy emphasized the need for the
beach areas and the boardwalk to be resilient to large coastal storms. These
areas provide a natural barrier to many homes in the area. The Community
NN
Section II: Assessment of risk and needs Page 54 (2)

.. fe
Se eee OS ee
Section III:
Reconstruction and
ois TALO ASL re Roel (S15

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee In addition to focusing on hard infrastructure systems, the Committee
(Committee) developed the Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies identified specific natural and cultural resources that required specific
described in this section on the basis of knowledge gained from the visioning protection or enhancement strategies. The Committee focused, for instance,
process and information gathered through the needs and opportunities ‘on ways to improve the resource values of Brighton Beach and Coney Island
assessment and the risk assessment processes. The Committee prioritized Beach while improving those assets’ ability to withstand risk.

Brent strategies according to matics at ines thet relationship © te The Committee and Community members worked to iden solutions to
strategies were used as a framework for developing specific projects, policy _‘rotect housing assets for extreme weather events, A variety of residential
decisions, or other actions. The strategies represent the Committee's general single aruly homes . Manhattan Beach to high-rise apartment co-ops snd
recommendations for achieving rebuilding, resilience, and economic growth. public housing towers, and supportive housing and assisted: living farilities in
The Committee initially discussed key strategies at a meeting on Coney Island. Collectively, housing units suffered tremendous damage due to
September 30, 2013. They developed and refined these strategies at ‘Superstorm Sandy. As the Committee devised strategies to mitigate housing
subsequent meetings, incorporating public input from the second Public damage by improving infrastructure systems, it also developed strategies to
Engagement Event, which was held on November 20, 2013. protect individual homes and homeowners.

Taking existing City, State, and regional plans into consideration, the The Committee also recognized that a disaster of Superstorm Sandy's
Committee discussed strategies in terms of their anticipated Community magnitude demonstrated the need for better Community-level planning.
benefit and their potential development into defined project proposals that Although structural solutions are required to safeguard the Community's
respond to Community needs exposed or exacerbated by Superstorm Sandy. physical assets, community planning and capacity building strategies are
The resulting list of projects, investments, and initiatives, which includes needed to protect the residents who utilize these assets. Based on their
detailed project descriptions and cost estimates, is included in Section IV of personal experience with inefficient or inadequate emergency preparedness
this plan. This section lists the Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies and, and response procedures during and after Superstorm Sandy, the Committee
where applicable, introduces resulting Proposed and Featured Project worked collectively to generate a range of strategies to improve planning
concepts in general terms. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are processes and build the capacity of local organizations, including civic groups
included in Section V of this plan. and locally based non-profit organizations. Although preparedness and
Given the magnitude of the storm surge and flooding associated with __‘esPonse procedures are relevant and important forall Community members,
‘Superstorm Sandy, substantial storm-related damage to coastal communities 'e Committee was particularly determines generate strategies that
such as Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate was specifically addressed the needs of socially vulnerable populations.

inevitable. Still, the Committee recognized that the failure or Even as the Committee defined better protection of infrastructure, homes,
underperformance of key infrastructure systems magnified this damage. The and residents as its most immediate priorities, Committee Members
impacts of direct storm surge were made more severe, for instance, by the recognized that the Community's long-term sustainability is predicated on
failure of water and wastewater conveyance systems to prevent backflow economic wellbeing. Many residents rely directly on local businesses and
inundation. Similarly, the effects of prolonged, regional power outages were commercial corridors for employment, retail services, restaurants, groceries,
compounded by a lack of redundancy and power generation capacity at the and personal services. The health of a neighborhood's economic assets is
building level. typically a good indicator of that neighborhood's overall condition. With this
a IY 2 008 cst of that neighborhood's veal condtion With tis
‘Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 56 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Commurity Reconstruction Plan
Se]
consideration in mind, the Committee collaborated to develop strategies to
protect and strengthen economic assets along the Peninsula.
A. Reconstruction and resiliency strategies
This section lists and describes the specific strategies that the Committee
drafted to enhance the Community's ability to organize, plan, manage, and
implement recovery. The Committee relied on individual members’ specific
local knowledge of, and personal experience with, the impacts of Superstorm
Sandy. In many cases, the perspective of community groups, non-profit
organizations, municipal agencies, and elected officials supplemented this
knowledge.
The highlighted boxes below each strategy description provide examples of
Proposed or Featured Projects that evolved during the planning process to
address each strategy developed by the Committee.
Pl
a
-_— eee
3 r a =
a Dns
a
ad ¢ 2 =_
a Dae cd
Members of the Planning Committee discussing resiliency strategies'**

ed
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 57, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Enable more effective response to natural disasters by % TRH
enhancing emergency response protocols and communication | P i :
The Committee recognized that vulnerable populations require special Ri | \ y,
consideration in emergency preparedness planning and during post-disaster I [ a Es
emergency response and recovery phases. For example, many residents, e 5 in.
particularly the elderly and those with limited English proficiency, were not _ 7
aware of emergency response messaging and faced the difficult question of eee
whether to shelter in place or evacuate during the storm. Also, the f st a ip ij
inconsistent evacuation of nursing, elder-care, and assisted-living facilities 5 I mei i
illustrates the need to ensure that evacuation protocols and methods are ae a ee
tailored to accommodate individuals with limited mobility. The Committee Clem d lo i Na Bs en
determined that greater coordination and communication between the ®
Community and first responders is essential. The strategy of enhancing ' ) 4 = a a
‘emergency response protocols and communications for Peninsula residents ae oe as 4 |
directly responds to this need. . om |} is
National Guard responding to Superstorm Sandy along the Southern
Brooklyn Peninsula’?
Enable more effective response to natural disasters by enhancing emergency response protocols and communication
. rer lg errr]
if t Ni Short Project Description Pte eg
roject Name b Ge elias | eee emote)
Public Emergency Preparedness _| Create a local public outreach campaign that $160,000 Proposed Y
Outreach Campaign Uses multiple forms of media to provide
targeted and specific disaster preparedness,
response, and recovery information to
Community residents.
ed
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 58 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Commurity Reconstruction Plan
ES
Improve facilities, infrastructure, information sharing, and
‘emergency capacity of social service organizations and =
health/mental health service providers a wee f
Committee members and Community residents reported having limited =
access to municipal services and storm-related information immediately after z Saat =
Superstorm Sandy. This feeling of being disconnected was also a prominent —_ ae
and recurring theme at Planning Committee Meetings, at which es a
representatives reported difficulty accessing municipal agencies to address ==, PaaS
constituent concerns in the storm’s immediate aftermath. The locally based >in es
civic groups and non-profit organizations acted as “first responders” a Se - — - 3
following Superstorm Sandy, and worked diligently to meet the needs of a * ry
residents, particularly vulnerable populations in the Planning Area. These os (sa) 2
representatives also reported that their organizations’ facilities suffered from = EP a? A Y
storm-related damage. To address this need, the Committee developed a of ya! ia
strategy to improve the facilities and capabilities of these organizations “? ae
throughout the Peninsula. ze ft heal
“ ~ =
x he) - |
g hots
Waiting in line for supplies in Coney Island???
Improve facilities, infrastructure, information sharing, and emergency capacity of social service organizations and health/mental
Deere ie
Ces ead eae Ens reed esta) Petrie hers | e Se ne - nA ,
Designation of Emergency Perform a location and feasibility analysis to $980,000 Proposed Y
Response and Recovery designate emergency response and recovery
Centers centers in each neighborhood in the Community.
Also create a fund to develop continuity plans and
assess facility vulnerabilities for civic groups and
non-profit organizations.
SS
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 59 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Commurity Reconstruction Plan
ES
Support local businesses to fully recover from Superstorm
Sandy
Superstorm Sandy caused moderate to severe damage to a number of i
institutions critical to the local economy. Although some key institutions —
rebounded reasonably quickly after Superstorm Sandy, many local small * Pe Fy lace TAN
businesses and microenterprises were slower to recover, and some have yet at . H
to retum. In its 2013 Action Plan, the City of New York reported that as Rani) - a jf, ae
many as 30% of businesses in storm-affected neighborhoods in Southern wer . ae ae
Brooklyn remained closed up to five months after the storm.!* Many of ee 7 fs eS eee
these businesses are also located in high or extreme risk areas. Ln \) 4 Te = amulk
Committee Members saw opportunities to catalyze economic activity in all a ™ +H ie
‘Community neighborhoods through potential expansion of the Coney Island ¥t a
amusement district. Although the Committee voiced considerable support for . i Hl Hl pe)
similar efforts that the Alliance for Coney Island is coordinating, the majority i > a Peavy mt 3
of Committee Members also wanted to support economic development a ‘ ee:
opportunities beyond the boundaries of the amusement area. —— Se Z oe
The most pressing need for small businesses, and especially micro- — se —
businesses, is their continuing instability following Superstorm Sandy. —_ = =:
Although many businesses did not suffer substantial structural damage, —— ==
inventory was lost and flooding damaged interior spaces. The need to jal retail "i as
provide adequate technical assistance and funding for low-cost flood Commercial retail along Brighton Beach Avenue
mitigation measures is reflected in the strategy to support local businesses.
Support local businesses to fully recover from Superstorm Sandy
Deed ard Piet re ped eer crn) Estimated Cost | _ Proposed or ed
Featured Project Project (Y/N)
Increase Resiliency of Small Establish a small business support office; offer $1,960,000 Proposed
Businesses Throughout the direct assistance to merchants for floodproofing
Peninsula their businesses; implement Peninsula-wide
streetscape enhancements, including replacing
trees, installing stormwater attenuation
measures, and making landscaping
improvements along business corridors.
SELLE!
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 60 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Expand workforce development opportunities in the Southern » at | i =
Brooklyn Peninsula that would enhance regional resiliency 9g eons sary!
and recovery i sees a
The Committee viewed the Community's high rates of unemployment and “4 ++ : >
under-employment as critical concerns. Committee members and Community anf
residents reported that employment opportunities and job and skills training i 2
services are badly needed in the Community. These reports are jaar
supplemented by empirical data. In 2012, for instance, the Furman Center at f pe
New York University estimated Community District 13's unemployment rate 1
at 12.8%, higher than the citywide rate of 11.2%. Nearly 30% of all s . \ 2 ,
Community District residents lived in poverty that year.'2 Equally telling is " ae %3
the educational attainment profile of the Community. A 2012 analysis by the i \£ .=
Institute for Children, Poverty and Homelessness found that the most — = = s
common educational attainment level among adults 25 and over in many (+ \ ‘
Census Block Groups in Coney Island and Brighton Beach was “less than high a ee r
school.” This attainment profile signals a dire need for improved workforce ee re ee
training and preparation to serve the high number of Community residents
with limited job skills. It also demonstrates the need for educational curricula al a aa ae 4
that are more responsive to local needs, and more likely to engage local
youth. These considerations are reflected in the ‘committee's Svarkforce S—— Pe
development strategy, which seeks to augment City workforce initiatives on
the Peninsula. Solar Sandy project facilitated by Solar One®
Thiru Gne io hota ait iin hee tas mat)
caret
rset Ty End aes ad srr sista) Estimated Cost | eee eo
Featured Project Project (Y/N)
Vocational Training Program Expand vocational training programs at a high $680,000 Proposed Y
school on the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula to
include green and resilient building and
emergency preparedness curricula
ed
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 61 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
ee eee ee
Explore opportunities to expand economic activities
throughout the Peninsula ee,
The Committee identified a strong need for restored and enhanced economic cn st a
and business activity in the Community. To address this need, they sought to ee
develop a strategy that would catalyze new economic opportunities, provide — = r
more goods and services locally, resume commerce and employment, and a Tg
generate revenue in the Community. Recent City and State planning . = 3
activities have largely focused on revitalization of the amusement area as a a | I Pen
means to stimulate Community-wide development. These efforts have been ——— a ‘5 ‘ i Ler |
reasonably successful. A 2011 report by the Office of the New York State sin aS Fe ‘I ti}
Comptroller found that private sector employment had grown steadily in BA ep 5 he
Coney Island and Brighton Beach in recent years.” That progress a pa li
notwithstanding, development and economic revitalization have not been i
distributed evenly across the Community. Pee) | Ah a
Mermaid Avenue, for instance, is a key commercial corridor and one of the 2 ee. ae = sm
primary entry points into the Coney Island community. Many small st) —! =
businesses and non-profit service providers along this corridor were flooded naan ee a —
as a result of Superstorm Sandy, resulting in major losses of equipment and val retail id . end™
inventory, as well as extended closures. This damage compounded the Commercial retall on Mermaid Avanue In Conay stan
roblem of commercial vacancy rates that were already relatively high. New
York City Department of city. Planning data from the summer of 2013 provide immediate support to help existing businesses and support new
showed 28 vacant lots in an eight-block stretch of Mermaid Avenue between business development along Mermaid Avenue, in particular. The following
West 16" and West 25"" Streets.° The Committee felt a strong need to strategy and Featured project addresses this need.
Sea Ce oe Cu iia Cn aetey
eee td Cee]
Project Name Rees eed tt} Estimated Cost | Pathtaeinc iene or
Mermaid Avenue Corridor Revitalize the Mermaid Avenue commercial $7,635,000 Featured
Improvements. corridor through streetscape and landscape
improvements that would incorporate
stormwater attenuation measures.

Cn eed
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 62 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Commurity Reconstruction Plan
ES
Protect existing housing stock by making it more flood
resilient
Throughout the planning process, the Committee emphasized the need to The damages that Superstorm Sandy created continue to impact
protect homes from future extreme weather and flooding as perhaps the homeowners, but also renters, and especially vulnerable populations. These
‘Community's greatest need. A number of Peninsula homeowners in all four impacts are particularly acute for the thousands of residents of NYCHA and
‘Community neighborhoods are stil not back in their homes. This problem is Mitchell-Lama developments, who experienced major inconvenience or
most acute in the community of Sea Gate, where dozens of homeowners are hazard due to the prolonged fallure of key building systems, including power,
either still making extensive repairs to homes severely damaged by storm heat, hot water, and elevators. The slow pace of housing recovery underlines
surge, or evaluating other logistically difficult or expensive repair or the need for greater support to homeowners to increase resiliency after
relocation options. Many homeowners in Manhattan Beach face similar future storm events, as reflected in the following strategy:
challenges.
Most housing units on the Peninsula, from single-family residences or high-
rise co-op or public housing towers, are located in moderate to high flood
zones. Many Public Engagement Event participants expressed particular
concern that particularly given uncertainty surrounding potential dramatic
increases to flood insurance premiums, the cost of basic repairs or
floodproofing might force them from their homes.
Protect existing housing stock by making it more flood resilient
7 , rics) etree Reig Coy]
eer Cray | Rae ced ser td) ah a ine erm ae

‘Sewer Connection Cut-Off Provide financial assistance to homeowners for installation of | $2,640,000 Proposed

Valves for Owners of One- _| sewer connection cut-off valves, as well as education and

and Two-Family Homes public outreach related to proper operation and maintenance

of these devices.

Feasibility Study for Energy | Conduct a feasibility study on developing microgrid, $340,000 | Proposed/Featured

Resiliency for NYCHA And smartgrid, and/or cogeneration solutions to ensure that

Mitchell-Lama Properties NYCHA and Mitchell-Lama properties maintain power in

‘storm-related events.

SS
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 63 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
ee eee ee
Protect the shoreline and coastal communities through
structural shoreline protection enhancements
Community infrastructure and systems experienced significant damage from
Superstorm Sandy. Direct storm surge, as well as backwater flooding from .
te strategy would take time to implement, and likely exceed the Committee's
Feat te Peansele ee eettee ced ananincush wery cart ae funding allocation. With those considerations in mind, Committee Members
the pionning process to develop o statesy that would aduese these prinary collaborated to draft a strategy that accounted for the certainty of future
souizes of Community property dameve. ‘The strategy below led the flooding and sought to minimize associated impacts, while targeting the most,
Committee to identify and consider a variety of potential flood control cost-effective projects the Committee could fund.
measures that could include building and refurbishing dunes, creating or The Committee supports a New York City Economic Development
enhancing wetlands, strengthening or constructing bulkheads, constructing Commission proposal to evaluate the feasibility of protection measures at
flood walls and levees, installing breakwaters or jetties, or constructing flood Coney Island Creek, as reflected in the Additional Resiliency
gates. Recommendations of this plan. This could include wetlands enhancement
‘The Committee realized that no infrastructure solution can wholly prevent and additional recreational opportunities for Gravesend and Peninsula
flood risk, and that any infrastructure project developed on the basis of this, residents.
ee RUE UE UC eee Re ee UCU eee
, —_ eres] Proposed or err]
Project Name Cedars ad seer tay oon Pantie en era me y7

Bulkhead Replacement at Sea Replace the bulkhead on Sea Gate Association property | $3,000,000 Proposed

Gate and along some private residential properties.

Implementation of Cost-Effective | Install a flood barrier to protect against flooding at $700,000 Proposed

Storm Surge Protection for primary under-boardwalk access points.

Ocean Parkway and W. 25th

Street

Reconnaissance Study of Storm _| Evaluate a range of options to mitigate future flood $100,000 Proposed Y

Surge Protection for Sheepshead | events caused by flooding and storm surge in

Bay Manhattan Beach and Sheepshead Bay.
Cn eed
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 64 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Replace, repair, and upgrade existing infrastructure to
improve its resilience to future storm events
The Committee recognized that rehabilitating infrastructure throughout the
four Community neighborhoods is a long-term effort, but one that must be a eae
accomplished to make the Community truly resilient to future storm events. 7 i ]
Flooding damages to infrastructure from Superstorm Sandy had a significant 7) ; :
impact on the storm drain and sewer systems. In Sea Gate, extensive pq
damage from the storm to the network of sewer lines led to deterioration of Poe i
pipes and subsidence of the road pavement. Deterioration of streets is oe ails B55 e
common throughout the four communities along the Peninsula. Electrical ad *
systems for street utilities were damaged by saltwater intrusion throughout ~ Fa ees
the Peninsula. Private-sector communications infrastructure for cell phone va = <=
coverage was disrupted and is still problematic throughout the Peninsula. a
Infrastructure improvements would form the basis for increased resilience ag =
that would benefit all six Recovery Support Functions. To account for these a
diverse needs, the Community developed the broadest possible strategy to © A =
address the Community's aging and vulnerable infrastructure. As listed in the ”
table below, this strategy statement led to two discrete Proposed Projects.
Damaged streetlight after Superstorm Sandy?
Cem eC COR eu pie te Sten eal uence}
. , Estimated tees Rg err]
eer Cray Short Project Description oon Pantie enna me ayy
Installation of Resilient Install resilient streetlights along key business corridors | $3,500,000 Proposed
Streetlights and road intersections, evacuation routes, and high-
density housing areas throughout the Southern
Brooklyn Peninsula.
Pilot Small-Scale Renewable Create a small-scale renewable power project for a $900,000 Proposed
Power Project small- to mid-sized senior-housing or nursing home
facility.
ed
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 65 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Repair and make more resilient damaged and/or
underutilized natural and cultural resources = ros ox
The Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate ae \ Oye coat ue a
neighborhoods rely on their natural resources for both economic livelihood Say oar 5 sf ‘ar a ty
and personal enjoyment. Coastal resources like parks, beaches, dunes SD agal Reo WE Git A E
provide physical protection to other Community assets, for example, while aes Bh See Sia ii i Ta 3
simultaneously promoting public waterfront use and access. In 2010 alone, = iH bias, AA ee eS
‘over 12.8 million people visited Coney Island’s beaches, providing a i va Pi hee fi I tegen
customer base for small businesses along Riegelmann Boardwalk and & lig SIC -eormetna oi Sz Ui ee es.
beyond.’ Manhattan Beach Park serves fewer annual visitors, because of its ae : a Ld ee = Es
more limited size and its relative physical isolation. The Committee also (SO eee no.
stated that the Park's visual appeal and attractiveness to visitors is marred 3 e x
by current state of the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse, which is underutilized. 4 % Pak: err:
Even small-scale features like street trees serve vital environmental and % ee = a ee SS
‘economic functions. One 2005 study found that shoppers in large cities will win i Ree ae = Seay
spend 12% more in visually attractive shopping districts that feature high peste tear nt 5 nena
tree canopies."* Many trees were damaged or destroyed during Sandy, = Si eee
either by wind damage or by saltwater flooding. In Sea Gate alone, over 80 a Sree eee?
trees still have yet to be replaced. In response to this need, the Committee — — .
drafted a strategy that seeks to enhance protection for small-scale and large- Downed trees in Brighton Beach as a result of Superstorm Sandy**
scale natural resources and related cultural amentities.
CELT Ree a CLE Cm CeCe el pe
etree Reg
5 : ferret] Corel}
road Cty Rae ced ser td) eee) i
fend ee’ Lies tO 00D)
Increase Resiliency of Small Establish a small business support office; offer direct $1,960,000 Proposed
Businesses Throughout the _| assistance to merchants for floodproofing their businesses;
Peninsula implement Peninsula-wide streetscape enhancements,
including replacing trees, installing stormwater attenuation
measures, and making landscaping improvements along
business corridors.
Resiliency Upgrades for Upgrade the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse by enhancing $4,000,000 | Proposed/Featured
Manhattan Beach Bathhouse resiliency and utilities.
SSS
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 66 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
PO tee ea nec et mae Beene Ur Ret ie eed
Dre
, is Estimated Der
Deed ET aa ea eer cy en Gated pear)
eed
Community Streetscape Provide funds for peninsula-wide streetscape enhancements, | $3,900,000 Proposed
Enhancements including replacement of trees on public property that were
destroyed or damaged by Sandy, implementation of storm
water attenuation measures, and landscape enhancements
along selected business corridors.
Evaluate opportunities for creating or enhancing natural a 2 v.
shoreline protection measures | ey Wes =
Superstorm Sandy revealed the extent to which boardwalk and beach areas ie st bill
need to be made resilient to future storm events. Although Riegelmann TOR or bd Rios eyes i TEI
Boardwalk escaped the type of major structural damage that occurred on ER RSE a he Foie)
‘other boardwalks in Staten Island, Queens, and Long Island, Sandy blew rong ae, fmt Fay,
several feet of sand over the boardwalk and onto local streets. A large SR EE ea > | a Sa
volume of storm surge flooded the Community through openings in the S=—- 2 we le
boardwalk at Ocean Parkway and West 25" Street. While the Committee is Se ON
also promoting structural upgrades that would mitigate this exposure to ne 1
flood risk, members realized that a suite of protective measures would offer SSS eee = - *
better comprehensive protection than a unitary infrastructure upgrade. This = = Pe
strategy along with its related projects is intended to improve the resource SS i =
values of Coney Island Beach and to address the need to enhance the Volunteers cleaning up the Riegelmann Boardwalk after Superstorm
beach’s protective function. Sandy"
Evaluate opportunities for creating or enhancing natural shoreline protection measures
a Dre 9
. , is era) Ceo
Dyed Crd aa ea eer cy oan <a Peay
Beach Grass Planting _| Plant beach grass along the boardwalk in Brighton Beach and Coney $800,000 Proposed
and Infrastructure Island at six locations; relocate of six water utility valves from under the
Improvements ocean side of the boardwalk to a less vulnerable location on the inland
side of the boardwalk, and install two beach access mats.
eT
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 67 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Enhance coordination between civic groups and non-profit organizations with local government agencies to make the Southern
Brooklyn Peninsula better prepared for future emergencies
Although some confusion is understandable and expected in the context of an extreme weather event of Superstorm Sandy's magnitude, Committee Members and
attendees Public Engagement Events reported that emergency response protocols appeared to break down at the local level immediately after Superstorm Sandy.
The Committee also recognized the critical role that civic groups and non-profit organizations provided after Superstorm Sandy and the need for enhanced
collaboration between public agencies and community-based organizations both pre- and post-disaster events. This need and opportunity is reflected in the
following strategy.
Enhance coordination between civic groups and non-profit organizations with local government agencies to make the Southern
Dea net eae eras hea
, , _ ; Dee he Der
Project Name Ree aden ty Estimated Cost | pean irae PY)
Southern Brooklyn Emergency Create a Southern Brooklyn Emergency $640,000 Proposed Y
Response Plan Response Plan to provide specific information
targeted to local neighborhoods and incorporate
lessons learned from Superstorm Sandy.
Educate residents and visitors about the importance of natural and cultural resources
Community residents believe that the natural and cultural resources of the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula are its greatest assets, and should be protected and
respected. Educating residents and visitors about the importance of these resources, therefore, is an important strategy of the Committee. The Committee also
believes the Community youth are an important part in forwarding this message, and that environmental programs would instill a sense of stewardship of these
resources at a young age.
Educate residents and visitors about the importance of natural and cultural resources
, , _ ; Dee hd cee)
Project Name Ree aden ty Estimated Cost | perianal aPC)
Environmental Youth Education _| Partner with local non-profit organizations to $140,000 Featured
Program provide educational materials and mini-courses
for Community youth on natural and cultural
resources.
ed
Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Page 68 @

Ss hd 4 i a i
a my pom ‘a es |
t —* . : emit i > ae, ay pm
a 7 — % i ak ee > a =
= = b — : ~ —— = = = ——
—=—s—_} a SE
SS
sal) — SS
Section IV:
Implementation —
project profiles

near-term project time frame; these projects will require a longer time frame
A. Introduction for implementation. If projects are of regional significance, this wider level of
significance is noted in the project profile. Regional significance means that
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program has allocated up_ the Proposed or Featured Project benefits more than one community.
to $19.3 millon to the Souther Rub) eee BS. Department of Projects were first categorized by Recovery Support Function. The
jousing and Urban Development munity Development Bloc!
Grart-Dister Recovery (CD8G-08) ung, While developing projects anders ofeach jee rubra, arg! Penehonrs)
ectons "loaning Committes (te ‘Conimittee) took pout ere underwent an initial feasibility and funding evaluation that explored various
estimates, cost-benefit. analyses, the effectiveness of each project in sources of funding for the project. The Committee used the input from Public
reducing isk to populations and cial assets, feast, and community, EVD eo ached naraatconey
nen toe eateponee and actions set forth in the NYRCR Plan are divides of the Public Engagement Events for the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula are
7 documented in more detail in Section VI, but the overall outcomes were
+ Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding through the generally consistent with the Committee's selection of projects.
Community's allocation of CDBG-DR funding. In addition to providing a detailed description of each project, the project
+ Featured Projects are projects and actions that the Planning profiles include information on two important elements that the Committee
Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations used to evaluate the value of each project: cost-benefit analysis and risk-
and has analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through reduction analysis. The benefits were presented with qualitative descriptions
the NYRCR Program. that demonstrate how the projects assist the community in economic,
+ Additional Resiliency Recommendations (see Section V) are environmental, and health and social services terms.
projects and actions that the Planning Committee would like to . .
highlight but that are not categorized as Proposed Projects or B. Cost-benefit analysis
Featured Projects. Cost-benefit analysis (CBA) is a tool used to calculate and compare the costs
This section provides a complete project profile for each of the Proposed and and benefits associated with a project. The CBA provides decision-makers
Featured Projects identified and approved by the Committee. The Committee with a framework for comparing different projects (i.e., anticipated costs of
identified, selected, and advanced the Proposed and Featured Projects in implementation against total expected benefits) and determining whether
response to the risks, needs, and opportunities described in Section II of the the benefits of a particular project outweigh the costs.
NYRCR Plan. The Proposed and Featured Projects reflect the implementation
Because the NYRCR Program is a community-driven process, the CBA has
mechanisms for the Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies) described in focused on identifying project costs and benefits that easily relate to the
- Proj pr Pe ‘communities that the Committee represents. Community and Committee
implemented in the near future to build resiliency and fulfil other important Input, informed ‘by an understanding of local ‘conditions, needs, and
goal for the neighborhoods of Brighton Beach, Coney sland, Manhattan Community values, plays cucalrle nthe development of projec. The
" ‘ risk-reduction benefits are described in terms of how much each Proposed or
throughout the NYRCR Plan. Several Featured Projects are exceptions to the Featured Project would lower the vulnerability of the Community's assets.
ee eee
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 70 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
See eS
The additional benefits of the projects are provided in qualitative terms that + Economic: The project’s potential to help minimize economic costs
explain how these projects bring additional value to the Community. The and reduce the time it takes for the Community economy to rebound
CBA provides the Community with a practical understanding of the potential from a storm event. Economic data included, where applicable, an
estimated costs of project implementation and the potential benefits accrued estimate of permanent jobs secured/added, potential for additional
to the Community with the particular project in place. economic activity, and the net effect on City of New York
‘expenditures. 2"
Project costs + Health and social services: Qualitative information was provided
Each project profile includes a preliminary estimated cost for implementing (on the overall population benefits of improved access to health and
the project. Factors contributing to the overall life-cycle costs of the project, social service facilities, including public safety services, and the
are described in general terms at this phase of the planning process. degree to which essential health and social service facilities are able
The cost of implementing a Proposed or Featured Project is just one aspect, to provide services to a ey during a future storm or weather
of the justification for funding the project. Another important variable is the .
future costs of not implementing the project. Such opportunity costs have + Environmental protection: Benefits include the protection of
the potential to negatively impact the long-term viability of the Community. crucial environmental assets or high-priority habitat, threatened and
Although these lost opportunity costs of not implementing the projects do endangered species, migration or habitat connectivity, any cleanup
not always lend themselves to quantification, they are no less important to resulting from the project; and creation of open space or a new
‘our analysis and are therefore addressed qualitatively. These costs include: recreational asset
+ Economic loss to residents and to local and regional employers as a . -
result of the inability to work; C. Risk-reduction analysis
+ Hindrance in the provision of life-safety and emergency services The risk-reduction analysis estimates the extent to which each Proposed and
resulting from repeated inability to access vast areas of the Featured Project will lower the flood risk to the Community's critical assets
Community; and and population when the project is in place. The risk-reduction analysis uses
information from the risk assessment in Section II to determine the risk of an
+ Extensive, repetitive damage to personal property (e.g., vehicles, asset before the project implementation. The analysis estimates how the risk
residences) and public infrastructure resulting from frequent will be lowered by showing how much the Proposed or Featured Project
recurring flooding and future storm events. would lower the vulnerability score.
Project benefits
The types of benefits considered in the CBA include:
+ Risk reduction: The extent to which a project reduces the risk of
damage to a community asset from a future storm event (discussed
further below under “Risk-reduction analysis")."°”
Cn eed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 71 (2)

Bulkhead Replacement at Sea Gate

See een ee eee

‘Sea Gate’s location makes it particularly susceptible to storm surge and

flooding damage, and during Superstorm Sandy surges of up to 10 feet

destroyed or damaged hundreds of homes in the community. Bulkheads,

which have provided protection from flooding and inundation in previous

storms, were destroyed during Superstorm Sandy, leaving the community

increasingly exposed to storm surge and inundation risk. The massive

amount of water that entered Sea Gate also pushed its way through Coney

Island, severely damaging homes and businesses in that community as well. 3

This project would involve the replacement of the bulkhead in Sea Gate that

Superstorm Sandy destroyed. The replacement of the bulkhead would help

address shoreline erosion and provide limited storm surge protection to Sea

Gate and the communities to the east. Over 1,850 feet of linear bulkhead

would be constructed along the property line during the first phase of this

project.

‘The Sea Gate Association acquired an initial cost estimate for construction of

the first 1,850 feet. On the basis of this estimate, the anticipated project cost

is $3,000,000. This total estimate covers removal and disposal of old

bulkheads in addition to construction of new bulkheads.

Health and social services: Bulkhead replacement would provide some ; F 139

level of protection to essential health ‘and Social services facties to help Portion of the damaged bulkhead in Sea Gate, Brooklyn

keep them operational to assist them to recover quickly from storm events.

Environmental protection: This project would protect Sea Gate parkland. = :

The bulkhead project would also reduce flooding into homes and buildings

and the contamination associated with buildings being flooded and the The project would derive a significant return on the intial investment of

chemicals that often end up in floodwaters. $3,000,000 by protecting assets in Sea Gate and western Coney Island from
the damaging effects of storm surge and repetitive loss during regular storm
‘events. The Sea Gate Association is encouraging property owners along the
shoreline to participate in the project. If these homeowners participate, the

—a—X—X—XK\<_)|)S00000000000000000000ccccccCcCcCcCcC

Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 72 (2)

Bulkhead replacement at Sea Gate
———
length of contiguous bulkhead will be extended, transferring risk mitigation
benefits to a larger number of assets.
Bulkheads generally have a long useful life with proper maintenance. The
proposed bulkhead materials would be of a composite design and have a
much longer useful life than more traditional bulkhead designs. The project
would offer significant benefit to the Community for the duration of the
bulkhead's useful life. pe
If the project were not implemented, a large number of assets in Sea Gate a
and surrounding neighborhoods would be subject to increased risk. a eT
ta ot aes Eo a
Petre en ners i Oe ae a or Le |
The project would reduce the physical risk to assets in the Sea Gate Py 5 hy eel ke Fes nS aN
community. Although the bulkhead replacement project would still not in ay Ps Ale Se Ss ee ty
eliminate all risk associated with storm surge and flooding, the project, ty ie x So a ON
especially if the shoreline property owners participate, would mitigate the fof Piha ae CH ele
type of widespread and catastrophic damage that was observed in the Sea py, rs) a rat Lee 0 es =
Gate neighborhood after Superstorm Sandy. Because the project would limit OSSD distr BEY eee ae
storm surge from entering Coney Island, benefits would also accrue to assets p Pie SF pa 2 eee Ware ei
in the western half of Coney Island. 5 i aly. Ge Ais ats
| PRE eet Gave ok Set ek
DReienaenen ite a yas ai awa
bedi ca Sl eee ray em oe en eh
The project could be completed within two years, depending on the |) fa ee, et ape RC ay Ce
Association's success in encouraging participation by private homeowners. ae a: * aa Rae re ay
ane yet aie Aveta
Local, State, and Federal regulatory requirements: Dit eh ee ahs ce een My
(A ee eon eA ere, ae
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: NYC Zoning I Segrnatbe MRNA graces at) eae ami sf.
Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text Amendment; Mee eee COS le pie BER eee
NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code and all subsequent Roe Ae ris pacer
amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code and all subsequent amendments; NYC = ene i Ue Niasd er
Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if applicable. [ cae ie eb TO are ea
Project jurisdiction: Extent of proposed bulkheading (red outline) with elevation
The project would be located in Brooklyn Community District 13, in Kings contours’
County in the City of New York.
SS
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 73 (2)

Designation of Emergency

Response and Recovery Centers

At the two initial Public Engagement Events, Community residents reported

having limited access to City services and storm-related information

immediately after Superstorm Sandy. This feeling of being disconnected from

services and information was also a prominent and recurring theme at

Planning Committee Meetings, at which Community Board and non-profit

representatives reported difficulty in accessing City agencies to address

constituent concerns in the storm’s immediate aftermath. This lack of access

was compounded by the temporary closure or inaccessibility of many of the

social service organizations that would ordinarily fill this need. Many de facto

response and recovery centers evolved organically in all four communities in

response to this need, typically thanks to efforts from non-profits and _

‘community groups, like the Shorefront YM-YWHA in Brighton Beach. These —__— = = =<S

centers offered supplies, food, information, and comfort to residents. vV— = a

The project is intended to formalize and better organize this strong 5 |i ny 4 | | |

Community response to post-disaster needs. The response and recovery ar Ps fl ma

centers would provide local residents and business owners with a primary = i ~

meeting space to obtain information, seek support, and receive services after “ see

a disaster. The project would develop siting criteria and perform feasibility ag nti 2

analyses to designate potential center locations across the Peninsula. t t- .™

Subsequent project phases would include determining building retrofitting eS 5

needs, hardening designated buildings to increase their resiliency, and heer. LE

training staff to work at these facilities in post-emergency situations. ‘Toy distribution for local children impacted by Superstorm Sandy,
r ‘Shorefront YM-YWHA“**

The estimated cost of this project is $980,000. This figure includes

expenditures for siting and feasibility analyses, as well as installation of

necessary equipment and operational features. Engineering, design, and

construction management costs are included in the total estimate.

ed

Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 74 (2)

Designation of emergency response and recovery centers
—————_—_
Ereirnes The project would protect socially vulnerable populations by addressing a
lack of communications, infrastructure, and localized information about the
Economic: The project would result in more efficient delivery of services availabilty of post-disaster resources’ and services. Community residents
and access to information in a post-disaster setting. With more services and broadly reported feeling disconnected from emergency response services
supplies available locally, residential displacement may be limited. Therefore, and. information during Planning, Committee “Meetings and. Public
the project would be useful in restoring and maintaining the confidence of Engagement Events,
local businesses and residents.
Health and social services: The project would benefit socially vulnerable Pee ee
households. These households may include individuals with limited English
Siting criteria could be developed and relevant feasibility studies completed
proficiency, households with children or elderly residents, and households of Sn criteria could be developed and relevant Feastiliy stucies cor
low or moderate income. The project would also benefit all residents of the - recovery
Conohuntty copecry those wt walking distance of the reteonse. and and response centers would depend on the availability of additional funding.
recovery centers. =
ry cen (SEM en ein ee cen
Cost-benefit analysis: The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable regulatory requirements:
The useful life of the facilities would be limited to the useful life of the host oni Reson including ee ee eesiieney Paes
buildings. With regular maintenance, this period would be at least 30 years. 7 i i
Ia canter sharing faciy, avis mus not mpinge onthe regu SUEREQUEE-aendmens; 1968 NYC Buldng Code and al subsequent
function of the host space. If the project is not implemented, the Community applicable. The New York Gty Office of Emergency Management {NYC GEM)
would remain winrale othe el and perceived sues with socal sevice RSs podheed ait F tng flea and onsets for Deter
after Superstorm Sandy. The expenditure of $980,000 to develop response Assistance Service Centers that Is relevant to this project.
and recovery centers would yield a strong return on this initial investment, as segue Tao
it would allow more Community residents to access post-disaster information Project jurisdiction:
and services in an efficient, centralized manner. The project would be located in Brooklyn Community Districts 13 and 15, in
= Kings County in the City of New York.
IIe
The project would lead to limited risk reduction to assets specifically selected
for use as response and recovery centers.
—KX—X—XK_Vwowonssssssssssss_c_c_c_ccc_c_c_c_ccccccccccc
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 75 (2)

Beach Grass Planting and
Infrastructure Improvements
cea nas
The Southern Brooklyn Peninsula’s beaches are the Community's first
defense against damaging storm surge during extreme weather events. The project would reduce the annual maintenance costs of removing sand
These beaches absorbed some surge during Superstorm Sandy, but large blocking access to the six water supply valves. The project would protect the
volumes of seawater still entered the Community from the oceanfront.
During the planning process, the Committee sought to identify means of
enhancing the beaches’ protective function without impairing thelr quality as
recreational assets.
This project would fund beach grass plantings to help minimize the shifting
and erosion of sand in six locations along the boardwalk. Beach grass is a
hardy plant, which is highly tolerant of direct sun, extreme heat, and high
salinity. This project would also fund the installation of “snow fencing”
around the planting areas. In addition to the planting component of the
project, funding would allow for the relocation of six water utility supply oe eae Be
valves from the south side of the boardwalk (i.e., the water side) to the nei N 2 i
north side (inland). This project would protect the supply valves from a qo 3
vulnerable storm surge and minimize New York City Department of Parks and pe
Recreation (NYC DPR) seasonal maintenance. Finally, this project would i
fund the installation of two ADA-compliant beach access mats on the beach,
from the boardwalk to the water, which would allow seniors, disabled 3 4
persons, and wheelchair users to access the beach. These locations would be 3S
identified in partnership with the Community and the NYC DPR.
(eee
The anticipated total project cost is $800,000. This total cost includes ‘Adune grass planting by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers on Plumb
funding for plantings, relocation of the six water utility valves, and purchase Beach’
and installation of two high-impact matting to provide ADA-compliant beach
access.
ed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 76 (2)

Beach grass planting and infrastructure improvements

SS
water supply valves from damaging storm surges and reduce the movement DnGkirnek meen ne

of sands by stabilizing the beach in front of the boardwalk at the six

proposed locations. These measures would enhance the beach experience The time frame for implementation would be subject to coordination with
for visitors, minimize costly expenditures on structural solutions to mitigate DPR; however, the project could be completed in 1 year.

erosion, and provide a more natural beach habitat. -

Local, State, and Federal regulatory requirements:
eS ETE es The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: 2012 New
If the project is not implemented, the sands and sand dunes adjoining the York City Department of Environmental Protection (NYC DEP) Standards for
boardwalk may shift, especially during storm events. This shifting reduces Green Infrastructure; Administrative Code of the City of New York; New York
the resiliency of the boardwalk and compromising shoreline stability. Also, City Department of Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR) Division of Forestry
key water supply valves serving the area may be subject to damage during requirements; and relevant methodological and process requirements as
storm surges. defined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).

(errr eee BIS Res eee
The project would stabilize the beach at the locations proposed and may The project would be located in Brooklyn Community District 13, in Kings
reduce future storm surge damage to the boardwalk. ‘County in the City of New York.
za rier PY sie a faery MATE) hea kh en terse ;
mint Yelaaterne es . F a ten fs " eee Cen 19
OG E tee mer | f = WP pane ap ele
% C i 1 \ | ao
2 Reet k= Ae Pee oe “ cn eae
Twa are eH _— So Potential Beach
ey \ a a: : Grass Planting Area
—"——" = - s Water Source Pit
a Under Boardwalk
Potential beach grass planting areas and water supply valve locations along the boardwalk in Coney Island and Brighton Beach***
ed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 77 @

Community Streetscape Enhancements
The Planning Committee and residents providing feedback from Public y weld ; ny a
Engagement Events expressed that street trees are important assets to the = | i 1 ie i
Community. Their loss or damage during Superstorm Sandy has created an a eh ce oP fee |
additional challenge for business owners who derive direct economic benefit, ge \ a Te eS my ee
from attractive streetscapes. Replacing these trees would also improve air SE BE ae ED
quality, help control storm water run-off and retention, provide shade, and ‘og ; § Re ee
add to the quality of life for residents. The project would provide funds for aie a aR ie
peninsula-wide streetscape enhancements, including replacement of trees on — ia es oe anes, eg
public property that were destroyed or damaged by Sandy, implementation p ee iT Ch Mint tye
of storm water attenuation measures such as catch basing and bioswales, —_ Et oae® 2 ers a a agai Le F)
and landscape enhancements along selected business corridors. EF ih Aly <i Sct ARR ates SY ER
Hundreds of trees were lost in Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Fg Fae) Ye Xe) yes EY
Beach, and Sea Gate due to storm-related damages; these trees have not Fe aR Veen |
been replaced. Tree species selected for replacement of trees damaged or his Mie Se! Pata gee as
lost by Superstorm Sandy would emphasize salt-tolerant types. The trees es. ie ee SY Tr
would also be planted, where possible, in enhanced tree pits that conform to Per > eG Va 7 a4 be Tad he y
NYC DEP requirements. A representative tree pit in the City of New York can bP al A Ls tS 2
divert up to 950 gallons of storm water during a 1-inch rain event. The Be Lae =< aN "
project can also fund the planting of trees lost or damaged by Superstorm oe Po Ny = Qs =
Sandy on NYCHA property and within Parks. ee ee gd pm

“ ER DS artis, Sa. OI
reese i Pay Saas}
Cost for this project is estimated to be $2.5 million - $3 million. This is a = 4 i (4 f 2 iS
scalable project. The estimated cost for new and replacement trees is = QO Fr cs , a
$900,000 with an average cost per tree of $1,000. The streetscape sea Si ea
enhancements, including storm water attenuation measures, are estimated . ys PS he
to range from $1,600,000 to $3,000,000. Eee The | a

Bioswale example in New York City’

ed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 78 @

Community streetscape enhancements

SS

Gmenrnn nen Given the quantifiable economic and environmental benefits of street tree
restoration, the expenditure of between $2.5 million and $3.9 million would

Economic: Recent research on urban forestry indicates that street trees be wholly justified.

confer significant economic benefits to communities. One recent analysis

fom Porand, Oregon tas hel sts ees ested rtf bls

can increase those properties’ sale prices by over $7,000. Another analysis RET Ee

from Portland determined that walkability in “tree-lined” neighborhoods The project would lead to a slight reduction of risk to critical assets, and

elevates home values six times more than walkability in treeless result in an overall cumulative risk reduction to the Community. Through the

neighborhoods does. Based on the results of these analyses, this project use of enhanced tree pits, the project would provide storm water control

should deliver substantial return on investment in the form of increased from frequent storm events. The project would reduce the risk of flooding

property values and economic activity. that occurs from more frequent storm events but would have negligible

Environmental: The project would provide significant environmental she in reducing risk from events such as the magnitude of Superstorm

benefit to the Community. Trees improve air quality, help control storm .

water run-off, reduce the heat island effect, provide shade and add to the err rarer uh

quality of life for residents. Natural landscapes would open up more pervious ATT EST ESSE FURS ARMA ago BRAND

surface allowing for more natural groundwater recharge. Storm water control The project could be completed within one year.

measures like bio-swales and connected tree pits provide additional benefits

for surface water quality. Local, State, and Federal regulatory requirements:

Ernie nee The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: 2012 NYC
DEP Standards for Green Infrastructure; NYC DOT Street Design Manual;

‘Street trees in downtown areas typically live for roughly 25 years, though Administrative Code of the City of New York; DPR Division of Forestry

proper maintenance and care can extend the life of trees considerably requirements.

longer. Green infrastructure features such as tree pits and storm water

attenuation measures can be maintained in perpetuity. Regular upkeep is err

required to ensure good working order. If the project is not implemented, a

lack of pervious surfaces and adequate storm water controls would continue The project would be located in Brooklyn Community Districts 13 and 15, in

to stress the community's storm drain system, lead to frequent flooding Kings County, in the City of New York.

events and adversely affect water quality.

ed

Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 79 (2)

Feasibility Study for Energy Resiliency for

NYCHA and Mitchell-Lama Properties

ee eed

All 40 New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) residential buildings and 9

Mitchell-Lama developments in the NYRCR Southern Brooklyn Peninsula =— - Z

experienced prolonged power outages after Superstorm Sandy. In many of

these high-rise buildings, saltwater inundation caused building power

systems to fall. These failures compromised other critical building systems,

including elevators, heat, and hot-water service. The outages severely ic)

impacted residents’ access to basic food, water, medical, and emergency = cae

supplies. Heat and hot water were not restored to all NYCHA developments (=) ee

for more than three weeks. Many buildings continue to use temporary J ond

re c— 1

This project would provide funding for two related studies to determine the + i '

feasibility of developing microgrid, smartgrid, and/or cogeneration solutions G&D) icons

to ensure that NYCHA and Mitchell-Lama properties maintain power in future

storm events. One study would evaluate energy-resilient systems that would

benefit multiple NYCHA residential towers. The microgrid project at the Conbencar Cooling tower

Building Performance Lab of the City University of New York (CUNY) is one

approach that may be applicable to NYCHA housing projects. The second ‘Amalgamated Warbasse Houses Power Plant — Cogeneration"

study would entail assessing the potential for a microgrid powered by the

existing power plant at the Amalgamated Warbasse Houses, 2 Mitchell Lama

cooperative, to provide reliable power to Coney Island Hospital; the Coney

Island NYCHA Complex; and nearby schools, businesses, and housing. Health and social services: Energy resiliency improvements can enhance
safety and accessibility to essential health and social services during and

The project may offer opportunities to partner with New York State Smart after storm events. The socially vulnerable populations impacted by the

Grid Consortium (NYSSGC) initiatives and the New York Power Authority project would include low- and moderate-income residents of the

(nvea). developments, children and the elderly, and residents with access and
functional needs, who are inconvenienced or imperiled by lack of a dedicated

power supply.

The cost estimate of $340,000 for this project includes funding for both

studies.

Cn eed

Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 80 (2)

Feasibility study for energy resiliency for NYCHA and Mitchell Lama properties

Ernie nee ig es 4 a

The project would only have a positive benefit-to-cost ratio if an energy pete ine ba Wf Shopping Center Taam

resiliency upgrade were implemented based on the results of the study. The os SS ad Brae Sa

Committee recognizes the health and safety concerns related to the loss of OY ea | j Se f

power for these residents as a result of a storm and is seeking an innovative t Wy = j | wt if

and cost-effective method to minimize these issues in the future. Therefore, : HW | aa a

the project cost of $340,000 is a reasonable expenditure that may yield oe ron a lf Fa Myles

identification of broadly applicable solutions that would benefit NYCHA and Fee. \ le | cg Ps :

Mitchell-Lama developments both in the Community and throughout the City = A db.

of New York. " Electric and thermal
aan pe OB livet 3 bulcings

PeRirennb meen B oa \ 1 he. Si

‘As a feasibility study, this project would not reduce risk to Community Yai ae aN Pe

residents or assets. If a project were implemented on the basis of study cs 4 Po CS oN

results that increased the redundancy and resiliency of power systems at a Oa Sey ~ rece

Mitchell-Lama or NYCHA development, the risk score associated with that r De Sela i

asset would decline. Schematic of proposed microgrid at Amalgamated-Warbasse Houses'**

Time frame for implementation:

The studies could both be completed within two years.

Local, State, and Federal regulatory requirements:

The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: NYC Zoning

Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text Amendment;

NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code and all subsequent

amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code and all subsequent amendments; NYC

Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if applicable.

ces tner eens

The project would be located in Brooklyn Community District 13, in Kings

County in the City of New York.

ed

Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 81 (2)

Implementation of Cost-Effective Storm Surge Protection
th
for Ocean Parkway and West 25" Street
During Superstorm Sandy, storm surge from the Atlantic Ocean flooded
Ocean Parkway through a breach in Riegelmann Boardwalk (Boardwalk), as
far north as Avenue V. Flooding of Ocean Parkway was exacerbated by a
lack of obstructing natural or manmade structures. Similarly, surge waters
breached the berm system under the Boardwalk at West 25" Street, sending
floodwaters into residential communities.
This project would entail a feasibility study and the design and construction —
of measures to limit inundation at the Boardwalk and Ocean Parkway and at
the Boardwalk and West 25" Street. Measures may include reconstruction of eee. J ——— —e0 = =
the berm in front of the Boardwalk at Ocean Parkway and replacement of the Se
vehicle underpass at the Boardwalk at West 25" Street with drive-over ~ eres a -
access. Es
Eel I a ee
The expected project cost is $750,000. This total cost encompasses a wide SSS sie Sa ng
range of planning, and coordination, and construction activities, including ee SE eS
engineering and soil management costs. ~ igo ee es as
te a ee ee
Go eeseuen ae Tee dl
Economic: The project would reduce the vulnerability of commercial assets Displacement of sand and debris after Superstorm Sandy, Coney Island”
at the Boardwalk and near the intersections of the Boardwalk, Ocean .
Parkway, and West 25th Street. By mitigating commercial and residential Health and social services: The project would provide direct benefits to
building exposure to risk, these flood- and storm-surge reduction measures all socially vulnerable populations whose property would be secured by the
would limit the prospect for extended business closures and residential project or whose access to vital services would be improved in the aftermath
‘outages. The combined effect of these improvements would be to increase of a disaster.
commercial activity in the immediate aftermath of disasters and to minimize -
the potential for disaster-related employment loss. Cost-benefit analysis:
Depending on the nature of the measures selected after the completion of
the feasibility studies, maintenance or storage of protective feature
components may be required. These maintenance or storage tasks would
entail operating costs above and beyond the initial project costs.
ed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 82 @

Implementation of cost-effective storm surge protection for Ocean Parkway and W. 25" Street
The primary objective of the Committee is to identify eligible, cost-effective
solutions to mitigate or minimize the risks faced by the Community in future
disasters. The proposed project cost of $750,000 would yield high returns _
related to protection of key recreational, commercial, and residential assets. yr \ a. l \ i
5 - = z ae | Nol es
minnie nr es ois “ais a} f
} aq
The project would decrease the vulnerability of a large number of ae
‘Community assets. The project would also mitigate the direct exposure of mad a,
buildings and other assets to the damaging effects of storm surge. ae rl . I
The project would limit direct risk to the population by limiting the intense 2 eg ye
and unpredictable flooding associated with storm surge. i Af} a
ee ALLL
Time frame for implementation: J at 51 OM
The project could be completed within 12 months, assuming appropriate , wo ae
coordination with relevant partners including NYC DPR. zi Pe i Bre -
Soa a en een ee ne eS: ae Pe
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: Section 404 pope Sea v4 y 2 = _
of the Federal Clean Water Act; Section 10 of the Federal Rivers and Harbors og A hf EFS
Act; applicable New York State (NYS) DEC regulations related to tidal - - ~
wetlands and coastal erosion management; and NYS Coastal Policy, including Bench on eee heath of Hosekwatsrs daring ‘Supersiprm Sandy
the provisions of the City Waterfront Management Program. .
ces tner eens
The project would be located in Brooklyn Community District 13, in Kings
County in the City of New York.
ed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 83 (2)

Increase Resiliency of Small

Businesses Throughout the Peninsula

SEE eee eee eel
‘Superstorm Sandy devastated small businesses in the Southern Brooklyn |

Peninsula. Commercial corridors, such as Brighton Beach Avenue, Neptune o

Avenue, and Mermaid Avenue, were overwhelmed by flooding from storm =

surge and from inundation caused by backflow from sewer lines into \

buildings. In the aftermath of the storm, some businesses were slower than I ANAS b

others to rebound. Some merchants and groups, attributed these problems Xi =

to a lack of preexisting coordination and resilience among local small a —  —
businesses. 1 a, a
The project would establish a small business support center to provide nl an

technical assistance and paralegal support to small businesses throughout 4 . a

the Peninsula to obtain the grants, loans, and financial planning necessary to

fully recover from Superstorm Sandy. The center would lease commercial La}

space and provide in-person assistance to merchants and property owners.

The center could partner with the Business Resiliency Investment Program 7

(BRIP), an initiative of the New York City Economic Development Corporation \

(NYC EDC) to support business investments to improve resiliency to severe

weather events (currently in the implementation design phase). The project a nn -
would establish a fund for installation of cost-effective flood protection ¥

measures, including elevating electrical panels above flood elevations and Business damaged by Superstorm Sandy in Brighton Beach?”
installing deployable flood barriers and backflow preventers on the sewer

lines. These flood protection measures would be made available to micro- would also include an allocation to fund storefront improvements and
and small businesses throughout the Peninsula to augment other funding streetscape enhancements along Mermaid Avenue.

sources and with a particular emphasis on those businesses not eligible for

‘other City, State, or Federal programs. anon

The small business support center could also support the establishment of The estimated project cost is $1,960,000. This estimate encompasses limited
additional merchant associations and business improvement districts, if streetscape and corridor improvements; establishment of a fund for direct
desired. The project would establish a fund for installation of low-cost floodproofing assistance; and the establishment of the Southern Brooklyn
floodproofing of micro- and small businesses throughout the Peninsula to Small Business Recovery Center, including funding for three full time
augment other funding sources and with a particular emphasis on those equivalent staff positions and two years of leased office space

businesses not eligible for other City, State, or Federal programs. The project

ed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 84 (2)

Increase resiliency of small businesses throughout the Peninsula
ON )
cerns Deeks oern sean
Economic: The more than 3,100 businesses in the Community employ over This project is designed to last for two years based on the direct funding
24,000 people. Superstorm Sandy damaged or destroyed a significant allocation.
number of small businesses, many of which were not eligible for Small
Business Administration or other loan and/or grant programs as a result of Local, State, and Federal regulatory requirements:
cash-flow limitations, credit score requirements, or destroyed documents.
Most small businesses were also ineligible for insurance reimbursements. The The project would comply with all New York City Small Business Services
project seeks to address many of these issues, The project would also programmatic policies and requirements. The project would also be
potentially increase retail sales for businesses in the Community while responsive to the guidelines established by NYC EDC.
decreasing project area commercial vacancy rates. Increased resiliency a
would lead to greater economic activity, an increased number of jobs, and a BIS Res eee
more stable local economy. The project would be located in Brooklyn Community Districts 13 and 15, in
Health and social services: The small business support center would Kings County in the City of New York.
incorporate multi-language support to reflect the diversity of local
businesses. The center would enable businesses to serve and address the _ . .
needs of the local population in emergency events and post-disaster y ——_— Aire _
situations. —— Tile — =

= Es 7
Ernie nee ——= a SS eae |
The project life is anticipated to be 2 years; any extension of this timeframe \ —— + one -
would require additional dedicated funding. The Committee has identified (6
means of assisting small business owners that are consistent with City ow
policies and recovery initiatives. The project cost of $1,960,000 is expected
to generate considerable return on investment in the form of greater SS
business sustainability and resilience on the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula. gr
Merchants and business owners would benefit not only from direct funding | - i A
to implement protective measures against flooding, but from technical ‘ pi hi mo \\
assistance to develop capacity and promote business resiliency. Pos ae = | eee

Bl peice i

EOViTinninaee nents q 4 i ‘
The project would not initially reduce risk to assets; however, the eventual 2 i = i
floodproofing and business continuity plans would contribute to reduced risk ti a —
and vulnerability scores for small business assets. Therefore, the project : - — =
would lead to a reduction of vulnerability and risk for assets along Reopening of Totonno Pizzeria in Coney Island, March 2013
‘commercial corridors in the Community.
ad
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 85 @

Increase resiliency of small businesses throughout the Peninsula
SS
rT aT
I b | on 4 Ni
= cy rete
— ey , } n eS i < rE i j
' yp if We: a . 4 7 al Bris
sa Vata lie Seep ; {i La Pe
ee nae pa oee a =
Je - ; seh i a ] ae Er fa
fer MMM ee oe
d ee > Bibs Peet Tes fon
aT ee id ae
Sic pea pa , ie (| ES
ae sees tt Sinsil Businesses in Brighton Besch
@ wcemes Sunecan ‘amncank:
=, 86 [eee ee
2S Ahlen Esper eee iat
Figure 1V-1: Economic Corridors in the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula
C—O
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 85 (2)

Installation of Resilient Streetlights
Power outages during emergency events are a significant problem in the
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula. Blackouts and outages impact the ability of
residents to safely walk or drive to their homes, evacuate to emergency
shelters, and access critical medical services. The loss of street lighting also
impacts the ability of small business owners to stay open or re-open after
emergencies. Throughout the Peninsula, Superstorm Sandy damaged or if
destroyed the electrical systems and connections for traditional streetlights
These systems and connections required repair or replacement, resulting in
prolonged outages. Streetlights that use stored energy from the sun or other Nee IR 4
renewable power sources instead of traditional power sources can provide Ne oP
lighting in critical locations during power outages and help retain vital street 1 ti i}
lighting that might otherwise be knocked out by a storm. ~~ me Fi
The project would involve funding for new streetlights powered by light-
emitting diode (LED) solar-powered lights or other renewable light
technologies. The streetlights would be located along key business corridors
and road intersections, evacuation routes, and areas of high-density housing
throughout the Peninsula. Other project areas could include the installation
of resilient lighting on key commercial buildings, elevated train lines, NYCHA
property, or parks.
Example of a solar powered street light"®*
For the purposes of estimation, it is assumed that between 500 and 875 Economic: Sustainably-powered street lighting would reduce local
lights would be installed, enough to illuminate between seven and 10 miles government utility costs. Use of renewable power sources for street lighting
of local streets. Based on review of a number of solar-powered streetlight would also likely reduce local government expenditures by providing
designs, the average cost per streetlight, including installation, is estimated emergency lighting during power outages. This benefit would potentially
to be $4,000. The estimated project cost would therefore be between result in a net decrease in costs to the Community because the improved
$2,000,000 and $3,500,000. These costs account for purchase of equipment, safety conditions would potentially result in fewer accidents.
delivery, and labor. A cost range of this nature has been provided to allow
flexibility within this project and across multiple Proposed Projects.
—__
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 87 (2)

Installation of resilient streetlights
Health and social services: Improved street lighting along major expenditures for streetlight electrical system repair and replacement after
thoroughfares would enhance safety and accessibility to essential health and future storm events.
social services during and after acute hazard events, including storms and
floods. The project would benefit all Community residents, including Pennine nee
individuals with access and functional needs, for whom access to emergency
services may be critically important. Implementing sustainably-powered streetlights would reduce risk to critical
assets and result in an overall cumulative risk reduction to the Community.
Environmental protection: The City has established aggressive goals to Primary risk reductions would occur in the form of reduced traffic safety
reduce emissions, improve air quality, and increase use of renewable power concerns along key transportation corridors and links to primary evacuation
sources. Sustainable streetlights are consistent with that broad objective: routes.
they use renewable, sustainable green solar power, a low-cost solution that
reduces demand on power generation and transmission networks. PROC een
Iceni os The project could be completed in 18 months.
Street lighting requires long-term maintenance and operational agreements. PSS eee es ee en
The City manages streetlight maintenance through a contractor. " a
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: NYC Zoning
Solar-powered street lights have an extended useful life and provide Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text Amendment;
sustained benefits before, during, and after storm events. Upfront purchase NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code and all subsequent
and installation costs are higher for solar Powered streetlights than for amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code and all subsequent amendments; NYC
tonal streetlights, and more street lights are nee Provide Fire Code; NYC Street Design Manual; and the International Building Code, if
standardized luminosity. However, the long-term maintenance costs applicable.
associated with street lighting would be minimized for solar-powered street "
lighting due to the long life of LED lamps. Given the safety risks associated
with prolonged streetlight outages and given the Committee's strongly Sastry
expressed desire for continuous lighting, the benefits of this project would The project would be located in Brooklyn Community Districts 13 and 15, in
Justify its associated expenditures. kings County in the City of New York.
Given these considerations, the total project cost of $2,000,000 to
$3,500,000 is an investment that would yield high returns in terms of
residential safety, business confidence, and reductions in government
SS
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 88 (2)

Pilot Small-Scale Renewable Power Project

Superstorm Sandy damaged critical utility networks, resulting in power , EE

outages that adversely affected thousands of Community residents and

businesses. Elevator, heat, and hot-water systems were damaged or

preemptively shut off to prevent fires or other failures at many high-rise

buildings. As an alternative to oil-fired backup generators, solar power

systems or small-scale microgrids could be designed to use a combination of

renewable energy sources, such as solar or wind, to ensure the availability of

backup power during and after disaster events that cause the electrical

power, transmission, or distribution systems to suffer outages.

The project would involve two phases. First, a siting and feasibility study

would be conducted to identify a location for a pilot solar-powered backup

system for an existing small- to mid-sized senior or nursing-home facility <

located in the Community. This initial phase of the project would entail A Se

developing a set of criteria for evaluating applications and preparing a <a NS Na

Request for Expression of Interest (RFEI) to be sent to potential applicants. cl OR SSS ~

The implementation phase of the project would follow. or ely SS la

(eee \ SS i

Estimated costs for the initial siting and feasibility study, including project Se i

engineering design, would be $100,000. Anticipated construction costs would birceeee e

be roughly $800,000, for a total project cost of $900,000. Solar tax credits ‘An example of renewable enesgy sources in New York City

and other incentives for installing solar power could be used to defer costs,

depending on their availability at the time of project inauguration. Although the system would likely not cover all of the electrical cost to the

- facility, it would greatly reduce the facility's overall utility costs.

GSEs Environmental protection: Renewable and sustainable energy practices
: ld minimize adverse impacts on the local environment. As a single pilot

Economic: Maintaining Community utility services during and after storm woul

events would indirectly benefit the local economy by promoting resident and project, the direct benefits of the project to the environment would be

business confidence. Also, if occupants of housing units are able to return minimal. However, if the example provided by the pilot project caused other

Quickly to their homes after a storm event, government and non-profit similar projects to come online, benefits to the environment and sustainable

expenditures for temporary housing would be reduced. The direct benefits of development would increase substantially.

the project would only apply to the building selected for installation. Health and social services: The project would provide reliable power

during times of power outages to a facility serving vulnerable populations.
Ree eee eee eee
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 89 (2)

Pilot small-scale renewable power project

Ernie nee

The investment of $900,000 represents a reasonable expense given the
anticipated benefits of reduced greenhouse gas emissions and greater
energy self-sufficiency for the selected facility.

The long-term benefits of the project would be limited to the useful life of
the project equipment. With regular maintenance and reasonable usage, the
project system would last at least as long as the standard industry period.
GRIT sles

The project would reduce vulnerability at the site chosen for installation by
reducing or eliminating anticipated power outages. Improved power stability
would promote better performance of all key building systems in the
aftermath of a disaster, including heat, hot water, and elevator services.
These effects would limit inconvenience to all residents, and potentially
major hazards to residents with physical mobility issues.

Time frame for implementation:

‘The project would be completed within three years.

Sean da ee ea me

The following is a non-exhaustive list of the applicable requirements: NYC
Zoning Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text
Amendment; NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code and all
subsequent amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code and all subsequent
amendments; NYC Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if
applicable.

GO ces Miner ete

The project would be located in Brooklyn Community Districts 13 and 15, in
Kings County in the City of New York.
SS
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 90 @

Public Emergency

Preparedness Outreach Campaign

ee ee eee
Both the Committee and attendees at Public Engagement Events reported

widespread feelings of unpreparedness for Superstorm Sandy. Many Bagi eo " .

residents of the communities of Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Si geet ee) cen =| 1

Beach, and Sea Gate reported that they did not fully understand evacuation Sues CSI 3 a 5 Ze y
procedures before the storm event. These preparedness and a Mes oC ay | é

communications issues were exacerbated by the high density of vulnerable oe MIR, Ama AY

populations on the peninsula, including individuals with limited English re a eee UL SS ea

proficiency. For instance, roughly 85% of Brighton Beach residents speak hee ‘ \ Ly . a

languages other than English at home. Many of these residents are recent bomen: ns Wi ‘i

immigrants, and they tend to have difficulty accessing information and e .
services related to disaster preparedness and evacuation. Similar planning 2 = oa f
challenges exist with respect to the roughly one-quarter of Community 2 —_— a
residents who are 65 and older and who may have less familiarity with many 4 —

of the City of New York's (City’s) electronic emergency communications = Fl ss .
messaging methods. These populations require targeted outreach strategies a A

for effective emergency preparedness planning. | ~

The project would create a public outreach campaign that uses multiple 5 aus 3 "
forms of media to provide targeted and specific disaster preparedness, a iP
response, and recovery information to Community residents, with particular of : h i
‘emphasis on socially vulnerable populations and taking into account other = U

languages commonly spoken in the Community. Existing preparedness Emergency preparedness drill in Coney Island in November 2013 featuring
materials from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the staff from multiple City agencies and members of the Brooklyn Community
New York State Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Services (NYS Board 13 CERT*?

DHSES), and the NYC OEM would be used and adapted for the project. The

initial phase of the project would involve assessing the best way to reach out

to target audiences using print, radio, web-based, and local cable/television

broadcast media.

ed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 91 (2)

Public emergency preparedness outreach campaign

Cost estimate: GET ae ee sles

The estimated implementation cost of this project is $160,000. This figure The project would directly benefit all residents of Brighton Beach, Coney
includes production of relevant materials, and an assessment of the best Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate. The project would reduce risk to
means of connecting socially vulnerable populations to important socially vulnerable populations by providing services targeted specifically to
preparedness information. those populations.

cesarean Time frame for implementation:

Health and social services: The project would create and customize The planning process associated with the project would take roughly two
specific services to target socially vulnerable populations to promote a more years to complete.

streamlined and efficient emergency planning and response protocol whose

benefits would be felt directly and indirectly by all Community residents. The Local, State, and Federal regulatory requirements:

project would be designed to particularly benefit socially vulnerable

residents. The outreach campaign would include targeted information that is The project would comply with all requirements of Section 508 of the
relevant and useful to a range of populations, including individuals with Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and all policies and requirements of the NYC OEM.

limited English proficiency, who may require translated outreach materials; cpr ere pTprT?

households with children or elderly residents, which may require extra time Bese

or consideration in evacuation procedures; and individuals with access and ‘The project would be located in Brookiyn Community Districts 13 and 15, in
functional needs, who may require tailored information and assistance kings County in the City of New York.

related to emergency preparation.

Ernie nee

This anticipated expenditure to address observed and perceived issues with

‘emergency preparedness would be a worthwhile investment in the long-term

resiliency of the Peninsula. If evacuation procedures and directives are

communicated more effectively through the project, more residents are likely

to evacuate in a timely fashion, limiting public expenditures associated with

‘emergency response and recovery during storm events.

ed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 92 (2)

Reconnaissance Study of Storm Surge

Protection for Sheepshead Bay

During Superstorm Sandy, water surged into Sheepshead Bay, inundating

Manhattan Beach and southern sections of the neighborhood of Sheepshead

Bay. The Committee understood from the outset of the planning process that

no single infrastructure improvement can eliminate all risk associated with

storm surge. However, the Committee Members expressed a strong desire to n

examine potential protection options that could be integrated into the L

existing and proposed network of flood protection infrastructure in and

around the Community. i

The project would evaluate a range of options for reducing storm surge and , ‘

flooding in the neighborhoods of Manhattan Beach and neighboring pe a a a =e
Sheepshead Bay. Both green (natural) and gray (man-made) infrastructure otras coe ie iy aaa Ee "s a
options would be examined, including structural barriers, such as tide gates, ot ee Te ele ir) Lt TREE
sea walls, and road improvements, and natural solutions, such as dune and Misha (Pa 2) Sie | as edat DO Va
wetland enhancements. The study would also determine the potential 7 Shack) Wee Ve aly . ai
effectiveness of deployable flood walls and passive flood barrier systems to at VAR Wt
mitigate flood damage along Shore Boulevard in Manhattan Beach and the | i
Emmons Avenue Corridor in the adjacent neighborhood of Sheepshead Bay

(See Figure 1V-2 for the area that would be the subject of the study). <
If the reconnaissance study identifies viable options, it may warrant U.S.

Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) participation in a more detailed

engineering phase. USACE describes more intensive investigative work of —_

this nature such as a feasibility study. A construction phase might follow the ‘Sheepshead Bay-Manhattan Beach Pedestrian Bridge

feasibility study if the feasibility study yielded specific actionable and cost-

effective mitigation options. The Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay

NYRCR Planning Committee would share the cost of the project and be a

partner in the study.

ed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 93 (2)

Reconnaissance study of storm surge protection for Sheepshead Bay

ere environmental impact analyses to evaluate any effects of floodgate, seawall,
levee, or related measures.

The anticipated project cost is $100,000. This estimate is based on a review

of other similar feasibility studies conducted by USACE and/or by private Even taking into account these considerations, there would be no basis for

entities. conducting a more in-depth feasibility study if this reconnaissance study is
not undertaken. The $100,000 project cost is a relatively limited expenditure

i rton tothe pon bana of the uy, Gen the anarophi

Lio aes impact of flood and storm surge damage to Community homeowners,

Economic: A 2012 report by the Institute for Social and Environmental residents, and merchants, the Committee has determined that the long-term

Transition found that nearly all structural flood control methods enjoy a benefits of this project more than outweigh the possible drawbacks.

positive benefit-cost ratio because of mitigated damage and enhanced

economic activity. GET ae ee sles

Mitigation of the risk of flooding and its associated damage would reduce or The study would seek to identify structural interventions that would reduce

eliminate business outage times and the displacement of the local risk to as broad a range of physical assets and as large a number of

population. Local employment patterns would potentially be positively Community residents as possible.

affected by reduced business outage times in post-disaster scenarios and

because of minimal disruptions to local residents. LAO

Health and social services: The reconnaissance study could lead to the

identification and construction of structural measures that would protect me Ceate cee eal ee na Feast eid ot cine soe es

socially vulnerable populations, including children and the elderly, individuals

With sccecs and’ fenctional needs? snd. lowe and modcrate income magnitude. This timetable is applicable regardless of whether the USACE or a

households. A large number of essential health and social services are areas different entity undertakes the reconnialssanca study.

of High and Extreme risk, including supportive housing and assisted-living ns "

facilities. A structural intervention to mitigate local flood risk might benefit [TTS TORE TT att eS ete aeo

multiple socially vulnerable populations by reducing risk to these assets The study would conform to the relevant methodological and process

during and after acute storm events. requirements defined by the USACE.

Cost-benefit analysis: BIS Res eee

This study may identify structural methods to reduce the potential for future The project would be located in Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings

flood damage. If likely methods are identified, additional funds would need County in the City of New York.

to be expended to initiate a feasibility study. Construction costs related to a

structural intervention would likely be considerable and would include

ed

Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 94 (2)

Reconnaissance study of storm surge protection for Sheepshead Bay
il >|
a SET nh
Figure IV-2: Area that would be the subject of the reconnaissance study
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 95 @

Resiliency Upgrades for
Manhattan Beach Bathhouse
The Manhattan Beach Bathhouse is a roughly 110,000-square-foot building
in Manhattan Beach Park owned by the New York City Department of Parks
and Recreation (NYC DPR). The facility is currently not used, but could
support a variety of year-round uses for residents and visitors. Plans for uses
within the building are under discussion, and it is desired that a portion of
the facility might be made available for a’ community center.
This project would upgrade utilities at the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse to
allow for regular use and explore the installation of renewable energy
systems and solar panels. The project would also evaluate and implement m
ficodproofing measures and explore potential uses of the facility (e.9., as a S|
community center) with NYC DPR and community representatives. bh
The Committee has explicitly stated that use of these funds for
improvements to the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse would be contingent on an
agreement with NYC DPR as to the ultimate uses for the facility.
The estimated project cost is $4,000,000. This estimate could cover a variety
of upgrades, including installation of solar panels or other resiliency features. t
sks F i
= ig ee
Project benefits may include enhancement of economic activity, health and a a ae 5 a
social services, and environmental protection. Depending on the eventual Manhattan Beach Bathhouse'™*
usage of the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse, the recreational amenities, retail
concessions, and community services provided by the facllity may attract
Visitors to the park while providing new local jobs. A community center use
would benefit Community residents of ali ages, including vulnerable
populations.
ed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 96 (2)

Resiliency upgrades for Manhattan Beach Bathhouse

The project may include installation of solar panels or other renewable-
energy generation systems to support year-round use. These green additions
would reduce emissions and recurring maintenance costs. These lower costs
would increase the incentive to continue exploring potential uses for a
portion of the building to promote public waterfront access and provide
opportunities for other water-related uses.

Xr nn ee

The project would potentially entail additional staffing and/or maintenance
responsibilities for the NYC DPR. Rehabilitation of the building would require
additional funds, either from other government grants or private sources, to
complete the project.

GRIT sles

The project would not directly reduce risk to the Community.

Time frame for implementation:

The project could begin in 2014, depending on decisions made by NYC DPR
and the results of an RFEI process.

Sean da ee ea me

The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: NYC Zoning
Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text Amendment;
NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code and all subsequent
amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code and all subsequent amendments; NYC
Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if applicable.

ces tner eens

The project would be located in Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings
County in the City of New York.
SS
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 97 @

Sewer Connection Cut-Off Valves for

Owners of One- and Two-Family Homes

SS eee
The loss of power that occurred during and after Superstorm Sandy caused

many sanitary sewer pump stations to shut down. Without means to remove

sanitary waste, sewage backed up into many homes and businesses on the

Peninsula. Backflow inundation was not the only cause of building damage in Cleanout

inland neighborhoods, but it did significantly exacerbate damage. Four

Census Block Groups in Coney Island and Sea Gate that do not border either — ¥ —

the Atlantic Ocean or Coney Island Creek experienced damage to at least

70% of their housing units, according to the U.S. Department of Housing Th Builtn drainage stope —E

and Urban Development. Also during Superstorm Sandy, floodwaters entered bee ae — sr
the storm drain system at numerous locations. These floodwaters resulted in Fan ioe =
significant building damage, high cleanup costs, exposure to noxious waste Tosewer
fumes, and potential exposure to hazardous materials. The project would

provide direct financial assistance to homeowners for the installation of

sewer connection cut-off valves in residential homes. This program would Flap in standard position

also provide education and public outreach related to the proper operation Under normal conditions

and maintenance of these devices. Clear Top >

The cut-off valves would be installed within structures and operated by the eee Sg

building owner or tenant. Installation would require cutting the existing wz yr \

sewer pipe, installing the cut-off valve, resealing the pipe, and creating an — > —

access panel for valve clean-out. Limited excavation to access in-ground =

pipes would be required; structures would have either in-ground or above- 4 Rap Roats up to ===

ground sewer connections. As part of the project, both self-deploying and 2 D> rock beck tow

manually operated valves would be evaluated for consideration. Te

A preliminary assessment of the sewer system on the Peninsula would be =~ eS 7 n'

needed to determine if any adverse impacts would result from implementing ,

this project and if other cost-effective system- or subsystem-level

modifications might also mitigate, at least to some extent, the sewer : i i .
backfiow problems at a block or neighborhood level. Additional evaluation Diagram demonstrating mechanics of sewer connection
would be needed to finalize lists of potential homes or residential blocks that

would benefit from the installation of cut-off valves.

SE e eee een eed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 98 (2)

‘Sewer connection cut-off valves for owners of one- and two-family homes

Sn )

Installers could be hired locally and trained. Use of local labor would directly Environmental protection: Unless the project includes flood protection

address the workforce development needs identified by the Committee measures to the overall sewer system, the project would have limited

throughout the planning process. If workers were supervised by licensed beneficial impacts on water quality in surrounding water bodies.

Master Plumbers, their time spent working on the project would count

towards the experience requirements for their own licensure. (este eee

The attendees of both Public Engagement Events and Planning Committee The useful life of the project is a function of the effective life of individual

Meetings consistently rated this project as a top priority. Committee cut-off valves. Maintenance and replacement of individual components would

Members were particularly supportive of the project because of its low unit be required to keep backflow prevention systems operating. Although

cost and scalability. individual parts would require periodic replacement, the benefits of the
: project would continue to accrue indefinitely, assuming responsible and

(eee proactive maintenance.

This project is scalable, and can be implemented on a per-building basis. If the project is not implemented, the Community's housing assets will

Based on research of local unit purchase and installation costs, this project remain vulnerable to sewage backups during and after storms and more

assumes a per unit cost of between $2,400 and $3,500. The Committee frequent flooding events. More than 11% of owner-occupied homes

determined that mitigating risk of backflow to 1,000 homes would constitute damaged by Superstorm Sandy suffered at least $30,000 of damage." By

a significant benefit to the Community. The anticipated project cost is concentrating assistance in areas where this damage profile was prevalent,

therefore between $2,400,000 and $3,500,000. In some limited instances, this project can deliver an especially high return on investment.

an individual home's cost could be higher than the estimate unit cost if the

sewer line to the structure is not readily accessible. The total cost estimate Pertti ene

provided here accounts for these contingencies by incorporating inspection

costs and a slightly higher per unit cost than may be typical. The project would reduce risk to physical assets by preventing water and/or

wastewater backup into homes. Further spatial analysis would be required to

determine the optimal locations for installation of cut-off valves. When this

Gees analysis is complete, reduction of risk to assets could be quantified more

Economic: Minimizing sewage backflow into homes during storm events precisely.

would positively affect the local economy by minimizing building damage and

residential displacement times as a result of storm events. The limited Packfiow of puking fom Cae ee the commtice of Brighton

Piaing: daoee ee Se out anit would Wald ove Sio,000 por Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate would benefit from

housing unit in direct cost savings. An installation program could also create reduced exposure (to these ‘hazards and from the reduced flooding risk

jobs and employ local workers. 7

Health and social services: Effective backflow prevention systems can Time frame for implementation:

reduce risks to public health posed by contamination caused by sewer

backups in residential dwellings. Socially vulnerable populations, including The project would take roughly two years to complete, [given the need to

children, individuals with disabilities, senior citizens, and low- and moderate- finalize criteria for potentially eligible recipients. ]

income persons, would benefit from the project.

ed

Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 99 (2)

‘Sewer connection cut-off valves for owners of one- and two-family homes
Ss
Son ne Men mee en
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: New York
State Department of Health Guidelines for Designing Backflow Prevention
Assembly Installations and Cross-Connection Control Program and the NYC
DEP regulations related to sewer equipment installation.
Omar ee ny
The project would be located in Brooklyn Community Districts 13 and 15, in
Kings County in the City of New York.
4 = al > ]
a an
Pa ae | Mer fe tig: (el yy
! ed \ & - ee a |
Paes A pe" ‘ ——
meen a sy | Pell hee, = ey te TP |
a A ue ai | ew Ta
tel Va | l a 7 Ass a een ke Ee
7 i Bes ze) a 8 ae Sieceseerseecl
ais a :
Fey Se eee ; ae
=i cei EU re Ig Sa 2 ae
ees -— Y See = fie
We a tal aE Ma wr ee ol
ae (ood His w= . ee
i = ® ane a J SES er
% 4 aan oe ——— } an
Me. Acco Ea
7a = ceases
Figure IV-3: Examples of One- and two-family homes in the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula’?
Map datasource: New York Gty Department of Gy Planning, MepPLUTO
Cn eed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 100 (2)

Southern Brooklyn

Emergency Response Plan

Ee EE ee

At Planning Committee Meetings and Public Engagement Events throughout

the planning process, attendees reported that emergency response protocols = ~

appeared to break down at the local level immediately after Superstorm —=, 7

Sandy. Anecdotal reports suggested that the emergency response efforts =} |

were disproportionately concentrated in certain neighborhoods. As such, the _——

Committee suggested that citywide hazard plans and response protocols be

supplemented by a Community-driven and Community-produced local fe

emergency response plan to facilitate more effective local response and am Pn - an

recovery. Community Boards 13 and 15 and members of the associated - b

Community Emergency Response Teams (CERTs) have both stated that local 4 F

community members are the best source of relevant information to guide LALLA i

‘emergency response planning. ke

There are a number of citywide plans in place related to a variety of natural Paokead aie

and man-made hazards. Although the project would not be a formal annex sae Mo

to these plans, it would provide specific information for local neighborhoods SUS ,

and incorporate the lessons learned from Superstorm Sandy. The Southern Dea . 4

Brooklyn Emergency Response Plan would integrate the network of local PcA| i ae

non-profits, religious institutions, and social service organizations, providing >.

a forum for Community representatives to collaborate on response and < ie 4

recovery issues throughout the Community. Ny a ow

A primary focus of this project would be planning to meet the needs of . "4 5, 4160

vulnerable populations, including residents in nursing homes and senior ‘ANew York City CERT preparing for a drill

centers. The plan would include multilingual resources to address diverse Finally, in recognition of the indispensable role played by community-based

Or ee es Far the locally prepares aoe Aton at auld reed to ke organizations (CBOs) in any disaster setting, the project includes funding for

prepared in close collaboration with the NYC OEM. as many as 10 locally based civic groups and non-profit organizations to
evaluate their vulnerability to natural hazards and to develop business
continuity plans to improve the hazard resiliency of their facilities. The
Committee agreed that if there was regional interest, the project location
could be expanded to the area defined by Community Districts 13 and 15.

ed

Section IV: Implementation — project profiles Page 101 (2)

Southern Brooklyn emergency response plan
—_———
Key project components include: As documented above, the Committee reported widespread failure to receive
Preparing a needs assessment specific to each Peninsula ‘or comprehend relevant information related to preparation and evacuation
eee cel foc tees and cont acaster elerming and weporee cainy procedures prior to Superstorm Sandy. This confusion contributed to higher
von the ground" information. ftom local nonprofit avd. religious emergency response costs in the storm’s aftermath, as numerous individuals
leaders, local elected officials, first responders, and government required emergency evacuation. This project would seek to address these
agencies; 'ssues.
+ Convening a task force to better integrate these locally based RET TEe
organizations with first responders and government agencies; and The planning process would provide direct benefits to the residents of the
* Establishing eligibility and siting criteria for selection of civic groups Southern Brooklyn Peninsula by mitigating risk to the population before,
and non-profit organizations to receive funding and preparation of a during, and after disaster events. As demonstrated by Superstorm Sandy,
fequest for expressions of interest (RFEI) for CBOs to apply for Community residents face risk during all phases of disaster events. More
mitigation funds. efficient and effective evacuation and preparedness procedures would limit
risk to residents during acute events. The greater availability of critical
information and services in the aftermath of a disaster would limit secondary
eee risk to residents by reducing the demands placed on first responders.
The estimated project cost is $640,000. This figure covers the project
components described above. Pn eee
es The planning processes associated with this project are expected to take
a dq roughly 2 years to complete under ordinary circumstances.
Economic: Orderly and efficient emergency procedures would limit exigent
emergency and recovery costs. PSone ee ne
Health and social services: Planning to meet the needs of vulnerable The project would comply with all requirements of Section 508 of the
Populations, including residents in nursing homes and senior centers, would Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the policies and requirements of the NYC OEM
be a primary focus of the project. The plan would also include multilingual and the NYS DHSES.
resources to address diverse language needs. All Peninsula residents would
benefit from improved emergency response planning. Project jurisdiction
Iceni os The project would occur in Brooklyn Community Districts 13 and 15, in Kings
County in the City of New York.
If the project were not implemented, socially vulnerable populations in the
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula would’ likely continue to perceive localized
inadequacies in emergency response. For that reason, and because of the
Community's strongly held position that more locally targeted emergency
preparedness planning is required to ensure Community safety in future
disasters, the project cost of $640,000 represents a worthy investment.
—KX—X—XK_Vwowonssssssssssss_c_c_c_ccc_c_c_c_ccccccccccc
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 102 (2)

Vocational Training Program

Even before the disruption to employment and business patterns caused by

Superstorm Sandy, job opportunities on the Peninsula were relatively limited. =

According to Census Bureau Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics SY

data, there were fewer than 15,000 primary jobs on the Peninsula in 2011, u fi

and roughly 48,000 adults between the ages of 20 and 64. 7, Lai
Vocational training programs provide targeted training, hands-on experience, . a

and career opportunities for high school students and young adults. As the "e-- aa .
Community recovers from Superstorm Sandy, significant educational and Rekee os /
‘employment opportunities may be created, in the growing fields of resilient ae TUN
construction, renewable energy, and associated manufacturing, as well as

emergency preparedness. In this NYRCR Plan alone, there are several a {

projects and programs that will require a well-trained workforce to execute. =H

Careers in these fields have the potential to provide both livable wages and ac |
‘opportunities for career advancement. par) ih

This project would pilot a new or adapted vocational high school curriculum ’ | =;
focused on developing knowledge and skills in the broadly-defined fields of |

resiliency, sustainability, and emergency preparedness. This curriculum 7
development process would utilize relevant State and City University of New KS

York (SUNY and CUNY, respectively) curricula and adapt them for use in a

high school vocational training program. In particular, the new SUNY College 1

of Emergency Preparedness, Homeland Security, and Cybersecurity presents pee at oe

a unique opportunity for related integration with the program. {4
The curriculum would also connect students with local internship #
opportunities. Graduates may directly enter the workforce following

graduation, or pursue higher education, especially in subject areas related to

sustainability, resiliency, and preparedness Vocational training focused on renewable energy technologies***
The project would include a parallel workforce training program for

unemployed adults. Partnerships with existing workforce development

initiatives, such as Workforce One, could be cultivated to support this project

objective.

ed
Section IV: Implementation — project profiles Page 103 (2)

Vocational training program

Oe)

The project would provide members of the Community with specific local

knowledge and skills needed to support reconstruction to make the Peninsula

The project should cost between $500,000 and $750,000, inclusive of startup more resilient. The project investment would yield high returns for the

and initial administration costs. The cost range reflects the flexibility of the quality of life of future generations in the Community. More tangibly, it would

Project, and its ability to encompass a wide range of activities and programs. equip local residents with the skills required to fill an estimated 138,000 jobs
5 that are expected to be created in the City between 2008 and the 2018 in

the fields of green building, construction, and renewable energy thanks to a

Economic: Significant employment opportunities in green infrastructure jobs suite of City, State, and Federal initiatives, including the New York State

exist in the wake of the damage and recovery efforts from Superstorm Energy Research and Development Authority's New York Energy Smart

Sandy. These opportunities include jobs in the construction, renewable Program, and various City initiatives created as a result of PlaNYC.

energy, transportation, and manufacturing industries. These careers can > - =

provide livable wages, and a more highly trained and skilled workforce would GETS area usr scess

enhance economic promise and vitality on the Peninsula. The project would Direct risk reduction related to this project would be fairly limited. However,

also benefit employers, by providing opportunities for public-private the project would increase Community resilience by addressing the structural

partnerships with real estate developers, contractors, and sustainable energy issues related to employment and business development that were

producers in the region. exacerbated by Superstorm Sandy.

Health and social services: The project would benefit the overall

Community. The program could be a stand-alone program connected to local

employers that can provide internships and job opportunities for students. The project would take 2 years from start to finish. This timeframe takes into

Environmental protection: The skilled and knowledgeable workers that account necessary coordination with the participating schools, as well as time

would result from this project be well positioned to understand associated with development of curricula.

environmental issues, especially in terms of development and construction

practices. (TES Mea ie Pes ee

The project (the curriculum) would require reviews and approvals from the

Cost-benefit analysis: New York City Department of Education and the New York State Education

This pilot project would require a dedicated funding stream if it were to last Department. Systematic and thoughtful coordination and development of the

beyond the project implementation phase of 2 years. The project would curriculum would be required to meet local needs while providing a pilot

provide high school students and young adults looking for a new career with approach that could be transferred to other areas in the City and throughout

the opportunity to train in a green and resilient building and construction the State.

field that would make the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula more resilient to

storm and emergency-related conditions that can jeopardize the quality of

life and the safety and security of residents, their homes, and businesses.

ed

Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 104 (2)

Vocational training program
— SSS
mes eee
The project would be located in Brooklyn Community Districts 13 and 15, in
Kings County in the City of New York.
i
& ec, | —_—
A ue es dual
aati a = CMe a) ee aa
| aeae i Tes iy See AD I i
or |e Fate
: ce =
Figure IV-4: Potential locations include William E. Grady Technical School, Lafayette High School, Liberation High School, or other schools in
the surrounding area.
—_
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 105 @

Environmental Youth Education (Featured Project)
EE eee
This project would facilitate partnerships between local _ non-profit,
organizations to provide educational classes and resources for Community
youth. These courses and materials would explain the importance of natural
resources like Coney Island Creek and local marshland and wetland habitat =
to the regional ecosystem. Students would learn about the ways they can
encourage protection and enhancement of these resources, which provide
vital risk and damage mitigation functions during storms. The classes would
encourage safety and well-being in future storm events by linking good a " 4 4
stewardship of the urban natural environment with enhanced Community 4 x
quality of life and security. Bsr ea omni eee o
enn: pes >,
mere ig =
be sag ae | t
The estimated project cost of $140,000 includes monies for curriculum Ri SSS ees 3
development. epee es oe - '
oe F
Eterna free E o Pa
Health and social services: The project would provide topical and CS SA Ee »
relevant educational outreach to a population that may be unaware of the tare oa ae eo fe a
extent to which everyday actions and behavior can contribute to the health ba hin OS eae ee ed
of the urban environment. The project would provide an opportunity to share Seo Ri moe a
some of the lessons learned from recent disaster events. The target : . on , ;
audience for these educational programs would be Community youth. Volunteers with the Jamaica Bay Ecowatchers york to improve plant life on
Environmental protection: The project would encourage greater
Community understanding and interest in habitat and conservation issues.
Rooftop gardens not only provide local food, but also absorb stormwater and
runoff and mitigate the urban heat-island effect. If courses included cleanup
activities, such as beach and wetland garbage pickup, students would
contribute directly to the local natural environment.
ed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 106 (2)

Environmental youth education (featured project)

Ernie nee

The Committee recognizes the benefit to current and future generations of

investing in their future through educational opportunities. This project is z

intended to address the need to make the Peninsula both more resilient to Fa

future storms and educated about the concerns, needs, and opportunities ”

related to storms like Superstorm Sandy. The expenditure of $140,000 would

represent a relatively low-cost means of enhancing the Community's — a

preparedness for future storms and inducing everyday greener behavior 3

among Community residents.

GT ere sles

The project would provide for greater community awareness and

understanding of recovery and resiliency issues. ey

Time frame for implementation:

Development of course materials and identification of host organizations

could all be completed within 1 year. P

Local, State, and Federal regulatory requirements:

No regulatory requirements would be anticipated for this project. ‘An educator shows a starfish to a child at the New
York Aquarium?

ces tner eens

The project would be located in Brooklyn Community Districts 13 and 15, in

Kings County in the City of New York.

SS

Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 107 (2)

Implementation of a microgrid, smartgrid and/or
This Featured Project assumes that public, private, or foundation support —_ 7 ~— a
could be found to fund one or more electric power resiliency projects for aN ml orl aw
New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) or Mitchell-Lama properties based mss a mn” sy .
on the results of the Proposed Project of the same name. [secs Nea at a
The project would incorporate the results of that Proposed Project for the i 24 Fe Ree Cooling Towers F +
design and construction of one or more electric power resiliency projects. > a> : We!
The implementation phase would involve the construction of microgrid, eee A ye: aan
smartgrid, and/or cogeneration solutions to ensure that NYCHA and Mitchell- \ Se Se SS ———
Lama properties maintain power in future storm events. “ id —
As with the linked Proposed Project, there are opportunities to partner with d as bea! li
New York State Smart Grid Consortium (NYSSGC) initiatives and New York Ss 4 > lf a4
Power Authority (NYPA) on this project. = os & yi I
EOCErnniey Sy) Unused Power plant area [pas MR "A
x a 4 FS 4
Economic: Although the project would not likely result in a direct increase x y 4 s ~ Pale |
in economic activity except in post-disaster scenarios, it would limit Ed
residential displacement, which would help maintain the customer base ‘Amalgamated Warbasse Houses Power Plant (Source: Power Pro
needed for many local businesses. Protection of housing unit energy systems ‘onsulting, Inc.)
would allow NYCHA residents to return more quickly to their homes. The rs 7
resulting more rapid recovery would increase the likelihood that these leas
residents would be able to access their daily jobs. The estimated project costs dependent upon the findings of the feasibility
Health and social services: Energy resiliency improvements can enhance study. $10,000,000+
safety and accessibility to essential health and social services during and -
after storm events. The socially vulnerable populations impacted by the Cost-benefit analysis:
project include low- and moderate-income residents of the developments, ‘A cost-benefit ana
lysis cannot be prepared until the feasibility studies have
children and fhe elder, ana residents wih retieg and functional peed who been completed. If the project were not implemented, NYCHA and Mitchell
are inconvenienced or imperiled by lack of a dedicated power supply. Lama residents would be as vulnerable in the next major storm event or
emergency as they were during and after Superstorm Sandy. If a storm or
eee eee Eee eee
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 108 @

Implementation of a microgrid, smartgrid and/or cogeneration solutions for NYCHA and Mitchell-Lama properties (linked featured project)
emergency occurs during colder months, as was the case with Superstorm a. Lon =
Sandy, residents could be without heat for prolonged periods, placing them Bee ee ee
at risk of cold-related emergencies to people and property. weet |e es
ee
% =} ¥
REX re & aig iS
Barring other damage to buildings and housing units, this project would a a os al RS fi “ &
reduce the vulnerability of the housing assets where the project would be 145 ee
implemented. roi 3 a a ee
Continuous power supply would limit risk to socially vulnerable populations avere eS Se Gey
that may rely on dedicated power supplies, including the elderly and , =f io ae
individuals with access and functional needs. q Vater
Time frame for implementation: Spe “3 |
Fron Bus Eee
The project could be completed within two years of the completion of the Soe BP Bae 2
feasibility studies and obtaining adequate funding. 2s — =
Potential project location: NYCHA Gravesend Houses"®>
PSone ene Meme ens _ - :
‘The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: NYC Zoning pee Eee
Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text Amendment; ee Spear
NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code and all subsequent eres ae
amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code and all subsequent amendments; NYC = a
Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if applicable. i 7 0 are
, 7 d
f q og * GZ ere Me
Remaster “1 @e a a
‘ay EF Bh we)
The project would be located in Brooklyn Community District 13, in Kings ie ff -—f8 FF
County in the City of New York. is {ay Bet l= ee
Poetry es
ieee a __
Sis @
Potential project location: NYCHA Coney Island Houses"®*
Cn eed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 109 (2)

Adaptive Reuse of the Manhattan Beach
Bathhouse (Linked Featured Project)
ee eee
‘As noted above in the description of the Proposed Project, this linked
Featured Project would involve all construction activities needed to complete
the adaptive reuse of the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse for year-round
community uses. The $4,000,000 allocated for the Proposed Project would
be leveraged to obtain full construction costs, which, depending on the final :
determination of uses, could range from $15 to $20 milion. Fao eo
Eres ee enre.
Final project costs would depend on the breadth and type of improvements aes cated ppbiea A
and construction activities actually scoped. As noted above, and taking into Se ree tie ah
consideration the wide range of uncertainty that characterizes this project, Re ice ANY Se
the project is estimated to cost between $15 and $20 million oe Pass Feb eo oe cod
u it =

POteireis i ee

i , Cees Paeber Te
Project benefits may include enhancement of economic activity, health and a em foes le I |
social services, and environmental protection. Depending on the eventual z: = pret} tesa
usage of the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse, the recreational amenities, retail Pr sf a i li
concessions, and community services provided by the facility may attract y th ~—
visitors to the park while providing new local jobs. A community center use oP ae, a
would benefit Community residents of all ages, including vulnerable Rate :

a

populations. BE eee eto > m .
The project may include installation of solar panels or other renewable- L at it oa tia
energy generation systems to support year-round use. These green additions Manhattan Beach Bathhouse’
would reduce emissions and recurring maintenance costs. These lower costs
would increase the incentive to continue exploring potential uses for a
portion of the building to promote public waterfront access and provide
‘opportunities for other water-related uses.
Cn eed
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 110 (2)

Adaptive reuse of the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse (linked featured project)
Ernie nee

The project would potentially entail additional staffing and/or maintenance
responsibilities for the NYC DPR. Currently, the NYC DPR has not dedicated

funding to support this project. Total rehabilitation of the building would

require additional funds, either from other government grants or private
sources, to complete the project.

GRIT sles

The project would not reduce risk to the Community.

Time frame for implementation:

The project could begin in 2014, depending on decisions made by NYC DPR

and the results of an RFEI process.

Sean da ee ea me

The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: NYC Zoning
Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text Amendment;

NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code and all subsequent
amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code and all subsequent amendments; NYC

Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if applicable.

ces tner eens

The project would be located in Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings

County in the City of New York.
SS
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 111 @

Mermaid Avenue

Corridor Improvements (Featured Project)
Ee ee
Mermaid Avenue is a key commercial corridor and one of the primary entry

points into the Coney Island community. Many of the small businesses and

non-profit service providers along this corridor were flooded as a result of

Superstorm Sandy, resulting in major losses of equipment and inventory and

extended closures. Most businesses along the corridor were flooded with up wv 4

to 5 feet of water, causing prolonged or even permanent closures. As yao eee bis
discussed earlier, exact local figures are not available, but roughly one-fifth Lt ia Se
of storm-affected businesses citywide remained closed 6 months after the An wer ey =

storm. For a small retailer, even a 2-week closure corresponded to an Mey dt os
average loss of upwards of $100,000. 'ye Pal ef lt ts ~
This project would revitalize the Mermaid Avenue commercial corridor 5 LE Be Sea sere! ito

through streetscape and landscape improvements that would incorporate os Se Cs a Ue er Iti ee
stormwater attenuation measures. The project would seek to address fae anf) | cAL AS
existing infrastructure deficiencies, including issues with underground utilities LL gait pita Oe se aa CAH
and stormwater drainage. This Featured Project would build off of the work pal es 2 IR a CH | patel =
accomplished through the small business resiliency project discussed earlier. Shiai aed BOTH ITTY) rhe a ota mi
The Committee elected to include this project as a Featured Project because AS Oa SUT LCI h |
‘major infrastructure improvements and utlity upgrades may be required & Se
along Mermaid Avenue. To avoid waste, investigative work and subsequent — > =.
upgrades, if required, would have to be completed before implementing ~S Pee

streetscape enhancements. It is important to note that the streetscape 5 7

enhancements described in the related Proposed Project would not be 7 - -
adversely affected by any future utility or infrastructure improvements. Mermaid Avenue conceptual rendering and Coney Island Comprehensive
ed
Section IV: Implementation — project profiles Page 112 (2)

Mermaid Avenue shopping district (featured project)
Equally significant, the stormwater retention aspects of this project will
reduce the load on municipal drainage systems during all rain events.
The projected cost for this project is $2,200,000. This figure allows for a If infrastructure deficiencies and storm drainage inadequacies remain
broad range of stormwater attenuation and streetscaping improvements. It is unaddressed, key businesses and community facilities will remain highly
important to reiterate that that cost estimate carries considerable uncertainty vulnerable to the types of flood damages that accompanied Superstorm
given the infrastructure issues along Mermaid Avenue that have yet to be Sandy. This vulnerability could impact the continuous provision and local
resolved. availability of grocery services, pharmacy services, and other public health
necessities.
Creer
Economic: The benefits of the project would include limited flood risk
reduction, strong economic benefits for Mermaid Avenue businesses, Tf funding is secured, this project would provide limited risk reduction to
stormwater attenuation would result in reduced runoff and improved surface businesses and community assets along Mermaid Avenue.
water quality. Streetscape enhancements would create more pervious
surfaces, allowing for natural groundwater recharge.
The project would increase visitor traffic and purchases as well as business Given the uncertainty related to potentially necessary major improvements
investment, leading to more stable employment patterns. An improved retail along the corridor, it is not yet possible to estimate a meaningful time frame
and economic climate on Mermaid Avenue may lead to development of new for this project.
permanent jobs. The project would help to ensure business provision and
services for Community residents. (TASER ee ieee eee mes eu
Environmental: Stormwater attenuation would result in reduced runoff and The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: NYC Zoning
improved surface water quality. Streetscape enhancements would create Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text Amendment;
‘more pervious surfaces, allowing for natural groundwater recharge. NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code and all subsequent
amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code and all subsequent amendments; NYC
Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if applicable.
‘One 2005 study found that shopppers in large cities will spend 12% more in —_____
visually attractive shopping districts that feature high tree canopies." More
broadly, that research found that shoppers prefer “attractive” retail The project would be located in Brooklyn Community District 13, in Kings
environments, and will spend considerably more time browsing in areas they County in the City of New York.
perceive to be attractive.
SS
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 113 (2)

Mermaid Avenue shopping. district (featured project)
yi hg NSIS fhe Nita (jm (PLS 1 ao SE.
C1 CNS es | Eas fof
Pe ee COUP Noel age eee
BOR rept as agar = hese Saal Uy) Sherecteraay
eons ones SSeS a Se eer te 9
ee eS ea el ne
eh ena ere ego heed ne WR Rg
fe cael cn MMS Sen gl ae tae ge! Ne ee | Ue Bese
cagA ae Helis Sere Is Uae Bins Wt PN is) eg 7
PUAN sis Wolpe fas, N Cee Veet ld Be
Gee Picts 1 ty peed, cal eae pore Sal
iW A eat NS seme We e||pcuy sate. || Sere pene OE
1 cota ee Ca ayo Po ae eee A Se LR TA ae 5
Sarin ait ene eee es 2 fe er) Smee ar a ate
A> a plimaitt ot Veer ee cs wegen < ES ie
Sie ae NEY) a sages Pe We Says ects Eee oe a SS
eS aA Te mae i oe fo ee
eek, hertay | Ua Ps ray ieee
' Sat aS vires cad Bond eat er s :
nla ee en oe ay eae S ag eae aaa
1 es ae ae 2 i wre rer
Rahs 4 won ed
Figure IV-5: Illustrative development site plan for Special Coney Island District’””
eee
Section IV: Implementation — Project Profiles Page 114 @

m= petite
bef

gates {i eee

Y-Toi a fey A _

PX Celi derma ear

Section V: Additional materials

A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations

Additional Resiliency Recommendations are resiliency projects and actions

the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Southern Brooklyn

Peninsula Planning Committee (Committee) would like to highlight but are

not categorized as Proposed or Featured Projects. The Additional Resiliency

Recommendations are identified in Table V-1; and are categorized by

strategy, project name, project description, and estimated and regional

scope, if applicable.

ed
Section V: Additional materials Page 117 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
——————
Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Peron
Repair damage to ity of New York Coney Island Creek Flood_| Support SIRR-recommended City project, currently in NA Y
existing natural and —_| Control and Restoration Project feasibility phase. The project would construct revetment(s)
cultural resources and and a tidal gate at the mouth of Coney Isiand Creek to
incorporate resiliency mitigate flood risk to the Sea Gate, Coney Island, and
design elements. Gravesend neighborhoods. The project may include a
pedestrian/roadway link across the revetment and restoration
of wetlands and recreational amenities. The Committee has
‘expressed particular support for the goals of enhancing public
‘access and uses that would complement the objective of
storm surge mitigation.
Replace, repair, and | USACE Rockaway Inlet Surge Barrier Urge the USACE to initiate an expedited study to examine the | $8,000,000,000 Y
upgrade existing Feasibility Study feasibility of developing a surge barrier or alternative
infrastructure to measures at Rockaway Inlet to protect the communities both
improve its resilience to near and in Jamaica Bay.
future storm events.
Protect existing housing | Development of Mixed-Use Building Space | Develop mixed-use building that combines affordable housing | $5,000,000
stock to make it more Units with service and outreach components targeted to
resilient specific family structures, including single parent and multi-
generational.
Protect existing housing | Enhancement of Cornerstone Programs at | Enhance and create additional Cornerstone Programs for $100,000
stock to make it more | NYCHA Community Centers youth and adults at New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA)
resilient Community Centers.
Replace, repair, and | Enhancement of Public Transit Options Explore ways to improve public transit options to the area for $150,000 Y
upgrade existing visitors and residents, including express subway service and
infrastructure to ‘expanded private and public express bus routes.
improve its resilience to
future storm events.
al
Section V: Additional materials Page 118 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
——————
Peron
Implement Expansion and Enhancement of CERTS Develop plans to increase membership in, and enhance $50,000 Y
improvements that will effectiveness of, Brookiyn Community Districts 13 and 15
help civic groups and ‘Community Emergency Response Teams (CERTs). Plans would
non-governmental include recommendations to ensure that CERTs are adequately
organizations function staffed in a way that reflects the diversity of the Southern
better in a future Brookiyn Peninsula's neighborhoods.
emergency situation,
Protect existing housing | Resilient Greenthumb Community ‘Support greening projects at community gardens to grow food $20,000
stock to make it more | Gardening Program {and ornamental plants and provide gardening education;
resilient implement a Resilient Greenthumb gardening program with
‘mutticuttural, multigenerational, and resiliency education
‘components; incorporate best practices into the program to
mitigate and capture water runoff.
Protect existing housing | Site Suitability Analysis and Pilot ‘Conduct site suitability analysis of currently vacant and/or $665,000
stock to make it more | Construction of Resilient Homes on Vacant | underutilized lands and conduct a pilot project to construct
resilient or Underutiized Lands resilient housing using mitigation and resiliency best practices.
Replace, repair, and _ Street Repair and Upgrade Repair sinkholes, repave, and address other deteriorated road | Over $10,000,000
upgrade existing ‘conditions along major road corridors. The project would
infrastructure to include complete street improvements such as providing
improve its resilience to dedicated bike lanes and sidewalk repairs to encourage
future storm events pedestrian and non-motorized transport.
Protect existing housing | Support Project Hope and Common Ground | Collaborate with New York State (NYS) Office of Mental Health | $100,000
stock to make it more | Program to expand Project Hope programs to better meet the needs of
resilient vulnerable populations in the NYRCR Southern Brooklyn
Peninsula Community. Collaborate with Common Ground non-
‘governmental organization to support the homeless or near
homeless.
Replace, repair, and | Enhancement of Telecommunications ‘Support the City of New York in advocating for State and $0 (policy Y
upgrade existing Federal regulatory changes, encouraging better alignment in | recommendation)
infrastructure to Federal, State, and local approaches to regulation, and push
improve its resilience to for reporting and resiliency requirements that would lead to
future storm events. better preparation, awareness, and response in the event of
extreme weather events.
al
Section V: Additional materials Page 119 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pian

ES

B. Master table of projects

The Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional Resiliency

Recommendations identified throughout the NYRCR Southern Brooklyn

Peninsula Plan are reflected in Table V-2. These are categorized according to

strategy, project name, project description, project category, estimated cost, a

and regional scope, if applicable. Projects may appear more than once on Li eS Dace

this table if they are relevant to more than one Community strategy.
Every proposed and featured project is linked
Aol Mola ilelcstcl le]
Proposed Projects are projects the
Committee has proposed to be fully funded
through the Committee CDBG-DR allocation.
Featured Projects are projects where cost
is beyond the Committee CDBG-DR allocation
E-Tufe) {olan ta—lamm un) cian =lal = 1e(en ea
combination of CDBG-DR funding and other
sources. These projects may include the
funding of a Proposed Project, as the first
phase, and the Featured Project as the
oe) e oom

Section V: Additional materials Page 120 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
——————
Table V-2: Proposed, Featured, and Resiliency Recommendations
Dee Ree a See ed
ae ere
rer Ces reed Ce Ses eed eer ty Ee Estimated Cost | Project
(Y/N)
Protect the shoreline and Bulkhead Replace the bulkhead on Sea Gate Association Proposed $3,000,000
coastal communities through | Replacement at Sea _| property and along some private residential
structural shoreline protection | Gate properties.
enhancements
Improve facilities, infrastructure, | Designation of Perform a location and feasibility analysis to Proposed $980,000
information sharing, and Emergency Response | designate emergency response and recovery
‘emergency capacity of social __| and Recovery Centers | centers in each neighborhood in the Community.
service organizations and ‘Also create a fund to develop continuity plans and
health/mental health service assess facility vulnerabilities for civic groups and
providers non-profit organizations.
Evaluate opportunities for Beach Grass Planting | Plant beach grass along the boardwalk in Brighton Proposed $800,000
creating or enhancing natural | and Infrastructure | Beach and Coney Island at six locations; relocate of
shoreline protection measures Improvements. six water utility valves from under the ocean side of
the boardwalk to a less vulnerable location on the
inland side of the boardwalk, and install two beach
access mats.
Repair and make more resilient | Community Provide funds for peninsula-wide streetscape Proposed $2,500,000 =
damaged and/or underutilized | Streetscape enhancements, including replacement of trees on ‘$3,000,000
cultural resources Enhancements public property that were destroyed or damaged by
Sandy, implementation of storm water attenuation
measures, and landscape enhancements along
selected business corridors.
Protect existing housing stock to | Feasibility Study for Conducta feasibility study on developing microgrid, Proposed $340,000
make it more resilient Energy Resiliency at _| smartgrid, and/or cogeneration solutions to ensure
NYCHA and Mitchell- | that NYCHA and Mitchell-Lama properties maintain
Lama Properties ower in storm-related events.
al
Section V: Additional materials Page 121 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
——————
Dee Ree a See ed
ae ere
rer Ces reed Ce Ses eed eer ty Ee Estimated Cost | Project
(75)
Replace, repair, and upgrade | Implementation of | Install a flood barrier to protect against flooding at Proposed $700,000
existing infrastructure to Cost-Effective Storm | primary under-boardwalk access points.
improve its resilience to future | Surge Protection for
storm events (Ocean Parkway and
W, 25th Street
‘Support local businesses of all | Increase Resiliency of | Establish a small business support office; offer Proposed $1,960,000
sizes in their efforts to fully ‘Small Businesses direct assistance to merchants for floodproofing
recover from Superstorm Sandy; | Throughout the their businesses; implement Peninsula-wide
Repair and make more resilient || Peninsula streetscape enhancements, including replacing
damaged and/or underutilized trees, installing stormwater attenuation measures,
cultural resources and making landscaping improvements along
business corridors.
Replace, repair, and upgrade | Installation of Install new streetlights along key business corridors Proposed $2,000,000-
existing infrastructure to Resilient Streetlights | and road intersections, evacuation routes, and '$3,500,000
improve its resilience to future high-density housing areas throughout the
storm events Southern Brooklyn Peninsula.
Create more affordable housing | Pilot Small-Scale Create a small-scale renewable power project for a Proposed $900,000
in the Southern Brooklyn Renewable Power __| small- to mid-sized senior-housing or nursing home
Peninsula Project facility.
Enhance coordination between | Public Emergency _ Create a local public outreach campaign that uses, Proposed $160,000 Y
‘vic groups and non-profit Preparedness multiple forms of media to provide targeted and
‘organizations with local Outreach Campaign | specific disaster preparedness, response, and
government agencies to make recovery information to Community residents.
the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula
better prepared for future
emergencies
Evaluate opportunities for Reconnaissance Study | Evaluate a range of options to mitigate future flood Proposed| $50,000 Y
creating or enhancing natural__| of Storm Surge events caused by flooding and storm surge in
shoreline protection measures | Reduction and Flood | Manhattan Beach and Sheepshead Bay.
Barrier Systems
al
Section V: Additional materials Page 122 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
——————
Dee Ree a See ed
ae ere
rer Ces reed Ce Ses eed eer ty Ee Estimated Cost | Project
(75)
Repair and make more resilient | Resiliency Upgrades | Upgrade the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse by Proposed $4,000,000
damaged and/or underutilized | for Manhattan Beach | multiple methods, potentially installing solar panels,
cultural resources Bathhouse installing other renewable-energy systems,
upgrading utilities, and implementing floodproofing
methods.
Get residents back into their | Sewer Connection _| Provide financial assistance to homeowners for Proposed $2,400,000-
homes as quickly as possible. | Cut-Off Valves for __| installation of sewer connection cut-off valves, as '$3,500,000
Protect existing housing stock | Owners of One- and _| well as education and public outreach related to
by making it more flood Two-Family Homes | proper operation and maintenance of these
resilient; Protect existing devices.
housing stock by making it more
flood resilient
Enhance response to natural | Southern Brooklyn _ Create a Southern Brooklyn Emergency Response Proposed ‘$640,000
disasters by enhancing Emergency Response | Plan to provide specific information targeted to
‘emergency response protocols | Plan local neighborhoods and incorporate lessons
and communication strategies learned from Superstorm Sandy.
Expand workforce development | Vocational Training | Expand vocational training programs at a high Proposed '$500,000- Y
‘opportunities in the Southern | Program school on the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula to ‘$750,000
Brookiyn Peninsula that would include green and resilient building and emergency
enhance regional resiliency and preparedness curricula.
recovery capacity
Educate residents and visitors | Environmental Youth | Partner with local non-profit organizations to Featured $140,000
about the importance of natural | Education provide educational materials and mini-courses for
and cultural resources for the Community youth on natural and cultural resources.
resiliency of our Community
al
Section V: Additional materials Page 123, @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
Ls
Cee Eee Ce oe eed eee ad
ne Regional
ered Deen Dee eed Bas Pee ore
meld (Y/N)
Protect existing housing stock to | Implementation of _| Based on results of feasibility study, design and Featured ‘Over $10,000,000
make it more resilient microgrid, smartgrid | construct one or more electric power resiliency
and/or cogeneration _| projects.
solutions for NYCHA.
and Mitchell-Lama
Properties
Repair and make more resilient | Adaptive Reuse of the | Undertake necessary construction to complete the Featured $15 to $20 million
damaged and/or underutilized Manhattan Beach adaptive reuse of the Manhattan Beach Bathhouse
cultural resources Bathhouse for year-round Community uses.
Explore opportunities to expand | Mermaid Avenue Revitalize the Mermaid Avenue commercial corridor Featured ‘$2,200,000
‘economic activities throughout | Corridor through streetscape and landscape improvements
the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula | Improvements that would incorporate stormwater attenuation
measures.
Repair and make more resilient | City of New York ‘Support SIRR-recommended City project, currently ‘Additional N/A
damaged and/or underutilized | Coney Island Creek _| in feasibility phase. The project would construct Resiliency,
cultural resources Flood Control and revetment(s) and a tidal gate at the mouth of Recommendation
Restoration Project _| Coney Island Creek to mitigate flood risk to the Sea
Gate, Coney Island, and Gravesend neighborhoods.
‘The project may include a pedestrian/roadway link
across the revetment and restoration of wetlands
and recreational amenities. The Committee has
expressed particular support for the goals of
enhancing public access and uses that would
‘complement the objective of storm surge mitigation
Replace, repair, and upgrade | USACE Rockaway Urge the USACE to initiate an expedited study to ‘Additional '$8,000,000,000 Y
‘existing infrastructure to Inlet Surge Barrier —_| examine the feasibility of developing a surge barrier Resiliency,
improve its resilience to future | Feasibility Study or alternative measures at Rockaway Inlet to Recommendation
storm events. protect the communities both near and in Jamaica
Bay.
—KX—XKN\\W\)|)|)|)\)sssssssXXOoOoOsCcCc uc
Section V: Additional materials Page 124 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
——————
Dee Ree a See ed
ae ere
rer Ces reed Ce Ses eed eer ty Estimated Cost | Project
ei a
Protect existing housing stock to | Development of Develop mixed-use building that combines Additional $5,000,000
make it more resilient Mixed-Use Building | affordable housing units with service and outreach Resiliency
Space components targeted to specific family structures, | ‘Recommendation
including single parent and multi-generational.
Protect existing housing stock to | Enhancement of Enhance and create additional Cornerstone ‘Additional $100,000
make it more resilient Cornerstone Programs for youth and adults at New York City Resiliency
Programs at NYCHA | Housing Authority (NYCHA) Community Centers. | Recommendation
Community Centers
Replace, repair and upgrade | Enhancement of Explore ways to improve public transit options to ‘Additional $150,000 Y
existing infrastructure to Public Transit Options | the area for visitors and residents, including Resiliency
improve its resilience to future express subway service and expanded private and | Recommendation
storm events. public express bus routes.
Enhance response to natural Expansion and Develop plans to increase membership in, and ‘Additional $50,000
disasters by enhancing Enhancement of enhance effectiveness of, Brooklyn Community Resiliency
emergency response protocols CERTS Districts 13 and 15 Community Emergency Recommendation
‘and communication strategies Response Teams (CERTS). Plans would include
recommendations to ensure that CERT are
adequately staffed in a way that reflects the
diversity of the Southern Brookiyn Peninsula's
neighborhoods.
Protect existing housing stock to | Resilient Greenthumb | Support greening projects at community gardens to | Additional $20,000
make it more resilient ‘Community grow food and ornamental plants and provide Resiliency
Gardening Program | gardening education; implement a Resilient Recommendation
Greenthumb gardening program with multicultural,
multigenerational, and resiliency education
components; incorporate best practices into the
program to mitigate and capture water runoff.
al
Section V: Additional materials Page 125 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
——————
Dee Ree a See ed
ae ere
rer Ces reed Ce Ses eed eer ty Estimated Cost | Project
ei a
Protect existing housing stock to | Site Suitability Conduct site suitability analysis of currently vacant Additional $665,000
make it more resilient ‘Analysis and Pilot | and/or underutilized lands and conduct a pilot Resiliency
Construction of project to construct resilient housing using Recommendation
Resilient Homes on | mitigation and resiliency best practices.
Vacant or
Underutilized Lands
Replace, repair and upgrade | Street Repair and —_| Repair sinkholes, repave, and address other Additional | Over $10,000,000
existing infrastructure to Upgrade deteriorated road conditions along major road Resiliency
improve its resilience to future corridors. The project would include complete Recommendation
storm events. street improvernents such as providing dedicated
bike lanes and sidewalk repairs to encourage
pedestrian and non-motorized transport.
Protect existing housing stock to | Support Project Hope | Collaborate with New York State (NYS) Office of ‘Additional $100,000
make it more resilient ‘and Common Ground. | Mental Health to expand Project Hope programs to Resiliency
Program, better meet the needs of vulnerable populations in | Recommendation
the NYRCR Southern Brooklyn Peninsula
Community. Collaborate with Common Ground non-
governmental organization to support the homeless
or near homeless.
Replace, repair, and upgrade —_| Enhancement of ‘Support the City of New York in advocating for ‘Additional NA Y
existing infrastructure to Telecommunications | State and Federal regulatory changes, encouraging Resiliency (policy
improve its resilience to future better alignment in Federal, State, and local Recommendation | recommendation)
storm events. approaches to regulation, and push for reporting
and resiliency requirements that would lead to
better preparation, awareness, and response in the
event of extreme weather events.
al
Section V: Additional materials Page 126 @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
See eS
i, The Committee Members distributed announcements about Public
C. Public engagement process Engagement Events in their neighborhoods and businesses. Fiyers and
To ensure the success of the NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, electronic notices were also distributed to the businesses in the Community.
Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate (i.e., the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula) Plan, ‘The foundation of the public engagement process was the work of the
a broad-reaching public engagement strategy was established and Committee. The Committee coneidered lool issues, opportunities, and
implemented. The neighborhoods of the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula were Communiestion strategies and offered the public oprartentues. to provide
provided extensive opportunities for collaboration in three Public comments. at the conclusion of each. Planning ‘Committee, Meeting
Engagement Events and 12 Planning Committee Meetings between Summaries of the 12 Planning Committee Meetings and three Public
September 2013 and March 2014. Also, Committee Members and NYRCR Engagement Events are provided below.
representatives met with numerous Community groups, residents, and gag pr -
business leaders throughout the planning process, including NYCHA tenant
association leaders, senior centers, business groups, and civic organizations.
The Committee also performed a survey of Community businesses, to assess
their recovery and resiliency needs. More than 20 businesses responded, -
providing valuable input regarding Economic Development needs and i
‘opportunities. i AV Na)
The Public Engagement Events were designed to solicit feedback from the Fi | ) Vl)
Community regarding critical assets, strategies, and potential projects. \ ni J :
Meeting notices for Public Engagement Events were posted in multiple places aa ay J lf fe /
throughout each neighborhood in multiple languages (English, Russian, z P DDS F
Spanish, Mandarin, and Urdu) including, but not limited to: e >t etin,
* The Brooklyn Paper (local community newspaper); bs 4 ys
+The Russian Bazaar (local community newspaper); . a a
+ Subway stations, Coney Island Hospital, NYCHA lobbies, and senior
centers; \ L
+ Email distribution; a)
+ NY Rising website:
http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr/community/brighton-beach-
coney-island-manhattan-beach-and-sea-gate: Third Public Engagement Event, held on February 19, 2014, at MCU Park!”
+ Twitter: @NYStormRecovery; and
+ Facebook: NYStormRecovery.
Ce eee
Section V: Additional materials Page 127 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and organizations and groups that were considered important to include in the
Sea Gate Planning Committee Meetings process, especially as related to the development of a public engagement
plan. A preliminary discussion on possible dates and locations for the first
First NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate Public Engagement Event and the scheduling of the next Committee meeting
Planning Committee Meeting took place.
The first meeting of the Committee was held on September 23, 2013, at the
Shorefront YM-YWHA of Brighton-Manhattan Beach. The meeting was open _
to the public, as were all subsequent Planning Committee Meetings. The f ae =
meeting opened with introductions of the Committee Members. A = aoaes es a a
presentation was given introducing the NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney . ie ae a
Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate Plan process, the key elements, and " “8 =— " eal
the goals along with the methods for developing a Community vision and : A tof
conducting outreach. ried - _@ «.s*
— f.
Discussion topics included: bs x
+ Committee Members shared their knowledge, experience, and rN =
anecdotal information of the local impacts of Superstorm Sandy; y . iad
+ Maps showing risk areas and storm surge inundation areas were oo
discussed by the Committee; =
Second Public Engagement Event, held on November 12, 2013, at Abraham
+ A preliminary discussion on the geographic scope of the plan based Lincoln High School!”*
on the boundaries of the communities and important community
assets took place; Second NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea
* Coney Island Hospital and the Coney Island Complex were discussed Gate Planning Committee Meeting
as critical Community assets that warranted their inclusion in the The second Planning Committee Meeting was held on September 30, 2013,
geographic scope of the Community; at the New York Aquarium in Coney Island. At the meeting, the Committee
+The Committee reviewed the six major Recovery Support Functions; reviewed the key concepts of the NYRCR Plan and the boundaries for the
Community. The Committee addressed preparations for the first Public
+ Committee Members provided feedback on specifics related to Engagement Event as follows:
‘Community impacts in each of the Recovery Support Functions; and
ty impac *Y SUPP + The Committee discussed the format for the event. The Committee
* Preliminary asset maps were reviewed, with a number of additions evaluated the merits of a public open house with stations, a formal
proposed by Committee Members. presentation with break-out sessions, and smaller working groups
A discussion on public engagement then took place. The diversity of the that would review the draft vision statement, the list of Community
communities and the need to focus on ensuring that the needs of vulnerable assets and the Community needs and opportunities Identified to
populations were specifically addressed in the final reconstruction plan was date;
an important topic at the meeting. Committee Members provided names of
eee
Section V: Additional materials Page 128 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
+ The Committee decided that a formal presentation, to include a : D
background of the program and smaller working group sessions, ca
would be the best approach to promote participation; ro rN
+ The Committee reviewed and commented on the public engagement L /
contact list, which included non-profit organizations, day cares, -
schools and parent advocates, religious and cultural institutions, es 4
nursing homes, senior centers, and NYCHA tenant associations; rN f i
+ Outreach methods and a proposed press release and flyer were J = a
reviewed and discussed; - 7
By. 4
+ The need for translated outreach material and translator availability ca . x
at the Public Engagement Event was discussed; :
‘+ It was decided that material would be provided in English, Spanish, AS De,
Mandarin Chinese, Russian, and Urdu; and "EAN
+ The date and location for the meeting were discussed and \
determined to be October 22 at Abraham Lincoln High School. -
The Committee also participated in a visioning exercise designed to create a SS r/]
draft Community vision for the NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, t "
Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate Plan. Committee Members were asked to ‘Third Public Engagement Event held on February 19, 2014, at MCU Park?”?
first propose key words and phrases that they considered to be important
elements of a vision. All potential words and phrases were shared among the
Committee Members; after the words and phrases were considered,
Committee Members were asked to develop a vision statement in groups of
two to three members and report back to the larger Committee. Four teams
developed individual statements, and as a group, the Committee drew on the
four statements to create one vision statement that included aspects of all
four. The resulting vision statement was:
"Our vision is to empower and rebuild the diverse communities of the
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula to be prepared, vibrant, unified, and resilient in
facing the common economic, social, physical, and environmental challenges
in our coastal neighborhoods.”
Ln eed
Section V: Additional materials Page 129 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
Gm RHHRENS + Asin BREN cw von nasavc + cummnityRacensrvcin Progrem
SBD esters crests Roane Pee oS aire arene
ei cera Ce ee Ce
a0 saat a, pic a eo gy a
ee ie ee Pes Pa ae hg |
0 cape Mo SES ee ea reeae |
ae i ee? ap |
aang ee Rare ie a oe
Aaa Be. wee 4c, ZOOM —"a:00P, ue 7
Abmivars Linenin High Schaal) “0 = Peer er 2 2
Pra Ee ry ecco Saad | bene ne ae
Eee ate ee ier posse asec
ee ns
a ene
Yuu np nadacto sha tain Ranch, Conny and
FRAPS, iBrighton Beach, Coney “Aschatter Geazn are Sea Sete mere reticent
tant, HeeRinn DRESS ACERT Sah BE fe Hp Cort "Det wh he oot ve.
Sal ER ATLA MEETS, PARP RAN wehet ” , ee |
PELE AROT Et. £50 MIN RE CAEN TA TGR EA 7 al —— e908 are te
Sinhbochie oleshionezenne reteorenwres terme |
== RT es ren
[aes eee sat |
i ieee AER: Ae ARR iy Rea TORE ETON» £20
ET MINHA RUSH mre a) JERS ee ee
cAI Z See ee te
pe fc romalea Mente Sn Seat meenrentT TORESEY DEST
Ce
Chinese-language flyer for Second Public Engagement - —
Event, held on November 12, 2013" Flyer for Third Public Engagement Event, held on February
Ln eed
Section V: Additional materials Page 130 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
See eS
All Committee Members then had the opportunity to discuss and add to the
The Committee also approved the addition of the Coney Island Complex and Strategies developed by the smaller workgroups and prioritize. the key
Coney Island Hospital as part of the geographic scope of the plan. Updated regies.
asset inventory maps, which included new items from the first Committee The strategy exercise was followed by discussions of potential rebuilding and
meeting, were presented and discussed, and the Committee noted additions revitalization projects in each of the six Recovery Support Functions. The
and changes. Preliminary discussions on potential strategies and projects in Committee reviewed a draft list of projects that the City and its agencies
the areas of Community services, economic development, socially vulnerable were undertaking.
populations, housing, infrastructure, and natural resources also took place. {follow-up discussion and final preparations forthe frst Pubic Engagement
Event took place. Committee Members reviewed and approved the final fiyer
Thi WRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate and poster that would be used for outreach. The date and location for the
9 9 second Public Engagement Event was also discussed and decided.
The third Committee meeting was held on October 9, 2013, at the New York
‘Aquarium in Coney Island. The meeting provided an opportunity for the Fourth NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea
Committee to review and add to the previously identified assets, examine Gate Planning Committee Meeting
tisk area maps, and discuss resiliency strategies. The fourth Committee meeting was held on October 24, 2013, at the New
Recovery Support Functions and reconstruction strategies were addressed in York Aquarium in Coney Island. The meeting opened with a review of
detail as follows: feedback from the first Public Engagement Event. The Committee at this
. meeting reviewed the draft content of the NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney
The Committee reviewed the sk Recovery Support Functions in Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate Conceptual Plan. The Committee
preparation for the next step in the planning process: developing
reconstruction strategies; Members provided comments and feedback, which were incorporated into
* the NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach and Sea Gate
* For some Recovery Support Functions, the Committee broke into Conceptual Plan.
smal working groups According to Individual members’ areas of Preparations for the second Public Engagement Event were also discussed at
‘pertise; this Committee meeting.
+ The Committee participated in an exercise to identify reconstruction
strategies in each of the Recovery Support Functions;
* They considered the community's vision statement, damaged assets,
Community needs and opportunities, the needs of vulnerable
populations, and community strengths;
* For each of the Recovery Support Functions, the Committee
brainstormed elements from the vision statement and needs and
‘opportunities previously identified by the Committee; and
* Each Committee member worked on a different Recovery Support
Function and then shared his or her list of proposed strategies with
the whole Committee.
ee eee ee eee
Section V: Additional materials Page 131 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
ys ‘Sixth NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate
( Planning Committee Meeting
= The sixth Planning Committee Meeting was held on December 10, 2013, at
i the New York Aquarium in Coney Island. The focus of this meeting was
| project selection and refinement. Funding sources were briefly discussed in
: an effort to illustrate that funding sources other than Community
~ Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funds might be
: ) available for projects.
Ny . A project inventory list was presented to assist Committee Members with
| understanding current and planned projects in the area, to avoid duplicative
V4 efforts, to identify plans and projects that could be capitalized on, and to
f 1 y identify areas where needs were not being addressed.
} y The focus of the meeting was on project selection in the Recovery Support
\ Sl Functions of Community Planning and Capacity Building and Housing. For the
— first function, Community Planning and Capacity Building, the Committee
4 — discussed specifically expanding CERTs, disaster planning, and emergency
h centers. For the second function, Housing, the Committee agreed to examine
\ and evaluate projects to serve vulnerable populations such as the elderly and
s i those with lower income levels.
First Public Engagement Event, held on October 22, 2013°7°
Seventh NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea
Fh NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate Gate Planning Committee Meeting
The seventh Planning Committee Meeting was held on December 16, 2013,
York Rusconi Cone Tene the sceting open 75 2013, at the New at the New York Aquarium in Coney Island. This meeting was similar to the
Second Public Engagement Event. Votes tallied from this meeting indicated projects, meeting in eg acai s recentaton on ee
the public favored addressing eee ar roo act we see infrastructure protection methods, including a large-scale citywide surge
vrcented barrier, breakwaters to redirect wave energy, floodwalls, and a levee system.
After reviewing the second Public Engagement Event, the Committee
finalized strategies for the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula in an interactive
working group session. The Committee Members worked to combine and
broaden approximately 32 strategies into 16 strategies. This work
represented a shift for the Committee from focusing on assets, risks, and
‘opportunities to focusing on strategies, projects, and risks.
Ln eed
Section V: Additional materials Page 132 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
See eS
packets containing a list of potential projects for the Recovery Support
Function of Health and Social Services, a composite ranking of all Proposed
a — Project considerations, and project evaluation and ranking spreadsheets for
— me the Proposed, Featured, and Additional Resiliency Recommendations. After
— —_ discussing the nine projects for Health and Social Services, the Committee
a - Members participated in an exercise that included a vote on the Proposed
' ee: Projects from 1 to 13 (13 being the lowest score). The purpose of the voting
Be @ ay Pwr) S was to develop a complete list of Proposed Projects. The Committee had a
P _—— oat ie vigorous discussion of the 13 Proposed Projects.
: “= =e Tenth IWYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate
ai Planning Committee Meeting
The tenth Planning Committee Meeting was held on February 12, 2014, at
the New York Aquarium in Coney Island. The goal of the meeting was to
reach a consensus on the selection of Proposed Projects. The Committee
reviewed results of a qualitative analysis that considered feasibility, cost, and
funding for the identified projects. The Committee discussed’ Proposed
Projects for potential CDBG-DR eligibility. Three project categories were
determined: Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional Resiliency
7 Recommendations.
Planning Committee Meeting’ ‘The Committee discussed the upcoming Public Engagement Event scheduled
Eighth NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea for February 12, 2014.
Gate Planning Committee Meeting The proposed format for the Public Engagement Event was an open house,
The eighth Committee meeting was held on January 9, 2014, at the New with Brojects resented by Recovery Support Function to members of the
York Aquarium in Coney Island. The purpose of this meeting was to further ‘ommunity, who would then have an opportunity to vote on the projects
refine the project list for the Recovery Support Functions of Natural and they considered most important to meeting the needs of the Community. A
Cultural Resources and Economic Development. For example, the Committee draft flyer was provided for Committee review and approval.
decided to combine three project proposals related to replacing trees,
protecting trees, and landscaping on the Oriental Boulevard median. They seventh NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea
also decided to tie together workforce development projects with other Gate Planning Committee Meeting
vocational training programs. The eleventh Planning Committee Meeting was held March 4, 2014, at the
New York Aquarium in Coney Island. The Committee was provided a
Ninth NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate summary of the results of the third Public Engagement Event. The
Planning Committee Meeting Committee then reviewed each of the Proposed Projects and Featured
The ninth Planning Committee Meeting was held on January 22, 2014, at the Projects in preparation for a ballot vote. The Committee discussed all
Shorefront YM-YWHA in. Brighton. Beach, ‘Committee Members received outstanding issues, posed final questions, and reviewed the ballot
SSS ee ee eee ee eel
Section V: Additional materials Page 133 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Pan
See eS
collectively. The amended ballot included 15 Proposed and 4 Featured prepared by the Committee and add words or phrases that they considered
Projects. Each Committee member was then asked to fill out and return his important. Maps of assets in each Recovery Support Function were made
cr her ballots indicating a yea, nay, or abstention for each project. available at stations and Community members were asked to add any
institutions, facilities, or other assets that were important to the Community.
Twelfth NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Participants were also asked to review the preliminary list of projects created
Gate Planning Committee Meeting by the Committee and add additional project ideas. Information was
‘The twelfth Planning Committee Meeting was held on March 25, 2014, at the recorded at stations, ut was aso ejected from participants on comment
New York Aquarium in Coney Island. The Committee identified four a 9 -
categories that were most suited for the New York Rising to the Top
competition and assigned Committee Members to prepare draft text for the
entire Committee to review prior to the Co-chairs submitting it to the State y
by March 31, 2014. The Committee then reviewed the project profiles from 2 \ J ;
the draft NYRCR Plan to identify any specific concerns of Committee = \ i
Members. Sanco ie jw ml
Public Engagement Events aad | | vw
First Public Engagement Event TS sae lS =
The first Public Engagement Event was held on October 22, 2013, at 4 a”
Abraham Lincoln High School in Coney Island; the event had approximately
121 attendees. The Public Engagement Event was designed to provide an -
overview of the NYRCR Program, while engaging Community members to i
review and provide feedback on the geographic Community reconstruction *
boundary, the draft Community vision statement, Community assets and 5
needs, and potential projects. Participants were provided a brochure
detailing the background of the NYRCR Program, the evening's agenda and “tPubik war held ve
the process for the meeting, and a summary of each station. Participants Second Public Engagement Mesting, held on November 12, 2013, at
were also provided a feedback form to encourage their input and raham Lincoln High School
Participation. Second Public Engagement Event
ww RCR erighton Beach Coney island) ranhation each, and Sea Gale The second Public Engagement Event was held on November 12, 2013, at
lanning Committee Co-Chairs opened the meeting with welcoming remarks Abraham Lincoln High Schoo! in Coney Island; this event had approximately
and an overview of the process to date. The New York State representative ee atrandece
gave a short presentation on the NYRCR Program. *
The focus of the second Public Engagement Event was a review of the
Parants were then asked to go to each stato to revw mate ask tage thatthe Comme ha developed td Parpants were
Participants were given the opportunity to review the draft vision statement Provided @ brochure that detalled the background of the program, the
en eee
Section V: Additional materials Page 134 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
SSS
agenda for the evening, and the strategies in each of the Recovery Support _ format provided project stations that included project boards and that were
Functions. Participants were also provided feedback forms. staffed by Committee Members to answer questions from the participants.
The project boards contained pictures, criteria rankings, maps, and prompts
‘After a brief PowerPoint presentation, participants were asked to rank the g 7 Maps,
Y for the public to identify how much they supported a particular Proposed or
top wo to hee strates in ach Refover Support Function besed onthe tre oj. Patan were hated 2 Proj! Elation Feedback
z Form, which listed all the projects and allowed the participant to provide
strategies recommended by the Committee or Community to date. feedback. Forty-three feedback forms were collected at the end of the night,
Committee Members were available to discuss each function and the and community members filled out an additional ten surveys online. The
strategies recommended for each. Committee Members also took additional Committee Members reviewed the total of 53 responses.
notes on ideas and concepts provided by partidpants. Throughout the conference room, members of the public and the Committee
Participants provided feedback on the evening's events and ideas on other Members held in-depth and passionate conversations. The event lasted for
strategies on comment cards, which were collected at the end of the several hours with participants taking the time to study project boards and
‘evening's event. ask questions.
Third Public Engagement Event
The Third Public Engagement Event was held on February 19, 2014, at MCU
Park in Coney Island and had approximately 56 attendees. An open-house
ee —_——oo
Section V: Additional materials Page 135 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
The demographics of the four communities on the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula are summarized in Table V-3.
Table V-3: Southern Brooklyn Peninsula Demographic Profile
a nen Manhattan cori)
(ced Total | % | Total | % | Total | %
[Medianage Ta Ta a0
Median Household Income $37,912 $33,263 $80,961 $60,255

Veteran Status

| Civilian Population 18 and over [26,284 {100 [39,405] 100 [3,731 [100 [ 3,538] 100 |

[ GivilianVeterans a8 | 2% | eas | am | 96 | 3% | 105 | 3% |

[Underig T5254 i% [7.677 [17% | 882 | 19% [1,066 [23% |

[withadisabiity tov {2% [232 am | te | 2% | oa | 9% |

[As-e4Years | 19,508 [62% [26,422 [57% | 2,592 | 57% | 2,856 [62% |

[with adisabiity 205 7% [3,280 [12% [as | 5% [332 | 12% |

[Population SYears&Over [30,018 fT a5av7 fT aaa 4s28t |

[EngishOnly 4508 15% | 18,866 [42% | 1,596 | 36% | 2,502 | 55% |

[Language other than English | 25,510 [85% [26,311 [58% | 2,886 | 64% | 2,026 [45% |

[Prareeenever [eral ony ee Se ee] ee] |

well”
[Spanish 3644 [tame [5.237 | ta% | er | 1% [256 [6% |
[mrarenesnevey [ley =] ey = TT PT
well”

SS
Section V: Additional materials Page 136 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
Corny ener)
cs oop Ori) aah Sea Gate
| Total | % Total | % | Total | % | Total | %
Other Indo-European Languages | 18,989 | 63% | 16,544 37% | 2,681 | 60% | 1,373 | 30% |
ii ed
well”
‘Asian and Pacific Languages 3e81{ 8% [7] 0% [es [2% |
ee | ey ee eee
well”
Other Languages [673 | 2% [sao [am [ ta | 3% [3291 7% |
ic ala
well”
‘Sources: Population Data: American Community Survey http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/isf/pages/index.xhtml Veteran Status,
Disability Status, Language Spoken at Home, & Household Income: American Community Survey http: //factfinder2,census.aov Table DPO2
Selected Social Characteristics in the United States 2008-2012 American Community Survey 5 Year Estimates and Table $1901 Income in the past
12 months (in 2012 inflation adjusted dolas) 2008-2012 American Community Survey 5 Year Estimate. Note: Census tracts forthe four CR
communities are: 308, 314, 326, 328, 330, 336, 340, 342, 348, 350, 352, 354, 356.01, 356.02, 360.01, 360.02, 362, 364, 366, 610.4,
610.02,612,616, and 620.
SS
Section V: Additional materials Page 137, @

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Se]
D. Community asset inventory
This section provides additional detall on the risk assessment process
—— SSS described in Section II. All Community assets are presented in the tables
ants es below, along with their landscape attribute scores and final risk scores.
—= These scores were derived using the methodologies described in Section II.
Table V-4 lists the risk scores for the economic assets in the Community,
OT KRIS Table V-5 lists the risk scores for health and social services assets in
onuysomer ~ the Community, Table V-6 lists the risk scores for the housing assets in the
Community, Table V-7 lists the risk scores for the infrastructure assets in the
oo Community, Table V-8 lists the risk scores for the natural and cultural assets
bration ORC in the Community, Table V-9 lists the risk scores for the systems asset
aS groups, and Table V-10 lists the Asset Inventory for the Community.
ae
—= ae
eS
Sample project boards used for the third Public Engagement Event, held on
February 19, 2014"”°
Ln eed
Section V: Additional materials Page 138 (2)

scp co nnn cesses comin
Table V-4: Risk Scores for Economic Assets in the Community
scone So
oi re
Nn ee Gc a a
ee
Section V: Additional materials Page 139 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table V-5: Risk Scores for Health and Social Services Assets in Community
Pee een eae tod | cee) | ca | Eeren | ccs | Coy
a
[esmowesey fe ff 3 fe
[ustedentom | ef ff
a
[eames fe ff
[resreee — g
[pseecnaoer
[somneonseme | re ff 3 fo
[emnensepotetmes we
fem mf
[eowntncnvensaer | ef ff
[Benders
[rewcnoniserewmrmae fe ff 3
[wan onaronrnee | we [> f 3 | = |
a
[coersowrenacowese | me ff 3 f
[emsowsomienee)
[eistmaneer | ff 3 fe
[enssmennansasames | me ff +f =
[ives cowmotmma we
[ecortansten stenerinsn | ees [3 f «| 3 |
[reverent fm | 2 ff
Section V: Additional materials Page 140 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
COT ee aod Pie oy eas si seek ote
EE
i
cS
a
en
a
Se
ee
[sertoninencwinccr me ff
Sc
[secetnameecr mm PY
[seevewtwargsene Pm PP
a
a
a
a
a
SS
[Sertetenshconmniyennt me ff
[Ascrmant Onsepretcononin iva) [veh [a] ||
ee
[renecurn rooontrseisenone | me fs
Ln eed
Section V: Additional materials Page 141 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
COT ee aod Pie oy eas si seek ote
[osavatncansnone ms Ps | Ts
a
ee
[Feraniipace Cm
a
ee
i
ee
[seremnsranowe Cm PY
a
a
[sexsinrinisoresioeoreensioe | vt |] |
a
a
a
[ienivencrecne ef
A
Ln eed
Section V: Additional materials Page 142 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

COT ee aod Pie oy eas si seek ote
Ln eed
Section V: Additional materials Page 143 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table V-6: Risk Scores for Housing Assets in Community
Cenc Pie oy eas si seek ote

[sercuesimerinvessions | || ||
Se
[caeriendsageroivaenane mf
[sirensansnpernivnesires | mm | P|
[secenairinimeiecs me PsP s
[rein ccanronvaesins | mm ||
i
I
[retentopiy acumen mm PP
a
i
[wowcoene Sm |
[wom swamarme Ym Ps
[wow comers mm P|
[womcmeree me
I
[wow ceranacseresy mm P|
I
[wow cxeycoas Cm
[mower im
ee

SS

Section V: Additional materials Page 144 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Deter cocd cee ey eas Exposure Teeny re eed
[ntti vatnevimescmneons) | nan || P|
i
[neccnon,seniex Geen) mm P|
i
[rine roaoviewe@wmay mf
[neschon um roxcoomasam | mm [P|
i
[necchom simewtrowscaemy | mm [| |
[sectertones mm P|
a
a
[stmertoceermainaes |e |
a
[cowrsowstews Cm
a
Ln eed
Section V: Additional materials Page 145 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island Manhattan Seach, and ea Gate Nt Rng Conant Recon Fen
Table V-7: Risk Scores for Infrastructure Assets in Community
Infrastructure Asset aaa
[conertsondcompes fie
[Aone mess -Gronsey Toe PT
[aomicepress ssf oe Pe
[Setem Tansporation Cop fie PP
[ove Transporaton to Pe
[wen Retoe toe
[Robin Transporation oh PP
[Tomessuses ec toe Pe
[rotoneacnstaten toh PP
[ose Parkway Staton ote Pe
[wastes My Aqrimsavon Tigh PT
[one iond seen staton fight
[NereneAvenvestton oe Pe
[Disc FacttySantaton Gorge Toh Pe
[weedsemgeste oh
EY
Section V: Additional materials Page 146 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island Manhattan Seach, and ea Gate Nt Rng Conant Recon Fen
Table V-8: Risk Scores for Natural and Cultural Features Assets in Community
rere SS a
Section V: Additional materials Page 147 (2)

Natural & Cultural Asset Risk Area | Hazard | Exposure | Vulnerability | Risk score
[usencmnreomnwos | mm ||
[oscormmvenincr wef
[wainsesme
[nimetomas
a
[svenwemanncows we fT
[fecha servation
[sewriwavisyhoie
[sewrawuse
[sawensienneimmgneeeme es
a
a
[sear cea eee [5
a
[sin RR |
[aewiowro
[en Se
[Sesseetrree es
a
[mewn secveas es

ee
Section V: Additional materials Page 148 (2)

Table V-9: Risk Scores for Systems Asset Groups
a [system | Risk Score
ee
Section V: Additional materials Page 149 (2)

‘Table V-10: Asset Inventory
|
, al | tosare baie

croson ae | remntna | Stance’ | Seoetaton | ‘Be eed, | Asseton | Landcape
ome crtical | community | SLteorper |store "| canaraceato | Seen | tg, | yacttting | “i

Facility Value yearor | defense or | — anticipated estat ner leer ao

stim | “anand” | Sensor | rons, | Saeaee® | getmea | ay

ven, | Seater | sce | “ona
=
| Jw | mo | ves | ves | ves | vee | | 2 | oo | o |e |
[cura | tg | economic | io | tw fo | of ves | ves, | ves [ves Sf 2 Ts [00 | 4 | a6 |
| [wo [to ves ves ves ves 40 Ta | ]
[Neptune Avenue Commercial Gonrdor_ | High | Economic | io | este [no | no [ves | ves [ves [ves Sf 2 | sf 00 | 4 | a6 |
| [wo [to ves ves ves ves 300 Ta | |
| suréavenue Commercial Corridor | igh | economic | io | etium [no | sof ves | ves [ves [ves Sf 2 Ts 00 | 4 | a6 |
| [vo [vo [ves ves [ves [ves 2 sf 00 [os | a |
| PS 100 The Coney stand School | igh | Health and Social Services | Yes, FEMA | Medium [No [No | ves | ves [ves [ves ~[ 2 | 3 | 300 | 2 | |
[PsieeMichaclEperty | igh | Health and Sociatsenvces | ves,rewa | medum [no [no [ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [3 [soo [ 3 | 27 |
[S225 ThetilenEZagin | High | Health and Social Services | Yes, FEMA | Medium [No [No | ves | ves [| ves, [ves [2 | 3 | 300 | 2 | |
[psp igh [ Hettn and Sociatserices | ves,rewa | medum [no [no [ves ves [ves [ves sf 2 Ts [00 | 3 | a |
[PS 288 The Shiney Tanyhil | igh | Health and Social Services | Yes, FEMA | Medium [No [No | ves | ves, [ves [ves [2 | 3 | 300 | 4 | |
[psazosursde | igh | Health and Sociatsenvces | ves,rewa | medum [no [no [ves | ves, [ves [ves [2 [a [00 | 3 | 27 |
['PS90 Edna Cohen School | High | Health and Social Services | Yes, FEMA | Medium [No [No | ves | ves, [ves [ves ~[ 2 | 3 | 300 | 3 | |
[1s 303 Herbert Seisenbera | High | Health and Sociatsenvces | ves,rewa | medum [no [no [ves ves, [ves [ves [2 [a [soo [ 3 | 27 |
[ Mark Twain 1S 239-Gited & Talented [High | Health and Social Services | Yes, FEMA | Medium [No [ves | ves ‘| ves [ves [ves [| 25 | 3 | 350 [ 3 | |
[psa igh [Heath and Sociatserices | ves,rewa | medum [no [no [ves | ves [ves [ves [2s [00 | 2 [as |
[Abraham Lincoin High School | igh | Health and Social Services | Yes, FEMA | Medium [No [no | ves | ves [ves [ves [2 | 3 | 300 | 2 | |
[iberation Diploma Pus | High | Health and Sociatsenvces | ves,rewa | medum [no [no [ves ves, [ves [vss [2 [3 [soo | 4 | 36 |
| Rachel Garson HS for Coastal Studies [High | Health and Social Services | Yes, FEMA | Medium [No [No | ves | ves [ves [ves ~[ 2 =| 3 | 300 | 4 | |
[wim E Grady Career and Tech | igh | Health and Sociatsenvces | ves,rewa | medum [no [no [ves ves [ves [ves [2 [3 [00 | 2 | as |
[psmi igh [Health and Social Services | Yes, EMA | Medium [No [no [ves [ves [ves [ves | 2 3 | 300 | 3 | |
[ Coney isiand Prep Public Charter School | High [Health and Social servces | ves,rewa | medum [no [no [ves | ves, [ves [ves [2 | a [00 | 3 27 |
| Mazel Day School (FREE) | High | Health and SocialSenices | ves,rema | medium [no [no [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 | 3 [00 | 4 | 36 |
[pSi95 Manhattan Beach | igh | Health and Social Services | Yes, FEMA | Medium [No [no | ves —'| ves, [ves [ves ~[ 2 =| 3 [| 300 | 2 | |
| on M Goldstein High School Sciences | High | Health and SocialSenices | ves,rewa | medium [ no [ves [ves [ves [ves [ves [as [3 [aso [ 2 | aa |
‘Mesivta & Yeshiva Gedolah of Manhattan

Bon” | sign |ientnandsoxstsenecs | ves tena | ren | no | no | ves | ves | ves | ve | 2 | 2 | 200 | 3 | » |
[2vi Dov Roth Academy of veshiva Rambam | Extreme [Heath and Socalsenices | ves rewa | eum [no [no [ves | ves, [ves [ves [2 Ts [oo | 3 | a6 |
| [wo [to ves ves ves ves 300 Ta | |
| [wo [no [ves ves [ves [ves fT 00 | 4 [a6 |
| [so [vo [ves ves [ves [ves fT sf 00 fs | a |
| [wo [to ves ves ves es es 00 Ta |
_
Section V: Additional materials Page 150 (2)

‘Asset Information Landscape Attributes |
' | Erosion Rate | frequently at | absent, not | Yegetation | BFE, eroding, | Asseton | Landscape
Risk Critical Community | 21 foot per shore constructed to ‘ion: wer i
Area acility falue i ce a flood Bluff slope or filled Ces" =
unknown —— ee ‘source unstable, wetland 40.5)

Engine 318, Ladder 166 | ‘high | Health and Social Services ves,rewa | wigh [vo [ves [ves [ves [ves [ves [as sf sso [2 [aa |
Engine 246, Ladder 169 | igh | Wealth and Social Services vesreva | edum | no [no [ves ves [ves [ves fa [af a00 | 2 [ae |
EMS Station 43 | ‘nigh [ Health and Socal Services Were Po ves ves ves fives fe sf s00 [2 | ae |
Sea Gate Police Department | igh | Health and Social Services vesrema | medium | no [no [ves [ves [ves [ves [af a | a00 | sas
permanently closed) fA Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 25 |
Shorefront Jewish Geriatric Center | nigh _ | Health and Social Services vesrewa | igh [vo [vo [ves ves [ves [ves [2s [00 [2 | a8 |
Rehabilitation Center igh __| Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA Yes Yes Yes Yes 2 |
Sea Crest Health Care Center | igh | Heath and Social Services vesrema | medium | no [no [ves ves [ves [ves fa [a soo | a | a6 |
Shore View Nursing Home | ‘high | Health and Social Senvices Were ve Po ves ves ves fives fs P00 Ts | a6 |
Mermaid Health Center [igh |Health and Social Services YesremA | Wedume | vo | no [ves ves [ves [ves fafa 300 | a [a6 |
CenterLight Healthcare | ‘high | Health and Social Senvces Yes fem | Med {vo | uo [ves ves [ves [ves fs fT s00 [sf a |
Sheepshead Bay Renal Care Center [igh |Health and Social Services Were [Meum] vo | no [ves ves [ves [ves fafa a00 [sf a7 |
Catholic Charities | ‘high | Health and Social Senvces Yes fem | Med {vo | no [ves ves [ves [ves [2 sf 00 [2 [ae
Haber House Senior Center [igh |Health and Social Services YesreMA | Medume | vo | no [ves ves [ves [ves fafa a00 | a [a6 |
Salt and Sea Mission Church, Tne. | ‘high | Health and Social Senvces Yes fem | wed {vo | no [ves ves [ves [ves fs s00 fs | a6 |
Shoreont Jewish Community Counc | High | Heath and Social Services Were Meime | vo | no [ves ves [ves [ves fn fa Tao [sf |
2 Pe te te tee
food pantry location) igh___| Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA Yes Yes Yes Yes 2 |
Infirm igh___| Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA Yes Yes Yes Yes 2 |
Trump Outreach Program for Seniors NORC_| High _[ Health and Social Services Yes fem | wed {vo | uo [ves ves [ves [ves [2 sf 00 [2 [ae |
ASA Warbasse Cares NORC [igh |Health and Social Services YesreA [Meum] vo | no [ves ves [ves [ves fa ff 300 [sf a7 |
Trump Vilage Nore | ‘high | Health and Social Senvces Yes fem | Med {vo | no [ves ves [ves [ves [2 sf 00 [2 [ae
Urban Neighborhood Services, Ine [igh |Health and Social Services YesreMA | Medume | vo | no [ves ves [ves [ves fafa a00 | a [a6 |
The Friendship Cree | ‘high | Health and Social Services Yes rem | Swed] vo [no [ves ves [ves [ves [2 sf s00 Ts | a6 |
Coney Island Hospital Heath and Social Services vesrema | igh | no [no [ves ves [ves [ves | a fa aso [os [ae |
Coney Island Community Day Care Center| High _[ Health and Social Services (SA ne Pt ves ves Pes ves Pfs 300 Ps as
Polce Athletic League, Ine [igh | Health and Social Services [oF testi] no fo ves ves [ves ves fe af a0 | + | a6 |
Roberta Bright ChildCare Center | ‘high | Health and Social Senvces [ito [Titec fo fo ves ves Pes ves Pfs 300 [a 36 |
Bam Bam's Playhouse [igh | Health and Social Services [oF testi] no fo ves ves [ves ves [af 300 | 2 [ae |
Buratino interational Day Cae, ine. | High | Health and Social Services [oF resem Yo fo ves ves [ves [ves [2s [300 [2 [a8 |
nderela Day Care Centr, Ine | ‘high | Health and Social Services [nto [Fieri fo fo ves ves Pes ves Pfs 300 Pe fas |
Europe igh___| Health and Social Services Yes Yes Yes Yes 2 |
M.S. Sunshine Day Care Center [nigh [Health and Socal Services [ete no Po ves ves Pes ves Ts 300 Ts a |

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Asset Information Landscape Attributes |
Dunes
i Protective | absent, below
Waterline | Shore defenses Eee
Erosion Rate | frequently at | absent, not | Yegetation | BFE, erading, ail Fanenn
Risk ec Critical | Community | 21 foot per shore constructed to | Set and | vegetation; | barrierisland ‘ |
Area Facility Value ete | eaten | i sarcaiedl aa Siorsiope | or filed Cres" =
ae cS ay source unstable, wetland +05)
vegetation | deteriorating | Source ia
vegetation
Neshama Preschool [wich | Health and Social Services (NO no | to Tes ves ves [ves =| 2 | asf 300 | 4 [a6 |
Kinder Stuf 14 [igh | Health and Social Services [oF testi] no fo ves ves [ves ves [af 300 | 2 [ae |
Sunshine Childrens Daycare, LLC | ‘High [Health and Social Services [Noite no To ves ves ves ves | Taf 300 | 2 [ae |
Teremok V Day Care Center [ ‘high | Health and Social Sences [oF testi] no fo ves ves [ves ves fe af a0 [2 [ae |
Warbasse Nursery School [igh [Health and Social Services [Po item no To ves ves ves [ves TT af 300 | 3s | a |
Madeleine Jones Head Start [ ‘high | Health and Social Sences [oF ites] no fo ves ves [ves ves fe af a0 [sf a |
National Assocation of Family Dev Center | High | Health and Social Services [oF resi] io fo ves ves [ves [ves [2 fa [00 [sf 27 |
JASA Luna Park Senior Center | ‘high [Health and Socal Services [Noite no To ves ves ves [ves Te Ts [300 | 2 a
ASA Scheuer House of Coney Island Senior
Center igh___| Health and Social Services Yes Yes Yes Yes 2 |
JASA Shorefront Senior Center | ‘high [Health and Socal Services [Noite no To ves ves ves [ves | Taf 300 | 2 [ae |
Surf Solomon Senior Center [ ‘high | Health and Social Sences [oF ites] no fo ves ves [ves ves fe fa [a0 | + [a6 |
Vornado Hone oxaduls@sunis)_|_ Hoh | Henthandsecsenies [to Meum [10 | v0 [vs | vs] vw | vs | 2 [3 | s00 [3 | 27 |
‘Ocean View Manor Home for Adults (176
units) igh___| Health and Social Services Yes Yes Yes Yes 2 |
Surf Manor Home for Adults (200 unis) [High | Heath and Social Services [oF testi] no fo ves ves [ves ves fe sf a0 | + | a6 |
Abraham Residence I (75 units) | ‘high [Health and Socal Services [Foes no To ves ves ves [ves TT as [300 | + [a6 |
‘Abraham Residence II (Met Council Prj- 41
units) igh___| Health and Social Services Yes Yes Yes Yes 2 |
Evelin’s Wonderland, Inc,/ aka Happy
Towers Day Care Center Health and Social Services Yes Yes Yes Yes 2 |
[Fantasm ine | xtreme | Heath and Social Services [oF testi] no fo ves ves [ves ves fe af 400 [2 | 2a |
Kinderstuf 1 | ‘tigh _[ Health and Social Services [Portes no To ves ves ves ves PT af 300 | 3s | a |
Manhattan Beach Jewish Center [igh |Health and Social Services [iF ites] no fo ves ves [ves ves fe fa [a0 [3s | a |
JASA Manhattan Beach Senior Center| High | Health and Social Services [No went] o [of ves ves ves [ves | Tas [300 | 2 ae
Shorefront YM-YWHA of Brighton—Manhattan
Beach, Inc. igh _ | Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High Yes Yes Yes Yes 2 |
Kingsborough Community College [ign [Heath and Social Services WSR vo ves [ves ves [ves [ves fs [af aso [2 [a |
Sea Gate single amily residences | righ [Housing | io | edium [wo fo ves Tes [ves [ves Sf fs | 300 | os [Tae
Cee ONOMONNOMeMmmmm wo | no {ves {ves [ves [ves [2 {3 [300 | 4 | 36 |
Coney Island single-family residences | High | Housing | tvo | edium | of no ves Tes [ves [ves Sf fs | 300 | 4 | 6 |
PCAN ONOMOOMeMOMme wo | no {ves {ves [ves [ves [2 {a {300 | 4 | 36 |
Sea Gate multi-family residences | High [Housing | io | edium fo fo ves Tes [ves [ves Sf fs | 300 | os [Tas
anc ONOMONNOMeMGMmm wo | no {ves {ves [ves [ves [2 {a [300 | «4 | 36 |
Coney sland mult-amily residences | igh [Housing | odio [wo fo ves Tes [ves [ves Sf fs | 300 | 4 | 36 |
PAA ONOMOGOMeMGMOe wo | no {ves {ves [ves [ves [2 {a [300 | 4 | 36 |
Federation Employ. & Guidance Service | High [Housing | omer | no | no | ves, ves [ves [ves [2 Ts | 300 | 2 [ae]

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Commurity Reconstruction Plan
|
, Protective | absent, blow
Erosion Rate | trequenty at | "abseng not” | Yopetation | BFE eroding, | Asseton | Lendecape
Risk Critical | Community | 21 foot per shore constructed to ‘ond tion; ark
Area ee Faclity | Value | ~yearor | defense or | “anticipated” | S#s@tand | vegetation; | barierisland | Score
stim | “Sind” | canton or | fend | Shisiqne | geted” | (76% =
vegetation | deteriorating | Source ia
vegetation

[titespie ina igh [Housing To | Mesum [no | ino [ves ves [ves [ves =| 2 | as [300 | 3 | 2 |
[Program Development senices | wig | Housing | esuum [no fof ves_ ves, [ves [ves | fa | p00 | sf a7 |
Mo NOM |i no | no {ves [ves [ves [ves [2 | 3 [ 300 | « [36 |
(icin Stride Gardens | High | Housing oT Hino to Pes ves [ves [ves Pe Tf a0 | [ae |
|RivGHA, OtDivyer Gardens | ion [Housing oon no To Tes ves [ves [ves Tas [300 | + | a6 |
{ivi Coney teen | High | Housing oT iio Po Pes ves [ves [ves Pe fa 00 [sf 6 |
{nici Coney teland Sites) | Hick | Housing oT Hino tio ves ves [ves [ves fe Taf 300 [sf 36 |
(iVGHAConevisiand(Ste4@5) | Hon | Hows NO |e Mon] no [no [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 | a3 [300 | 4 | a6 |
|RiiA Goney teand (Sites) | High | Housing oT iio to Pes ves [ves ves Pe fa fa 00 | sf 6 |
(ROCHA, Garey Gardens 9 | ign [Housing oo no Po ves ves [ves [ves TT as [300 | + [a6 |
(Ri Habe | gt | csi to Tivo to ves ves ves [ves Pe fa 00 [sf |
[iitchelbtama,ScheverHouse(S7Unis) | Hoh | Hows NO ee Hone] no | no [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 | 3 [ 300 | « | 36 |
Mitchell-Lama, Warbasse Houses
[seu eee we | me | we | ve | ve | ve | > | s | so] « ||
|nitheletems) See Rise2(638,unie) | Wich | Housing oT Hi vo to ves ves [ves [ves fe Taf a00 [sf 6 |
[iiicheletama, Sea Rise i (@34unis) | Mion | Housing Noon] no To Tes ves [ves [ves TT as [300 | + [a6 |
Mitchell-Lama, Ocean Gate Houses (542
[i ee | me | we | ve | ve | ve f > [2 | soo] « |x|
|itheletams, Harbor View @aa-unte) | Wich | Housing | oT Hin vo fo ves ves [ves [ves fe Ts 300 | sae
Mitchell-Lama, Luna Park Co-Ops
LA | A
|itchelitama, Brighton House (Si unis) | Wich | Housing No [Metis] uo fo | ves ves | ves [ves Pe ff a00 | 4 [a6 |
(iitchelttama,SamBureHotsesGM6Uunis) | Hoh Hows NO |e Medume] no | no [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 | 3 [ s00 | « | a6 |
|StorefiontTovers | High | Housing oT iio to ves ves [ves [ves Pe TT a00 [sf 6 |
(Surecerdens | igs otsing ooo Po ves ves ves ves PT as [300 | + [a6 |
[iendeet Apartments | High | Housing No IT Hino Po Pes ves [ves [ves fn Tf 300 [is [ae |
|Sehieier House of MenhottanBescs | Wich | Housing oT Hin vo to ves ves [ves [ves fe Taf a0 [sf 6 |
[ScheterHotseofGrichion Beech | Moh | Hows NO ee Mome ey no [no [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 [| 3 [300 | + | 36 |
(feoneyitand St aad | High | Hocsing oT iio to ves ves [ves ves Pe Ta a0 [4 [6 |
[[Gceanview Manon |e Mion Housing SSNS SHORT no [no [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 | as [300 | + | a6 |
[coneyisand complex | nigh | infrastructure Systems| ves,renia | righ | no [no [ves ves, [ves [ves | a [a | 300 | 4 [a6 |
AEC | icine ONOMMG|MeMedomm no | no { ves [ves [ ves [ ves [ 2 | 3 [ soo | 2 [ae |
(ante tpress=surt | High | infrstctivesystems | NO Meum] yo | no [ves ves [ves [ves | a Ta | 300 | 2 [ae |
[{Gothamitransportaton Cop | Moh |infstuctnesistems NO |e Medume] no | no [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 | 3 [ s00 | 2 [a8 |
|oveteansporaton | High | infrstuctinesystems | NO Mesum] no | ves | ves | ves | ves [ves | as [a [aso [2 [a |
(ibe Retention intestictiesystems No wedimesy no [no [ves ves [ves [ves TT as [300 | 2 [ae |

: Protective | absent below
Erosion nate | Fruyuerty ot | shot not | “ogetation |/BPEeroding, | Aasston || Landacrpe
pene Gaitical_| Community | Eitootper | “sore” | contruciedto | SSM" | vegton, | pacrtnana | “Se
Facility Value year or defense or anticipated reea Bluff slope or filled Ces" =
wim | uptand | cinations or | cree | unaai, | wwetend | “c05)
vegetation | deteriorating | Source | wnetab
petation
| [vo [vo [ves ves [ves [ves ft sf 00 | 2 [ae |
| [no [no [ves ves ves [ves [Ts [300 [2 Tae |
[Brighton Beach station __'{ High | infrastructure systems __—| ves,rewa | medium [no [no [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 fs [00 [2 | ae |
[ocean ParkayStaton | Moderate | nrasructure Systems| ves Fema | edu [no | no [ves ves [ves [ves [2 [sf aso [2 [as
[wis street wy Aquarium statin | High | infrastructure systems | ves,rewa | medium [no [vo [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 fs [300 | 2 | ae |
[coneyisand-—sulwel Staion | wigh | nrasructure Systems| ves,Fema | edu [no [| no [ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [as [300 [2 ae |
[Weptune Avenue tation | wigh | inrasmuctwe systems | ves rma | esi {no | no [ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [as [300 [2 [ae |
| [vo [ves [ves [ves [ves [ves fas sf so [2 [aa |
‘No, Locally
|conmcssnsrectescommnniise | nigh [intowucesytens | Stott | wn | no | no | aes | es | es | es | 2 | a | a0 | a |» |
| [vo [vo [ves ves [ves [ves fs s00 fs [a6 |
[coneyisandstomwaterfacites | High | nrasructresystems__—| ves,fewa | wign [no | no [ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [sf 300 [3 | ay |
[wscrssnogeste | ign Lintsruresytens | Stent | nin | no | no | aes fs |e | es | 2 | a | soo | a | |
| [vo [vo [ves ves [ves [ves fs P00 [sf a7 |
[anata Beach tomate facies | igh | inrasructuresystems | vessfema| righ [no | no | ves | ves | ves [ves [2 [sf a0 [a | a7 |
| [vo [vo fo ves [ves [ves fas sf aso [a [30 |
[coney and powersuopy | igh | inrasructure systems | vessfema | wign {no | no | no | ves | ves | ves [as [3 [aso [3 [as |
| [wo [no [no ves ves es as [as fase [3
| Manhattan Beach powersupply | High | infrastructure systems | ves,rema | igh [vo [no [no ves [ves [ves fas fs [aso [os [as |
| [im | mw | ee fs [vw fe fs | soo | sf |
[Brighton Beach Library | High | Natural and cuturalResourees | No | medium [no [no [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 fs [300 | + [36 |
[coney sand bray | righ | natural and cuturatResoures [no | etm {no | no | ves | ves | ves [ves [2 [sf 300 [4 | a6 |
| [vo [vo [ves ves [ves [ves fs s00 fs [a6 |
[Larges SvcPeromed | tigh | natural and cuturatResources [no | Mesum [no | no | ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [sf a0 [3 | ay |
[ewan Chueh of Grist | High | natural and Gutuat Resources [no | Mesum [no | no [ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [as [300 [3 [a |
[Christian Mission of St Jo | High | Natural and CuturalResourees | No | Medium {vo [vo [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 fs [00 [sf a7 |
[comforting Unted Church of ist | woh | Natural and utralResources [no | Mesum {no | no | ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [3s [a0 [3 [a7 |
[Coney island Cathedral | High | Natural and CuturaiResourees | No | Medium [vo [vo [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 Ts [00 [sf a7 |
[coney ind Chursda | tg | Natural and cutratResources [no | medum [no | no | ves ves [ves [ves [2 [sf 300 [3 | ay |
[ Coney island Gospel Assembly | treme | Natural and CuturalResourees | No | Medium {no [ves [ves [ves [ves [ves [as fs [aso [os [Tan
[congregation GasdeiBressov | wigh | Natural and cuturalResources [no | Mesum [no | no | ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [3 [300 [3 | ay |
[Congregation Kneses israel | High | Natural and CuturalResourees | No | Medium [vo [vo [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 fs [00 | sf a7 |
[fetowshin Baptist church | High | natural and utratResources [no | Mesum [no | no [ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [sf a0 [3 | a7 |
[coreater ternal Light Ghurch [igh [Natural and CuturaiResourees [No [medium [vo [vo [ves ves [ves [ves fs P00 | os [a |
————————
Section V: Additional materials Page 154 (2)

: Protective | absent below

Erosion nate | Fruyuerty ot | shot not | “ogetation |/BPEeroding, | Aasston || Landacrpe
pene Gaitical_| Community | Eitootper | “sore” | contruciedto | SSM" | vegton, | pacrtnana | “Se

Facility Value or ea ee flood Bluff slope or filled ("Yes" =

wecwation | caterertng || saree | stable) | ween || 05)

petation

[Guardian Angel ReChurch {High | Natural and GuturaiResourees | No | Medium {vo [no [ves [ves {ves [ves [2 fs [00 | is | a7 |
[HoxzonCnistanFelowship | Moderate | natural and GuturalResources [no | Mesum {no | no | ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [sf aso [3 [as |
[Masjid Bab-Salam | High | Natural and CuturaiResourees | No | Medium [vo [no [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 Ts [00 [sf a7 |
[Neomiamezon Gnurh | tion | natural and cutratResources [no | Mesum [no | ves [ves | ves [ves [ves [as [3 [aso [3 [a2 |
[oftunar Park Gongregation | igh | Natural and CuturalResourees | No | medium [vo [vo [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 fs [00 [sf a7 |
[ourtsdyofsolaceCnuen | High | natural and cuturatResources [no | edu [no | no [ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [sf a0 [3 [ay |
[Redeemed Christan Chuo | wigh | Natural and Gutuat Resources [no | Mesum [no | no [ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [sf 300 [3 [a |
[St Pauls Evangelical utheran | High | Natural and CuturalResourees | No | medium [vo [vo [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 Ts [00 [sf a7 |
[unbroken chain Felowsto-ofe | High | natural and cutralResources [no | Mesum [no | no | ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [sf a0 [3 [a7 |
[ited Community Baptist Church | High | Natural and CuturalResourees | No | Medium [no [vo [ves [ves [ves [ves [2 fs [00 [sf a7 |
[warvasse Synagogue | High | Natural and cutratResources [no | edu [no | no [ves | ves [ves [ves [2 [sf a0 [3 [a7 |
[Zatiman efraim Rabbi | High | Natural and CuturalResourees | No | medium [vo [no [ves ves [ves [ves [2 Ts [300 [sf a7 |
[congregation NeorHachaimof una Pak | wigh | natural and uturalResources [no | ecu {no | no | ves | ves | ves | ves [2 [3 [a0 [3 | a7 |
! [vo [vo [ves ves [ves [ves fs P00 fs [a6 |
| [no [no [ves ves fos [ves [sf a00 [a a6 |
| [vo [vo [ves ves [ves [ves fs [00 [2 ae |
[weotne tayaround | righ | natural and cutratResources | no | ecm {no | no | ves | ves | ves [ves [2 [sf 300 [4 | a6 |
| [vo [vo [ves ves [ves [ves fs Tso [2 as
[coney and ceskPar | extreme | natural and cuturabResources | no | etm {no | no | ves | ves | ves [ves [2 [sf ao [2 | aa |
| [vo [ves [ves ves [ves [ves fas sf so [2 [aa |
[anhataneachpark | wigh | natural and cuturatResources | no | etm {no | ves | ves | ves | ves | ves [as [3 [aso [4 [oan |
| [vo [vo [ves ves [ves [ves [2 sf s00 [2 | ae |
[Holocaust Memorial ack | righ | natural and cuturatResources [no | ecm {no | no | ves | ves | ves | ves | 2 [sf 300 [2 [ae |
| [wo [ves [ves [ves [ves [ves ns [as [aso [a [ae
[Pubic promenade | igh | Natural andcuitural Resources| No | medium {vo [ves [ves ves [ves [ves fs fs [aso [2 [aa |
[wo [no ves ves ves ves 300 [6
———
Section V: Additional materials Page 155, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

ES

E. Endnotes + Sources: Population Data: American Community Survey

—— http://factfinder2,census.gov/faces/nav/isf/pages/index.xhtml; Veteran

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. "Sandy Damage Status, Disability Status, Language Spoken at Home, & Household Income:
Estimates by Block Group” (n.d.).. ‘American Community Survey http://factfinder2.census.qov Table DPO2
http://www.huduser.org/maps/map_sandy_blockgroup.htmi. Accessed Selected Social Characteristics in the United States 2008-2012 American
October 2013. ‘Community Survey 5 Year Estimates and Table $1901 Income in the past 12

? Healthcare Finance News. Mursing Homes and Home Health Agencies Face months (in 2012 inflation adjusted dollars) 2008-2012 American Community
Unique Challenges during Natural Disasters. Stephanie Bourchard, Survey 5 Year Estimate. Note: Census tracts for the four CR communities
November 8, 2012. Accessed March 2014. are: 308, 314, 326, 328, 330, 336, 340, 342, 348, 350, 352, 354, 356.01,
http: //www.healthcarefinancenews.com/news/nursing-homes-and-home- 356.02, 360.01, 360.02, 362, 364, 366, 610.4, 610.02, 612, 616, and 620.
health-agencies-face-unique-challenges-face-natural-disasters. "8 Tbid.

3 Amand, Lisa. “A Year After Sandy, Brightton Beach Struggles to Get Back "5 Tid.
‘on Feet: Storm and Weak Economy a One-Two Punch.” Forward: The +6 Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group
Jewish Daily. Published October 26, 2013. 1” Robert A. Caro. The Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of New York.
http:/forward.com/articles/186254/a-vear-after-sandy-brighton-beach- (New York, NY: Alfred A Knopf, Inc., 1974). Page 335.
struggles-to-get/?p=all#ixzz2viahZ3XS "8 Bird's eye view of Luna Park, Coney Island N. Y.

* Berke, Ned. "Checking in on Brighton Beach’s Businesses, Post Sandy.” http://diqitalgallery.nypl.orq/nypldiaital/id?836509
‘Sheepshead Bites. November 8, 2012. 18 Sources: Population Data: American Community Survey
http: //www.sheepsheadbites.com/2012/11/checking-in-on-brighton- http://factfinder2,census.gov/faces/nav/isf/pades/index.xhtml Veteran
beachs-businesses-post-sandy/ Status, Disability Status, Language Spoken at Home, & Household Income:

* Ibid. American Community Survey http://factfinder2.census.gov Table DPO2

Coney Island Complex.” NYC SUBWAY. N.p., n.d. Web. April 4, 2014. Selected Social Characteristics in the United States 2008-2012 American
http://www.nycsubway.org/wiki/Coney_Island_Complex. ‘Community Survey 5 Year Estimates and Table $1901 Income in the past 12

” Coney Island Hospital. About Coney Island Hospital .N.p., n.d. Web. months (in 2012 inflation adjusted dollars) 2008-2012 American Community
January 2014, Survey 5 Year Estimate. Note: Census tracts for the four CR communities
http: //www.nyc.gov/htmi/hhc/coneyisland/html/about/about.shtml. are: 308, 314, 326, 328, 330, 336, 340, 342, 348, 350, 352, 354, 356.01,

® city of New York. Community Development Block Grant—Disaster 356.02, 360.01, 360.02, 362, 364, 366, 610.4, 610.02, 612, 616, and 620.
Recovery: Partial Action Plan A. May 10, 2013. 81. ” Thid.

° Plate 35: Bounded by Gravesend Bay, Sheepshead Bay, Manhattan Beach Ibid.
and Atlantic Ocean. http://digitalgallery.nypl.org/nypldigital/id?1512337 ® Source: http://factfinder2.census.gov Table DP04 Selected Housing

10 “Brooklyn Community District 13.” New York City Department of City: Characteristics in the United States 2008-2012 American Community
Planning. Community District Profiles. 2013. Web. April 4, 2014. Survey 5 Year Estimates.
http: //www.bklynpublictibrary.ora/ourbrooklyn/brightonbeach/. 2 “USA Median Household Income.” ArcGIS. Last updated January 20,

4 Photo courtesy of Butch Moran 2014.Web. Accessed April 3, 2014.

2 “Brighton Beach.” Brooklyn Public Library. Our Brooklyn. Undated. Web. hittp://www.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.htmI?useExisting=1&layers
April 4, 2014. =da76de09076b4959ad005e1dc2c48049
http://www. bklynpubliclibrary.ora/ourbrooklyn/brightonbeach/. * Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group

el

Section V: Additional materials Page 156 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
* Ibid.
** Ibid. * Ibid.
27 Brooklyn Historical Society Blog. The Brooklyn Shore. Accessed March +” Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group
2014 http://brooklynhistory.org/blog/2011/06/03/the-brooklyn-shore/ 8 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Deaths Associated with
28 Manhattan Beach Hotel & Promenade, Manhattan Beach, N. Y. (1899- Hurricane Sandy, October — November 2012.” Morbidity and Mortality
1901). http://digitalgallery.nypl.ora/nypldigital/id?62039 Weekly Report. (May 24, 2013).
?° Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group http://www.cde.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6220a1.htm.
»° Sources: Population Data: American Community Survey Accessed October 2013.
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/isf/pages/index.xhtml Veteran 2° National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Sandy
Status, Disability Status, Language Spoken at Home, & Household Income: (AL182012) 22-29. October 2012 (February 12, 2013).
American Community Survey http://factfinder2.census.gov Table DP02 http://www.nhe.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Sandy.pdf. Accessed
Selected Social Characteristics in the United States 2008-2012 American October 2013.
‘Community Survey 5 Year Estimates and Table $1901 Income in the past 12 “© Long Island Newsday. State sets division of $2,097 billion in Sandy
months (in 2012 inflation adjusted dollars) 2008-2012 American Community recovery money. Jo Napolitano, February 18, 2014. Accessed March 2014
‘Survey 5 Year Estimate. Note: Census tracts for the four CR communities http://www.newsday.com/long-island/state-sets-division-of-2-097-billion-
are: 308, 314, 326, 328, 330, 336, 340, 342, 348, 350, 352, 354, 356.01, in-sandy-recovery-money-1.7124103
356.02, 360.01, 360.02, 362, 364, 366, 610.4, 610.02, 612, 616, and 620. “1 City of New York, A Stronger, More Resilient New York, Special Initiative
* Tid. for Rebuilding and Resiliency (2013).
® City of New York, A Stronger, More Resilient New York, Special Initiative http://www.nyc.gov/html/sirr/html/report/report.shtml.
for Rebuilding and Resiliency (2013). ® National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Sandy
http://www.nyc.gow/htmi/sirr/html/report/report.shtml. (AL182012) 22-29. October 2012 (February 12, 2013).
* Sea Gate Casino & Kalina's Baths buildings: Surf Av - W. 33rd St., http://www.nhe.noaa.gov/data/ter/AL182012_Sandy.pdf. Accessed
Brooklyn. 1934. http://digitalgallery.nypl.org/nypldigital/id?3984235 October 2013.
™ New York City Department of City Planning. “Bytes of the Big Apple.”
MaPLUTO shapefile. “4 “NYCHA Housing Developments.” New York City Housing Authority.
http://www.nyc.gow/html/dep/html/bytes/meta_mappluto.shtml. Accessed Undated. Web. Accessed April 3, 2014.
April 4, 2014. http://gis.nyc.gov/nycha/im/wmp.do;jsessionid=B6B64E2D25290687BF24
* Sources: Population Data: American Community Survey (00E2E66561B0?
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml Veteran *® http://amsterdamnews.com/news/2012/nov/14/nycha-announces-that-all-
Status, Disability Status, Language Spoken at Home, & Household Income: buildings-effected-by/
American Community Survey http://factfinder2.census.gov Table DPO2 “© City of New York. “Action Plan.” 81.
Selected Social Characteristics in the United States 2008-2012 American *” Photo courtesy of Jocelyn Augustino, FEMA
‘Community Survey 5 Year Estimates and Table $1901 Income in the past 12 “8 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, “Sandy Damage
months (in 2012 inflation adjusted dollars) 2008-2012 American Community Estimates by Block Group” (n.d.).
‘Survey 5 Year Estimate. Note: Census tracts for the four CR communities http://www.huduser.org/maps/map_sandy_blockgroup.html. Accessed
are: 308, 314, 326, 328, 330, 336, 340, 342, 348, 350, 352, 354, 356.01, October 2013.
356.02, 360.01, 360.02, 362, 364, 366, 610.4, 610.02, 612, 616, and 620. “° Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group
el
Section V: Additional materials Page 157 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

ES

*° Healthcare Finance News. ursing homes and home health agencies face *"http://www.nan.usace.army.mil/Media/FactSheets/FactSheetArticleView/ta
unique challenges during natural disasters. Stephanie Bourchard, bid/11241/Article/ 10006/fact-sheet-rockaway-inlet-to-norton-point-coney-
November 8, 2012. Accessed March 2014 island.aspx
http://www. healthcarefinancenews.com/news/nursing-homes-and-home- © Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group
health-agencies-face-unique-challenges-face-natural-disasters © ‘The City of New York Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency.

51 http://forward.com/articles/186254/a-year-after-sandy-brighton-beach- PlaNYC: A Stronger More Resilient New York (2013). Available at
strugales-to-aet/2p=all #ixzz2vahZ3XS http: //www.nyc.gov/html/sirr/html/report/report.shtml. Accessed October

* http://www.sheepsheadbites.com/2012/11/checking-in-on-brighton- 2013.
beachs-businesses-post-sandy/ ” Ibid.

33 Thid.. 71 The Wildlife Conservation Society, “WCS’s New York Aquarium Slated for

* htto://forward.com/articles/ 186254/a-vear-after-sandy-brighton-beach- Partial Reopening in the Late Spring of This Year,” Press Release,
struggles-to-get/2p=all #ixzz2vahZ3XS February 25, 2013. Available at http://www.wcs.ora/press/press-

55 New York Aquarium. "New York Aquarium Slated for Partial Reopening.” releases/nya-partial-reopening.aspx. Accessed October 28, 2013.
http://www.nyaquarium.com/media/headlines/nya-partial-reopening.aspx. ” Ballpark Digest, “2012 Baseball Attendance by Average” (September 24,
Accessed February 25, 2014. 2012). Available at

© wildlife Conservation Society, "WCS's New York Aquarium Slated for Partial http://www.ballparkdigest.com/201209245609/attendance/news/2012-
Reopening.” http://www.wcs.org/news-and-features- baseball-attendance-by-average. Accessed October 28, 2013.
main/announcement-nya-partial-reopening.aspx, Accessed February 25, ® U.S. Census Bureau, 2011 ZIP Code Business Patterns, Table
2014. CB1100CZ21. Available at

‘7A Stronger, More Resilient New York.” Southern Brooklyn chapter 17, http:/factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/ jsf/pages/productview.x
p.343. html2pid=BP_2011, 00CZ2&prodType=table. Accessed October 28, 2013.
http://www.nyc.gov/html/sirr/downloads/pdf/final_report/Ch17_Southern 7 Thomas P. DiNapoli, An Economic Snapshot of Coney Island and Brighton
Brooklyn FINAL singles.pdf Accessed February 25, 2014. Beach (July 2011), Report 8-2012, Office of the New York State

®* mathylde Frontus, Urban Neighborhood Services, Inc Founder and Comptroller. Available at htto://www.osc.state.ny.us/osdc/rpt8-2012.pdf.
Executive Director. www.uns-inc.org Accessed October 28, 2013.

°° Jewish Community Council of Greater Coney Island (JCCGCI) website. 75 U.S. Census Bureau, Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics. Data
www.jccgci.org/sandy generated using OnTheMap tool. Available at

© Flickr user Daniel Fleming. Licensed under Creative Commons. hittp://onthemap.ces.census.aov/. Accessed October 28, 2013.
https://flic.kr/p/aiFNRI 76 Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group

1 City of New York. “Action Plan.” 69. 7” New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation, “Coney Island Hospital

® Ibid. 70. ‘Again Receiving Ambulances,” Press Release, February 22, 2013.

® Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group Available at htto://www.nyc.gov/html/hhe/html/pressroom/press-release-

© Photo courtesy of Christopher Randazzo, FEMA 20130222-coney-island-ambulances.shtml. Accessed October 28, 2013.

5 Photo courtesy of Butch Moran 78 New York City Department of Education, School Search Tool. Available at

“ Flickr user drpavloff. Licensed under Creative Commons. hittp://schools.nyc.gov/default.htm. Accessed October 28, 2013.
https://flic.kr/p/dpNPKj ” Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group

SS

Section V: Additional materials Page 158 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
® Source: hittp://factfinder2.census.gov Table DP04 Selected Housing Income: American Community Survey http://factfinder2.census.qov
Characteristics in the United States 2008-2012 American Community Table DP02 Selected Social Characteristics in the United States 2008-2012
Survey 5 Year Estimates. American Community Survey 5 Year Estimates and Table $1901 Income
© Thid. in the past 12 months (in 2012 inflation adjusted dollars) 2008-2012
® Thid. American Community Survey 5 Year Estimate. Note: Census tracts for the
© hid. four CR communities are: 308, 314, 326, 328, 330, 336, 340, 342, 348,
* hid. 350, 352, 354, 356.01, 356.02, 360.01, 360.02, 362, 364, 366, 610.4,
8 Ibid. 610.02, 612, 616, and 620.
86 Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group ” Thid.
®” Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group 8 Thid.
®® Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group ® Ibid.
®° Metropolitan Transportation Authority, “Annual Subway Ridership.” 100 Thid.
Available at 101 Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group
http://www.mta.info/nyct/facts/ridership/ridership_sub_annual.htm. 122 Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group
Accessed October 28, 2013. 108
®° New York State Department of Transportation, Traffic Data Viewer. http://www.nyc.gow/html/sirr/downloads/pdf/final_report/Ch17_Southern
Available at https://www.dot.ny.gow/tdv. Accessed October 28, 2013. Brooklyn FINAL singles.pdf SIRR Report p.343.
™ Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group 108 Thid.
® Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group 105 Thid.
® Sources: Population Data: American Community Survey 196 Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group
http://factfinder2. census.qov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml Veteran 1°” Flickr user Jarek Mazur. Licensed under Creative Commons.
Status, Disability Status, Language Spoken at Home, & Household hittps://flic.kr/p/dphF'1)
Income: American Community Survey http://factfinder2.census.gov 108 Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group
Table DPO2 Selected Social Characteristics in the United States 2008-2012 * Source: http://factfinder2.census.gov Table DPO4 Selected Housing
American Community Survey 5 Year Estimates and Table $1901 Income Characteristics in the United States 2008-2012 American Community
in the past 12 months (in 2012 inflation adjusted dollars) 2008-2012 Survey 5 Year Estimates.
American Community Survey 5 Year Estimate. Note: Census tracts for the 0
four CR communities are: 308, 314, 326, 328, 330, 336, 340, 342, 348, http://www.nyc.aov/html/sirr/downloads/pdf/final_ report/Ch4 Buildinas
350, 352, 354, 356.01, 356.02, 360.01, 360.02, 362, 364, 36, 610.4, FINAL singles.pdf SIRR Report, p.71
610.02, 612, 616, and 620. 4 bid.
™ Thid. +2 Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy, New York University.
°° New York City Population Projections by Age/Sex and Bourough Sandy Effects on Housing in New York City. Accessed March 2014
http: //www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/pdf/census/projections_briefing_booklet.pd http://furmancenter.org/iles/publications/SandysEffectsOnHousingInNYC.
F Accessed March 14, 2014 pdf
°% Sources: Population Data: American Community Survey 3http://www.nyc.gov/html/sirr/downloads/pdf/final_report/Ch4_Buildings_F
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/ist/pages/index.xhtm| Veteran INAL sinales.odf SIRR Report p.75
Status, Disability Status, Language Spoken at Home, & Household 4 Thid.
SS
Section V: Additional materials Page 159 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ES
45 Thid. https://www.flickr.com/photos/urbanmkt/319666351/
46 Source: http://factfinder2.census.gov Table DP04 Selected Housing 13 Flickr user Roman Iakoubtchik, Licensed under Creative Commons
Characteristics in the United States 2008-2012 American Community hittps:// www. flickr.com/photos/iakoubtchik/8143532771/
‘Survey 5 Year Estimates. +33 Office of the Comptroller. “Economic Snapshot.” (1).
4? Tid. +4 Wolf, Kathleen L. “Business District Streetscapes, Trees, and Consumer
48 U.S, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Affordable Housing. Response.” Journal of Forestry. 108.3 (2005), 399.
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program offices/comm_planni 135 Flickr user Drpavloff, Licensed under Creative Commons
ng/affordablehousing/ Accessed March 14, 2014. hittps:// www. flickr.com/photos/niceimages/8150615685
449 Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group +36 Flickr user Luna Park NYC, Licensed under Creative Commons.
20 Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group https: //www. flickr.com/photos/lunaparknyc/8179639682/
2 Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group +37 New York Rising Community Reconstruction Program. NYRCR Program
+2 Flickr user DVIDSHUB, Licensed under Creative Commons Guidance to Firms, Project Evaluation, December 30, 2013. p. 3.
https://www.flickr.com/photos/dvids/8179270608/ 138 These costs could relate to reduced emergency and recovery
+3 Flickr user Bonnie Natko. Licensed under Creative Commons. ‘expenditures in the future less implementation costs for the life of the
hittps:/ www. flickr.com/photos/bondidwhat/8212840912/ project.
4 The City of New York. Community Development Block Grant — Disaster +39 Photo courtesy of Chris Gorman
Recovery: Partial Action Plan A. May 10, 2013. +40 Source: URS Corporation
http://www.nyc.gov/html/recovery/downloads/pdf/nyc_cdbg- +1 Photo courtesy of Brooklyn News Corporation. “Shorefront Y Shares over
dr_action_plan_hud_submission.pdf. Accessed April 2, 2014. 8,000 Children’s Toys throughout the Community.” (December 26, 2012).
™5 Flickr user Bruno-Edouard Perrin, Licensed under Creative Commons. http://www. brooklynews.com/20121226/122612-shorefront-y-shares-
hittps:/ www. flickr.com/photos/25922098@N02/4555950196/ over-8000-childrens-toys-throughout-the-community/, Accessed March 1,
226 Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy, New York University. 2014.
2012 State of New York City’s Housing and Neighborhoods. (86). 1 Flickr user NY District US Army Corps of Engineers, Licensed under
hittp://furmancenter.org/files/sotc/SOC2012.pdf. Accessed April 3, 2014. Creative Commons https://www.flickr.com/photos/newyorkdistrict-
2? Institute for Children, Poverty & Homelessness. “Educational Attainment usace/9716573427/
in New York City.” 2012. 183 Source: Google Maps
http://www. thirteen.org/metrofocus/files/2012/10/ICPH-nyc- +4 Flickr user Chris Hamby, Licensed under Creative Commons
education.pdf. Accessed April 2, 2014. hittps:// www. flickr.com/photos/chrishamby/9318821147/
128 +5 Source: Power Pro Consulting, Inc.
29 Office of the New York State Comptroller. “An Economic Snapshot of +46 “amalgamated Warbasse Houses.” 40.58111 N and -73.97254 W. Google
Coney Island and Brighton Beach.” Report 8-2012. July 2011. Earth. April 10, 2014.
http://www.osc.state.ny.us/osde/rpt8-2012.pdf. Accessed April 2, 2014. 1 Flickr user drpavioff, Licensed under Creative Commons
130 New York City Department of City Planning. “Bytes of the Big Apple.” https: //www. flickr.com/photos/niceimages/8147760193/
MaPLUTO shapefile. 8 Flickr user drpavloff, Licensed under Creative Commons
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/bytes/meta_mappluto.shtml. Accessed hittps:// www. flickr.com/photos/niceimages/8158895181/
April 4, 2014. 9 Flickr user mercurial, Licensed under Creative Commons
+31 Flickr user urbanmkr, Licensed under Creative Commons. https: //www. flickr.com/photos/mercurialn/8141733085/
SS
Section V: Additional materials Page 160, (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

ES

| ssen%20Maher%201906%20Aquarium%20Education%2004%2014%2011

150 Morales, Mark. “Famous Coney Island pizza shop Totonno’s reopens for jpg.
business after damage from Sandy.” New York Daily News. March 27, +65 New York City Housing Authority. “Gravesend.” (Undated).

2013. http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/brooklyn/famed-coney- hittp://www.nyc.gov/html/nycha/downloads/pdfl/Gravesend.pdt.
pizziereia-totonno-back-article-1.1300672. Accessed April 15, 2014 ‘Accessed April 13, 2014.

151 Flickr user Argonne National Laboratory, Licensed under Creative 166 New York City Housing Authority. “Coney Island.” (Undated).

Commons hittp://www.nyc.aov/htmi/nycha/downloads/pdf'l/Coney%20Island.pdf.
http://www. flickr.com/photos/argonne/7496222012/ Accessed April 13, 2014.

152 Flickr user David Reeves, Licensed under Creative Commons 16? Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group
https://www.flickr.com/photos/dcreeves2000/2662443646/ +68 http://www.thecidc.org/News/Presskit.htm|

*= Photo courtesy of New York City Office of Emergency Management. 165 Wolf, Kathleen L. “Business District Streetscapes, Trees, and Consumer
https://www.facebook.com/NYCemergencymanagement/photos/a.101521 Response.” Journal of Forestry. 108.3 (2005), 399.
11236859073.1073741850.114100899072/10152111237044073/?type=3, ™° City of New York. “Final Scope of Work for an Environmental Impact

voy Stheater. Accessed April 15, 2014. Statement ~ Coney Island Rezoning: CEQR No. 08DMEQO7K.” (17).

"5 Photo courtesy of the LiRo Group hittp://www.nyc.gow/html/oec/downloads/pdf/dme_projects/08DMEOO7K/
‘http://www.i-s-e- 08DME007K_Final_Scope.pdf. Accessed April 1, 2015.
t.org/images/pdfs/isetinternational_understandingtheeconomicsoffloodrisk 171 Courtesy: URS Corporation
reduction_khawleymmoenchlsabbag_2012.pdf.pdf 1” Source: LiRo Group

1° Flickr user Jacobs and Son, Licensed under Creative Commons 173 Courtesy: URS Corporation
https://www.flickr.com/photos/jacobs_and_son/161140856/ 1 Source: LiRo Group

45? Schematic courtesy of AWMA Industry 5 Source: LiRo Group

+58 Furman Center, New York University. “Sandy's Effects on Housing in New 8 Source: LiRo Group
York City.” March 2013. 17 Source: LiRo Group
http://furmancenter.or/files/publications/SandysEffectsOnHousinalnNYC. ¥ Source: LiRo Group
pdf. Accessed April 5, 2014. 18 Source: LiRo Group

+59 Photos courtesy of the LiRo Group

160 Flickr user Larry Osan, Licensed under Creative Commons
https://www. flickr.com/photos/larryosan/5522597949/

161 Photo courtesy of SolarOne

162 J, Mijin Cha and Jack Dafoe. Center for American Progress. “New York
Gity Green-Collar Jobs Roadmap.” October 2009.
http: //www.americanproaress.ora/issues/2009/10/pdf/ny aren jobs.pdf.

Accessed April 5, 2014.

163 Photo courtesy of the Jamaica Bay Eco-Watchers

1 Photo courtesy of the New York Aquarium.
http://www. nyaquarium.com/classes-and-
programs/~./media/Images/nyaquarium/education/headline/_Julie%20Lar

ed

Section V: Additional materials Page 161 (2)

Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
——————
F. Glossary NYCHA — New York City Housing Authority
BFE — Base flood elevation NYC DPR - New York City Department of Parks and Recreation
CBA ~ Cost-benefit analysis NYC DEP - New York City Department of Environmental Protection
CBO - Community-based organizations NYC OEM — New York City Office of Emergency Management
CDBG-DR - Community Development Block Grant — Disaster Recovery NYPA ~ New York Power Authority
CERT - Community Emergency Response Team NYRCR ~ NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
CUNY ~ City University of New York NYS ~ New York State
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency NYS DHES ~ New York State Division of Homeland Security and Emergency
Services
FIRM ~ Flood Insurance Rate Map
NYS DOS ~ New York State Department of State
HMP ~ Hazard Mitigation Plan
NYSSGC - New York State Smart Grid Consortium
HUD - U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
REDC — Regional Economic Development Council
JBRWG ~ Jamaica Bay Regional Working Group
RFEI — Request for Expression of Interest
JCCGI - Jewish Community Council of Greater Coney Istand
SIRR ~ Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency
KCC - Kingsborough Community College
SLOSH ~ Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from Hurricanes
LED — light-emitting diode
‘SUNY ~ State University of New York
MTA — Metropolitan Transportation Authority
USACE - U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
NPS — National Park Service
UWAS ~ Urban Waterfront Adaptive Strategies
NWS ~ National Weather Service
al
Section V: Additional materials Page 162 (2)

