Broad Channel
Community Reconstruction
Conceptual Plan
October 2013

This document was produced by the Broad Channel Planning Committee as part of the New York Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program within the Governor's Office of Storm Recovery. The
NYRCR Program is supported by NYS Homes and Community Renewal, NYS Department of State,
and NYS Department of Transportation. Assistance was led by the following consulting firms: Parsons
Brinckerhoff and HR&A Advisors, and supported by SCAPE Studio, OpenPlans, and Hammes Company.
All photographs were taken by the planning team unless otherwise noted.

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

FOREWORD
The New York Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) program was established by Governor
Andrew M. Cuomo to provide additional rebuilding
and revitalization assistance to communities
damaged by Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene,
and Tropical Storm Lee. This program empowers
communities to prepare locally-driven recovery
plans to identify innovative reconstruction projects
and other needed actions to allow each community
not only to survive, but also to thrive in an era when
natural risks will become increasingly common.

the potential costs and benefits of projects and
actions, and their priorities. As projects are more
fully defined, the potential impact on neighboring
municipalities or the region as a whole may lead to
further modifications.

The NYRCR program is managed by the Governor’s
Office of Storm Recovery in conjunction with New
York State Homes and Community Renewal and
the Department of State. The NYRCR program
consists of both planning and implementation
phases, to assist communities in making informed
recovery decisions.

Implementation of the proposed projects and
actions found in this conceptual plan is subject
to applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations. Inclusion of a project or action in this
conceptual plan does not guarantee that a particular
project or action will be eligible for Community
Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery
(CDBG-DR) funding. Proposed projects or actions
may be eligible for other state or federal funding, or
could be accomplished with municipal, nonprofit or
private investment.

The development of this conceptual plan is the
result of innumerable hours of effort from volunteer
planning committee members, members of the
public, municipal employees, elected officials, state
employees, and planning consultants. Across the
state, over 102 communities are working together
to build back better and stronger.
This conceptual plan is a snapshot of the current
thoughts of the community and planning committee.
The plans will evolve as communities analyze the
risk to their assets, their needs and opportunities,

In the months ahead, communities will develop
ways to implement additional strategies for
economic revitalization, human services, housing,
infrastructure, natural and cultural resources, and
the community’s capacity to implement changes.

Each NYRCR Community will continue to engage
the public as they develop a final plan for community
reconstruction. Events will be held to receive
feedback on the conceptual plan, to provide an
understanding of risk to assets, and to gather
additional ideas for strategies, projects and actions.
October 31, 2013

Table of Contents | 3

NYRCR Program

NYRCR Communities

Find out more at:
StormRecovery.ny.gov/Community-Reconstruction-Program

4 | Table of Contents

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

Contents

Contents
I. Introduction—6
Program Overview 6
Approach to Public Outreach

9

II. Community Context—12
Geographic Scope 12
Community Overview

14

III. Storm Impacts and Risk—16
Summary of Storm Impacts
Future Risk
18

16

IV. Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning—20
Process Overview 20
Needs and Opportunities 24
Vision 27

V. Additional Considerations—28
Regional Perspectives
28
Existing Plans, Studies, and Projects

30

VI. Next Steps—34
Projects and Strategies
Next Steps
39

34

Table of Contents | 5

NYRCR Program

I. Introduction
Program Overview
The
New
York
Rising
Community
Reconstruction Program (NYRCR) was
established to provide additional rebuilding
and revitalization assistance to communities
that were severely damaged by Superstorm
Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical Storm
Lee. The Program will enable communities to
identify reconstruction and resiliency projects that
address current damage, future threats, and the
community’s economic opportunities. In connection
with the program, New York State has allocated
funds for community planning in 50 communities
across the state, 10 of which are in New York City.
New York State has allocated up to $6.06 million
to Broad Channel in Community Development
Block Grant Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding
from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development. These funds can be used for a wide
variety of projects, and Broad Channel will likely be
eligible to receive additional project funding from
federal, state, and local sources. The purpose of
the NYRCR Program is to develop a prioritized list
of projects for the allocated CDBG-DR funding and
other sources.
As shown on the opposite page, this process will
include five steps:

•

Identify
Assets,
Opportunities

6 | Introduction

Risks,

Needs,

•
•

Define Community Vision

•

Identify Funding Sources and develop
Implementation Plan

•

Create Final Community Reconstruction
Plan

Identify, evaluate, and Prioritize Projects
and Actions

The NYRCR Program will focus on needs,
opportunities, and projects that address six
recovery functions:

•
•
•
•
•
•

Community Planning and Capacity Building
Housing
Economic
Health and Social Services
Infrastructure Systems
Natural and Cultural Resources

Each NYRCR community is led by a Community
Reconstruction Planning Committee (Planning
Committee), made up of community leaders and
residents. The Planning Committee takes the lead
in developing the Conceptual and Final Plans.
The State has also provided each NYRCR
community with a planning team to prepare a
plan. The New York State planning team includes:
Regional Leads Claudia Filomena and Chelsea
Muller; NYC Lead Planner Steve Ridler; and Broad

Channel Community Planners Ken Smith and Fred
Landa. The planning team for Broad Channel is
being led by Parsons Brinckerhoff (planning, coastal
protection, infrastructure engineering, and natural/
coastal management) and HR&A Advisors (project
management, community planning, economic
development, and housing analysis). They are
being supported by SCAPE Studios (landscape
architecture), OpenPlans (participatory mapping),
and Hammes Company (healthcare).
By the end of this process, the NYRCR Program will
produce two public deliverables:

•

Conceptual Plan, Fall 2013 – This
document summarizes the work to date on
Broad Channel’s opportunities for rebuilding
and resiliency after Superstorm Sandy. Led
by the Broad Channel Planning Committee,
this plan is based on deliberation during two
planning committee meetings and one public
meeting that were held in September and
October 2013. A minimum of three more
planning committee meetings and three
more public meetings will be held through
March 2014 to refine the plan and to propose
concrete projects and actions and develop
a final Community Reconstruction Plan.
The contents of this plan include the following:
1. Introduction

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

NYRCR Work Schedule
Planning Committee Meeting
Deliverables

Sept.

Oct.

Public Meeting

Nov.

Dec.

Deliverable Due Date
Jan.

Feb.

Mar.

Work Plan
Vision, Assets & Risk Assessment

1
2

Draft Conceptual Plan

1
3

List of Strategies

2

List of Priority Projects
4

Community Reconstruction Plan

3

5

4

5-Step Process

Identify Assets, Risks,
Needs, Opportunities

Define Community Goals
& Vision

Identify, evaluate, and
prioritize
Projects and Actions

Identify Funding
Sources and develop
Implementation Plan

Create Final Community
Reconstruction Plan

Introduction | 7

NYRCR Program

2. Community Context

Assessment of Risk and Needs

▪▪ Schedule of Implementation Actions

3. Storm Impacts and Risk

▪▪
▪▪
▪▪
▪▪

Community Assets

Appendices

Assessment of Risk to Assets

▪▪ List of NYRCR Planning Committee

4. Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning
5. Next Steps

•

Final Community Reconstruction Plan,
Spring 2014 – This document will include
more in-depth discussion of above, as well
as:
Overview

▪▪
▪▪
▪▪
▪▪
▪▪

Assessment of Risk to Systems
Assessment of Needs and Opportunities

Reconstruction Strategies

▪▪ Community Planning and Capacity
Building

Community Vision

▪▪
▪▪
▪▪
▪▪
▪▪

Relationship to Regional Plans

Implementation Schedule

Geographic Scope of Plan
Description of Storm Damage
Critical Issues

8 | Introduction

Economic Development
Health and Social Services
Housing
Infrastructure
Natural and Cultural Resources

Members

▪▪ Description of Public Engagement
Process

▪▪ Description of Priority Projects and their
Costs and Benefits

▪▪ Inventory of Assets

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

Approach to Public Outreach
Extensive public outreach and involvement
is a key component of the NYRCR Program’s
planning process. This is a community-driven
process that believes that outreach and community
engagement are critical to creating neighborhoodspecific ideas, setting direction, and ensuring the
overall success of the program.
At the heart of the public-outreach process
is the Planning Committee. The Planning
Committee is responsible for facilitating public
discussion and providing a meaningful link between
the planning team and the local community. At the
inception of the program, New York State appointed
the following Broad Channel Planning Committee
members:

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Daniel Mundy, Jr. (Chair)
Daniel McIntyre
Leo Chavanne
Frank Bassetti
Robert Pisani
Daniel Mundy Sr.
Michelle Green
Barbara Toborg
John McCambridge
Rick Sorrentino
James Harper

Committees were developed through direct
engagement with community leaders and
community members. Broad Channel committee
members are community leaders, life-time
residents and business owners who are active in
the community. This committee has access to an
extensive network that can be used to disseminate
and gather information. The
Broad Channel
Planning Committee has worked with the planning
team to develop agendas for all meetings, and to
provide input on draft documents and presentations
prior to circulation and presentation at meetings.
They also have spearheaded the outreach process
for meetings, coordinating a strategy for publicizing
meetings and the NYRCR Program to Broad
Channel community members.

Community Outreach Strategy
In consultation with the project team, the
Planning Committee has developed and
executed a comprehensive outreach strategy.
This strategy has entailed reaching out directly
to several key community organizations and
community leaders and attending meetings of
these groups to explain the project and promote
meeting attendance, and strategically placing
meeting announcements in local media, on the
NYRCR website, and on Facebook.

association meeting schedule, which is a known
and well-attended monthly meeting recognized by
the community. To the extent possible, the NYRCR
meetings will continue to be held at the time of
the monthly civic meeting, but the committee will
monitor each meeting with the overall schedule and
plan accordingly.
Going forward, the Planning Committee will
determine how to evolve their outreach strategies
through the steps in the process after seeing the
level of turnout at the first and subsequent public
meetings.

Public Feedback Opportunities
Thus far, two Planning Committee meetings
have been held to jump-start and structure
the community visioning process for the area.
The first community meeting was held on October
24th and insights and input from the community
will be incorporated into future meetings and future
refinement of the plan.
Dedicated time is set aside at each meeting
to incorporate public input. Members of the
public have attended the committee meetings, and
are welcome to attend the meetings of NYRCR
communities outside of Broad Channel as well. The
results of the committee meetings thus far include:

The Planning Committee has connected the public
process for NYRCR to the established monthly civic

Introduction | 9

NYRCR Program

•

Planning
Committee
(September 19, 2013):

Meeting

#1

▪▪ Reviewed NYRCR Program scope,
workplan, and timeline;

▪▪ Discussed

current
issues
postSuperstorm Sandy and began to identify
recovery and resiliency needs;

▪▪ Initial asset inventory and planning area
boundary were presented for input and
review

•

Planning Committee Meeting #2 (October
1, 2013):

▪▪ Planning Committee formed breakout
groups, moderated by members of the
planning team, to review asset maps,
confirm priority assets, and report back
comments from asset inventory;

▪▪ Further brainstormed community needs
and opportunities, and began to define a
community vision;

▪▪ Discussed agenda for public meeting,
venue, and outreach materials.

10 | Introduction

Following these two Planning Committee
meetings, the first public meeting was held
on October 24, 2013. Each public meeting
is designed to maximize interaction between
members of the public, the Planning Committee,
and the consulting team. The meeting was used to
review the purpose, scope, and timing of NYRCR
and to gather public input around 1) assets; 2)
needs and opportunities that had been identified
thus far by the Planning Committee; and 3) shortand long-term goals to inform a community vision.
The meeting was announced in advance through an
extensive public outreach campaign conducted by
the Planning Committee, which included postings
on the NYRCR website, Facebook, and the NYRCR
Twitter feed; ads in local newspapers; a series of
announcements made at local community groups,
and distribution of flyers and palm cards.
Four public meetings are projected to take
place before submission of the Final Plan
on March 31st, 2014. A second public meeting
will be held on November 21st, 2013 where initial
short-term and long-term project concepts will be
presented and the concept plan will be reviewed.
Subsequent meetings will be held to refine the
concept plan and develop the Final Reconstruction
Plan.

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

NYRCR Planning Committee member Dan Mundy, Sr. addressing the Rebuild by Design
Competition teams during a Jamaica Bay site visit

Football practice at Broad Channel Athletic Club

Broad Channel Park

Public Meeting #1

Introduction | 11

NYRCR Program

II. Community Context
Geographic Scope
Broad Channel is one of 10 community
planning units in New York City participating in
the NYRCR Program, and one of 45 community
planning units participating in New York State.
The Broad Channel planning area was defined
by the Planning Committee and the state
according to consideration of multiple factors,
which include: local understanding of community
boundaries, areas that were impacted by Sandy,
areas that are most at risk from future storms and
sea level rise, and places where key investments to
improve the local economy and infrastructure can
be made.

Broad Channel 1924
source: NYCity Map, NYC DOITT

12 | Introduction

Broad Channel is located on an Island within
Jamaica Bay. Surrounded entirely by water and
National Parkland (Gateway National Recreation
Area), Broad Channel is connected to the
surrounding communities of Howard Beach (to the
North) and the Rockaways (to the South) by the
Cross Bay Bridge. The island is also connected by
mass transit. The MTA A line, which runs out to the
Rockaways, maintains a stop on Broad Channel.
It also has water-based connections, by private
boats. There is no public ferry service to the island.
Broad Channel is a water-oriented community
with many of its houses built directly on the water
and a strong historic connection to the surrounding
Jamaica Bay.

Broad Channel 1951

The map on the following page indicates the
planning area designated by the Broad Channel
Planning Committee. The planning area has been
defined around the places where people reside
and therefore much of the land on the island that
make up the Gateway National Recreation Area
have been placed outside the boundary line, but
remain integral to the strategies for protection
that will be developed. The Committee will focus
on assets, needs, opportunities, and strategies
for the community within this planning area. It will
also consider broader regional issues facing other
Jamaica Bay communities.

Broad Channel 1996

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

Broad Channel Planning Area

Jamaica Bay

Jamaica Bay

Broad Channel Project Boundary

Introduction | 13

NYRCR Program

Community Overview
Broad Channel is a long thin island with a
small primarily residential community tucked
in between two Gateway National Recreation
Area parks. The Broad Channel planning area is
home to 915 houses and 2443 residents, according
to 2010 census reports.

related to rebuilding and resiliency planning.

While incomes vary, the Broad Channel area
is home to residents with a higher-thanaverage income when compared to statistics
for Queens and New York City. The median
household income in the area in 2012 was $68,627,
higher than Queens and New York City as a whole.

Higher than the citywide average, 97 percent
of homes in Broad Channel were built before
1960, and many are constructed of combustible
materials. Both these characteristics were
associated with greater damage from Superstorm
Sandy’s impacts; the NYC Mayor’s Office’s Special
Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency (SIRR) report
found that 95 percent of buildings throughout
New York City tagged by the NYC Department of
Buildings as red (for structural damage) or destroyed
were built before 1961.

Broad Channel’s residents are slightly older
than the New York City average. Currently, the
median age in Broad Channel is 40.7 years, as
compared to 35.5 in New York City as a whole
and 37.2 for Queens. This suggests a large senior
population in the coming years and may require
special consideration of accessibility challenges

Broad Channel is almost exclusively
residential, with a small number of supporting
businesses and restaurants. Zoned as a “lowerdensity residential district,” 80 percent of the area’s
building stock comprises single-family detached
houses. The majority (71 percent) of these homes
are owner-occupied, as compared to 43 percent

% Housing Units by Housing Type (2005-2009)

10%

7%

23%

13%

47%

1, attached
2-4

Queens
County

20%

9%

32%

9%

30%

% Owner-Occupied Housing (2010)

$68,627
31%

New York City

$53,421
$47,223

$50,000
$40,000

43%

Queens County

5-19
20+

While limited in number, the community
amenities and services available within
Broad Channel are critical, especially in an
emergency. This includes a volunteer firehouse
and several civic and religious institutions, including
the Broad Channel Athletic Club, American Legion,
the Veterans of Foreign Wars, and the Broad
Channel Historical Society.

Median Household Income (2012)

$60,000
1, detatched

Most residents also travel outside of Broad
Channel for work. In 2000, 100 percent of the
labor force did not work at home, and a majority
(52 percent) traveled outside of Queens County to
their place of employment, with 25.3 percent of
residents (the most predominant group) traveling
60–89 minutes.

$80,000
$70,000

New
York City

for Queens County and 31 percent for New York
City at-large. There are few retail and recreational
amenities in Broad Channel, and most community
members travel outside of the community for these
services.

$30,000
$20,000

Broad
Channel

80%

1%

19%

1%
0%

78%

Broad Channel

$10,000
$-

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Source: American Community Survey Housing Summary
2005-2009

14 | Introduction

Broad Channel

Queens County

Source: 2010 U.S. Census, ESRI

NYC

0%

20%

Source: 2010 U.S. Census

40%

60%

80%

100%

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

Marsh on the eastern shore of Broad Channel

House on the water's edge

East 12th Road boardwalk

Houses facing Cross Bay Boulevard

Introduction | 15

NYRCR Program

III. Storm Impacts and Risk
Summary of Storm Impacts
Local Impacts

Recovering from the Storm

Lingering Affects

The Broad Channel community began to feel the
effects of Superstorm Sandy well before the surge hit
the island. The low tide that occurred a full two cycles
prior to when Superstorm Sandy hit was unusually
high, so the community recognized that the storm
was going to be combined with a significant moon
tide condition that would exacerbate the effects of
the storm. The storm enveloped the island in water,
causing significant flooding throughout the entire
populated zone. The surge was strong enough to
severely damage houses and flood businesses,
impacting housing on both sides of the island. Due
to the unique timing of the storm and the wind
direction, a significant surge met the east side of
the island, inward from the mouth of Jamaica Bay,
where some of the greatest damage was incurred.

Many residents suffered significant damage, all lost
power, all were without cell phone communication
and most lost their propane tanks which were
attached to their structures and the heating oil
tanks spilled, so many were without access to
gas heat or ability to cook. Without power and
without a community gathering place, the Broad
Channel community facilities, despite being heavily
damaged themselves became a local refuge where
supplies were doled out and other recovery efforts
were concentrated.

The lasting damage of Sandy continues to linger in
Broad Channel. Some of the stores and businesses
have come back, but others have been unable to
reopen. Many homes and businesses took several
months to clean up, become habitable, and reopen.
Many are still rebuilding. Some were completely
lost. The community centers around the island
continue to serve the community but are in need of
improvements. Access, electrical power, and flood
damage to interiors continue to plague homes,
businesses, and community centers. At the oneyear anniversary of Superstorm Sandy, recovery
and rebuilding are still taking place and continue to
be major focal points of the community.

Former water pipe on Broad Channel

Damaged house on Cross Bay Boulevard

Broad Channel house on stilts

16 | Storm Impacts and Risk

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan
Source: FEMA MOTF

Broad Channel
Planning Area

Sandy Surge Levels
< 3 ft
3-6 ft
6-12ft
>12ft
Wave Action
& Water Movement

What Happened During Sandy?

Broad Channel and areas within
Jamaica Bay experienced surge and
direct wave action in addition to
“backdoor” flooding through Rockaway
Inlet.

¯

0

500

1,000

Feet
2,000

0

500

1,000

Feet
2,000

¯

Broad Channel Sandy inundation map

Storm Impacts and Risk | 17

NYRCR Program

Future Risk
All of the Broad Channel planning area lies in
the extreme and high risk zones according to
NYS DOS risk analysis. Located on an island in
Jamaica Bay, Broad Channel is highly exposed to
flooding from coastal storms.

NY Department of State Risk Areas
While the Federal Emergency Management
Agenecy's (FEMA) flood insurance rate maps
incorporate detailed analysis of possible storm
scenarios, they do not consider future factors such
as sea level rise. In order to map and assess risk,
taking into account sea level rise and differences
in exposure of the landscape, NYS Department
of State developed its own Risk Assessment
Area Mapping which takes additional factors into
account. This includes a sea level rise estimate
of three feet, areas expected to be inundated by

18 | Storm Impacts and Risk

a category 3 hurricane, areas subject to shallow
coastal flooding, and areas of the coast subject
to shoreline erosion. Considering these factors, as
well as the FEMA flood zones, the state established
three risk assessment areas:

•

Extreme: Areas currently at risk of frequent
inundation and vulnerable to erosion and
heavy wave action (in the FEMA V-zone),
subject to shallow coastal flooding, or likely to
be inundated in the future due to sea level rise
(assumption of 3 feet).

•

High: Areas outside the Extreme Risk Area
that are currently at risk of frequent inundation
(in the 100 year floodplain, the FEMA A-Zone)
or at future risk of shallow coastal flooding
with sea level rise (assumption of 3 feet).

•

Moderate: Areas outside the Extreme and
High Risk Areas but currently at moderate

risk of inundation from infrequent events (in
the 500 year floodplain) or at risk of being
in the 100 year floodplain with sea level
rise (assumption of 3 feet), and any areas
expected to be inundated by a category 3
hurricane.
A more detailed description of the State’s Risk
Assessment Area Mapping Methodology can be
found on the NYRCR website, as can a link to on
online viewer for the risk assessment area maps,
at
http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/communityreconstruction-program

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan
Source: NYS DOS
Gateway National
Recreational Area

Broad Channel
Planning Area

NYS DOS Hazard Zones
Extreme
High
Moderate

Gateway National
Recreational Area

Sunset
Cove

¯

0

500

1,000

Feet
2,000

Broad
Channel
Park

New York Department of State Hazard Zones map

Storm Impacts and Risk | 19

NYRCR Program

IV. Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning
Process Overview
As previously mentioned, the NYRCR Program
contains 5 key steps for rebuilding and
resiliency planning. This section summarizes the
outcomes of the two steps of the NYRCR that have
been completed thus far: Identifying Assets, Needs
and Opportunities, and Defining Community Goals
and Vision.
Through a series of Planning Committee and Public
meetings, the community:

•

Identified community assets and risks,
noting places or resources within the
community that residents value and/or deem
at risk.

•

Defined
community
needs
and
opportunities by evaluating the issues
and challenges as well as the resources

20 | Storm Impacts and Risk

Community Assets
presented by the unique landscape, housing,
economies, demographics, and services
within the community. These recovery and
resiliency needs and opportunities may be
associated with a specific asset or apply to
the community as a whole.

•

Established a vision for resiliency and
recovery in Broad Channel.

The results of this collective work will support the
next steps in the rebuilding and resiliency planning
process, starting with drafting strategies and
identifying potential projects in November 2013.
Content completed in the first two steps will evolve
through the process and revised content will be
presented in the Final Community Reconstruction
Plan delivered at the end of March 2014.

Housing Assets
The entire housing stock on Broad Channel
has been deemed as a critical asset. Much like
many other communities hard hit by Superstorm
Sandy, housing on Broad Channel suffered
significant damage. Every home in Broad Channel
located in either the extreme or high risk zone.
Houses line the main central spine of Cross Bay
Boulevard and run east-west along a series of
connecting streets both to the east and to the west.
When Sandy hit, all areas were inundated by water,
with significant waves breaching over the ends
of streets on both the east and west side of the
island. Broad Channel contains mostly wood-frame
houses, many of which are either directly fronting
or backing onto water, all within close proximity to

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan
Source: NYC Department of City Planning MapPluto, 13v1

Economic, health & social services and housing asset map

Storm Impacts and Risk | 21

NYRCR Program

open water. There are a large number of houses that
are either built on stilts or raised on blocks. Almost
all homes are either single or two family residences
of one or two story construction.

Economic
Broad Channel has a limited amount of economic
assets, and even fewer after Superstorm Sandy
inundated many of the businesses on the island. The
economic assets are largely located at the northern
and southern edges of the community, the main
business district, is between 9th and 10th Roads
with additional businesses dotted along Cross
Bay Boulevard. The largest business operation,
Call-A-Head Corporation, sits at the northern end
of the island, and there are a few maritime-related
economic assets along the water’s edge. The entire
island, and therefore all of its economic assets, lie
within the 100 year floodplain meaning they have at
least a one percent annual chance of flooding and
are deemed as either extreme or high risk by the
state of New York.

Health and Social Services
Broad Channel has a few, critical health and social
services. Public School 47 sits west of Cross Bay
Boulevard and just north of 10th Road. The local
library and post office make up a campus within
Broad Channel Park in the southern part of the
island on the east side of Cross Bay Boulevard. The

22 | Storm Impacts and Risk

Broad Channel Volunteer Fire Department sits at the
corner of Church and Noel Roads in the northeast
section of the island, but it has plans to move to the
northernmost section of the inhabited part of the
island to merge with the largest concentration of
community assets serving the community.

Infrastructure Systems

This northern edge of the community is home
to multiple community facilities, including
the Broad Channel Athletic Club and the
American Legion Hall. Slightly to the south lie
the VFW Hall and the Shad Creek Association
building. This concentration of community uses for
recreation, meetings, and community events lie in a
high-risk area, adjacent to a large section of Broad
Channel wetlands, but it is one of the highest points
on the island. The community highly values the
Broad Channel Athletic Club, the American Legion,
and the VFW and would like to protect them as part
of larger asset and community resiliency projects.

Cross Bay Boulevard is the main road in the
community and Joseph P. Addabbo Memorial
Bridge provides access to Howard Beach to
the north and the Cross Bay Bridge connects
to the Rockaways to the south; these assets
are the main access routes to Broad Channel and
were deemed critical. Cross Bay Boulevard itself
is a critical roadway linking the community to the
Rockaways and the mainland via Howard Beach.

Natural and Cultural Resources
In addition to the Broad Channel Athletic Club,
recreational resources include Broad Channel
Park, Broad Channel American Park, and
Gene Gray Playground. In addition, the wetlands
and natural features of Gateway Natural Recreation
Area provide a natural barrier against future storm
surge. Gateway National Park lands extend both on
the north and south side of the island.

There are a number of critical infrastructure assets
in the Broad Channel community, given the
community’s size and location within Jamaica Bay,
making them all the more vulnerable and lacking in
redundant systems.

The community is served by the A Train with a
single stop on the island and there is bus service
that runs along Cross Bay Boulevard. Other critical
infrastructure includes the wooden piers that form
the only connection between some houses and
land. The community highlighted East 12th Road
Boardwalk in particular as a critical access point,
which provides access to areas in the community
that have no other access points besides those
roads. The Broad Channel Station, which is the
only subway station in the community, provides
another means to access the island.

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan
Source: NYC Department of City Planning MapPluto, 13v1
Gateway National
Recreational Area

Broad Channel Athletic Club

Broad Channel

E1

RD

Parks and Recreation

Planning Area

E3

RD

Assets
E4

D - Infrastructure Systems
RT

BE

E - Natural and Cultural

RD

Culvert

RD

E5
W5

Broad Channel Wetlands

RD

RD

W 6 RD
E6

Broad Channel Station
RD

E 7 RD

RD

E 8 RD

E 9 RD

CR

SH

T RD

AD

RD

8

RD

Broad Channel MTA Subway Station
Gene Gray Playground

WES

K
EE

9

WALTON RD

W

NOEL RD

LANARK RD

W

W 10 RD

E 10 RD

East 12th Road Boardwalk

W 11 RD
W 12 RD

E 12 RD

W 13 RD

CROSS BA
Y BLVD

W 14 RD
W 15 RD

W 16 RD

E 14 RD

E 16 RD

W 17 RD

Gateway National
Recreational Area

Broad Channel
Park

Broad Channel American Park

W 19 RD

Sunset
Cove

MTA Subway Line (A)

CHANNEL
RD

W 18 RD

W 20 RD
CROSS BA
Y BLVD

E 20 RD
E 21 RD

¯

0

500

1,000

Feet
2,000

MTA/TBTA
Operations Facility

Broad
Channel
Park

Infrastructure systems and natural & cultural asset map

Storm Impacts and Risk | 23

NYRCR Program

Needs and Opportunities
Broad Channel’s needs are focused first and
foremost on immediate recovery and shortterm resiliency. The community suffered significant
damage to private homes and businesses during
Sandy. An event of this magnitude has the potential
to have lasting and long-term impacts on the social
infrastructure, cultural identity and economy of
the community. Recognizing that this storm has
affected both individuals and the larger structure of
the community, the NYRCR Planning Committee is
focused on rebuilding those facilities that are central
to the culture of Broad Channel.

Housing
Historically some Broad Channel houses were
built on stilts and a large percentage of houses are
either on stilts or raised above the ground plane.
Most houses on the island do not have basements.
One opportunity to make housing more resilient is
to raise the housing stock to guard against future
flooding. The raising of houses is financially and
physically challenging but may not profoundly
transform the nature of this waterfront community.

help it to remain a thriving community. Given Broad
Channel’s relationship to the water, various resiliency
needs must be addressed to help protect the
existing economic assets and to attract additional
businesses to the island. Cross Bay Boulevard,
although in a high-risk zone, is one of the high
points on the island. As a location to concentrate
economic activity, there may be localized protection
strategies that can make these businesses more
resilient to climate change conditions.

Health and Social Services
Many important community spaces were
damaged in the storm and the community is
looking to rebuild these and to improve upon them
so that they will be resilient in future storm events,
support community life, and serve as recovery
stations as needed in the future. The concentration
of community uses, especially in the north, could
translate into the opportunity for shared protection,
power, and other resiliency strategies to protect
what is effectively a campus of community uses
that serve Broad Channel’s community, recreation,
and public gathering needs.

Economic
Cross Bay Boulevard is home to businesses,
restaurants and stores that service the
community. Multiple businesses hit hard by the
flooding have been unable to re-open, leaving
this small community even more dependent upon
neighboring Howard Beach and the Rockaways
for goods and services. Overall, there is a need to
increase the business presence on the island to

24 | Storm Impacts and Risk

Overall,
Broad
Channel
needs
more
emergency and health services, available on a
regular basis, but especially in an emergency.
This is particularly the case for its senior and other
vulnerable populations. Given the tight-knit nature
of the community and the value residents place
on having places to gather communally, there are
opportunities to develop new multi-purpose resilient

community or social service centers that could
also function as centers for emergency shelter and
recovery during a storm.

Natural and Cultural Resources and
Infrastructure Systems
The focus on short-term improvements
extends to infrastructure needs, where the
community has already been working to make
improvements that will sustain the community
moving forward. Extending the “green streets”
program that is being piloted from 10th Road to
13th Road, identifying the critical “weak” points
in the flood control systems like the backflow
preventer at the end of West Road, and expanding
efforts to build back the wetlands in Jamaica Bay
are all elements of their vision to move forward
pragmatically with a game plan that has largely
been in the works for many years.
There are a number of major, long-term deficiencies
that need to be addressed if the community is
going to increase its resiliency in the face of climate
change and future storm events. Lack of utility
and roadway infrastructure to particularly isolated
streets and neighborhoods is a major concern.
A resilient energy plan is needed. There is no
natural gas pipeline to Broad Channel. Homes and
businesses are relegated to propane for cooking
and heat. During the storm, many propane tanks
were ripped from their supports and became part of
the flotsam and jetsam created by the flood. Having
propane tanks floating around the community and

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

Map capturing a committee brainstorming session on needs & opportunities

Storm Impacts and Risk | 25

NYRCR Program

the bay was a major problem, but this also meant
that many in the community were then without gas
for heat for days and even weeks. Local propane
supply is limited and trending downwards, leaving
this community highly dependent upon a single
source of energy that is becoming more scarce.
Home heating oil tanks over turned and polluted
the environment. The need for a more resilient longterm energy solution here is keenly felt.
Broad Channel is blessed by its unique natural
setting. It does not want for access to nature, with
many houses having direct access to water and
pristine tidal wetlands. The topography has been
changing in Jamaica Bay, beaches have become
wetlands, and the wetlands in the surrounding bay
are disappearing.
Broad Channel recognizes that its fate is inextricably
tied to the strategies being considered for Jamaica
Bay, and there are active participants in this process
from Broad Channel. The need to reduce the impact
of flooding and storm surge will largely be resolved
by the actions taken within the larger bay and remote
from the island. However, the community sees a
combination of actions in the short-term and longterm that are both local and regional to make Broad
Channel a resilient community. The wildlife refuge
and other natural features around the island present
an opportunity to be part of the solution. Extending
wetlands and building off the natural shoreline that
protects the island are both opportunities that the
community would like to see advanced.

Public Meeting 1: Needs and Opportunities Comments*
Infrastructure

Infrastructure

Provide storm surge protection

Provide additional energy sources

"Stop water from coming through storm surge"

"Natural gas line"

Infrastructure

Health and Social Services:

Improve water drainage

Improve access to medical
services

"Stopping the flooding on Cross Bay Blvd during a
heavy rain- main access in/out"
"Flap valve at sewer overflow at W. 10th and E. 6th"
"Sluice way between 5th &6th roads on CBB"
"Fix check valves"
"Malfunctioning check valve to stop water from
coming up the storm sewers into the streets"
Infrastructure

Make street improvements
"E 12th Rd (access to home)"
"Repairing wooden boardwalk on E. 12th Rd"

"Urgent care center (doable)"
"Hospitals & emergency rooms"
Health and Social Services

Enhance community resources
"Evacuation center needed- multi-purpose"
"Short-term evacuation"
Health and Social Services

Improve educational facilities
Infrastructure

Incorporate green projects

"Work with PS 47 to improve educational programs"
"Better lighting and security at P.S. 47"

"Less us of cement/impermeable surfaces: greater
use of natural ground cover to absorb rainwater"
"Build up Ruffle Bar Island & Sand Box Island by
taking the fill from Jamaica Bay. Bulk head the
outside areas to stop wave action"
"Use fill of Jamaica bay to rebuild islands.
Improvement of wetlands"
"Continued improvement of wetlands"

*Representative list of needs and opportunities provided
by the community at Public Meeting 1.

26 | Storm Impacts and Risk

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

Vision
Perhaps more than any other community in this
region, Broad Channel shares an affinity with water.
This island community, in the center of Jamaica Bay,
with many residents living within a block of water,
is certainly no stranger to flooding. The connection
to water is what drew people to this place and
the reason that people wish to stay. This unique
relationship with the water defines Broad Channel.
Broad Channel’s vision for resilience is to focus
first on the near-term recovery and rebuilding
that must take place to build back as a functional
community. Many homes and businesses were
severely damaged and critical infrastructure that
supports the community was also compromised
during Superstorm Sandy. For the residents of

Broad Channel, the damage was not just physical.
Those places that have always been the center
of the community, where people gather to meet
and recreate and share stories and conduct their
business—the places that make a community a
community—were also hard hit and need help to
build back so that they can once again serve as
the centers of a vibrant community. The immediate
focus is on the projects that will help build back the
community. Broad Channel recognizes that there
are also larger longer-term needs that must be
addressed. Protections against flooding, expanding
and diversifying access to power and other utilities,
building facilities to support the elderly and other
vulnerable populations must all be considered as
this community plans for the future.

Broad Channel is surrounded by natural beauty,
both on the land in the Gateway Wildlife Refuge
and the mostly natural coastal edge and in the
surrounding waters and wetland islands of Jamaica
Bay. Thinking both in the short-term and the longterm, the community supports solutions that can be
integrated into this natural setting. Soft solutions for
the bay, integrated with landside protection, fit into
the context of this place.
Broad Channel residents are keenly interested
in the plans for making Jamaica Bay resilient and
recognize the importance of those strategies both
to the ultimate plans for protection of the island, but
also how those plans affect the bay itself, its wildlife,
and the ecosystem it supports.

Storm Impacts and Risk | 27

NYRCR Program

V. Additional Considerations
Regional Perspectives
Jamaica Bay and Rockaway
Peninsula Overview
Connected hydrologically and ecologically,
Jamaica Bay is a unifying feature tying together
six NYRCR planning areas: Breezy Point,
Rockaway West, Rockaway East, Broad Channel,
New and Old Howard Beach, and Gerritsen
Beach/Sheepshead Bay. A seventh planning
area, Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan
Beach, and Sea Gate, is also in close proximity at
the mouth of the bay. With their shared shoreline,
these communities share climate change-related
risks, and collaboration can produce solutions that
address recovery and resiliency needs affecting the
bay as a whole.

Regional Resiliency Issues
Situated on land that originally made up a
series of barrier islands and marshland, these
Jamaica Bay communities have a similar
geomorphology and feature soft, marshy soil.
At the lowest elevation of any area in New York City,
many of them are located at sea level, making some
vulnerable to flooding even during normal high
tides. Broad Channel, New and Old Howard Beach,
and Hamilton Beach feature housing and important
commercial corridors adjacent to the waterways or
on piers and are protected by varying types of built
bulkheads, barrier walls, and stilts.

28 | Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning

Communities along the bay side of the 11 mile
long Rockaway Peninsula are also at risk.
Some communities sit directly on open beaches and
others are buffered by open space and marshland,
but the bulk of the bayside is protected by a seawall
which was overtopped during Sandy. Many natural
and constructed protective features around the bay
are insufficient, aging, or inadequately maintained,
leaving significant flooding risk for all of these
communities.
On the ocean side, the Rockaway Peninsula
faces risks due to its extensive unobstructed
coastline. While much of the coastline contains
beaches, many lack extensive protective features
and experience regular erosion. At the same
time, the Rockaway Peninsula provides valuable
protection to communities within the bay, acting
as a barrier island and reducing surge and wave
heights within the bay itself. The beach nourishment
and dune-building efforts being undertaken by the
United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) on
the Rockaway Peninsula therefore have potential
risk-reducing impacts for all communities on the
bay.
All of the Jamaica Bay communities suffered
significantly during Superstorm Sandy, some
from flooding or surge and some from wave
action damage. According to an assessment
conducted by NYC Department of Buildings, 37

percent of the buildings destroyed during Hurricane
Sandy were located in this region. Homes,
businesses, beaches and parklands, schools,
roadways, and mass transit were all damaged; the
area also endured one of the most extensive and
long-lasting power outages in the City.
Flooding risks are likely to be exacerbated
throughout the bay by projected sea level rise
associated with climate change. According
to FEMA’s Preliminary Work Maps, the 100-year
floodplain in the area has expanded for the borough
of Queens by 40 percent since 1983, and floodplain
expansion has been especially dramatic for the
Jamaica Bay/South Queens area.
Many Jamaica Bay communities also face
insufficient emergency access. Single access
routes to communities such as Breezy Point and
Broad Channel and certain parts of Old Howard
Beach, including bridges and roadways that were
damaged or flooded, also constrained emergency
response and hindered evacuation.
There are also ecological factors to consider:
Jamaica Bay is a tidal estuary. Though severely
degraded over the 19th and 20th centuries, it is
still a dynamic ecosystem providing critical habitat
to a variety of species, including a number of
protected and threatened birds and other species
who inhabit both the beach and bay. Habitat loss

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

Red Hook

Howard Beach

Broad
Broad Channel
Channel

Sheepshead Bay

Jamaica Bay

Gerritsen Beach

Rockaway
Community Park

Rockaway East
Rockaway Inlet

Brighton Beach
Coney Island
Manhattan Beach
& Sea Gate

Jacob Riis
Park

Rockaway West
Breezy Point

Atlantic Ocean

0

4,500

9,000

Feet
18,000

¯

NYRCR planning communities in Jamaica Bay

Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning | 29

NYRCR Program

and degradation of the bay’s chemical, physical
and biological environment has largely been due to
human activities, although by the city and federal
agencies over the last two decades have yielded
dramatic improvements in the bay’s water and
habitat quality.
In this hydrologically connected system,
projects and interventions in one area of the
bay can have ecological and coastal protection
ramifications across the estuary. The cumulative
impact of individual projects implemented in different
locations around the bay can be greater than the
sum of their individual impacts. At the same time,
interactions between projects can sometimes have
negative effects including, though rarely, induced
wave or surge activity.
Because of these interdependencies, the
six NYRCR bay communities will form a
Jamaica Bay NYRCR Working Group. The
group will review respective Conceptual Plans
and assess opportunities to strategically protect
their communities in concert. These regional
strategies will be included in the Final Community
Reconstruction Plans.
To maximize benefits and minimize risk,
coordination among efforts by NYRCR
communities as well as the various City, State
and Federal agencies active within the bay
will be needed. The newly formed Jamaica Bay
Resiliency Institute, established through an initiative
to be led by CUNY in partnership with NYC, the
National Parks Service (NPS), and Trust for Public

30 | Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning

Land, among other organizations, is a potential
partner and presents an opportunity for NYRCR
communities in Jamaica Bay to collaborate with
other organizations and agencies.

Existing Plans, Studies, and
Projects
In order to avoid duplication of plans and to
best identify how the NYRCR Program may
fill existing gaps, the consulting team has
reviewed past and ongoing plans, studies, and
projects in Broad Channel and surrounding
areas. Major existing plans, studies, and projects
in Jamaica Bay and citywide are described below.
Relevant plans and projects specific to Broad
Channel are also described in more detail in the
matrix that follows.

Jamaica Bay Initiatives
NYC Department of Environmental Protection’s
Jamaica Bay Watershed Protection Plan.
Authorized in 2005 and ini number of ongoing
studies and projects in the bay which could provide
resiliency benefits for NYRCR communities. These
include studies that pre-dated Superstorm Sandy
as well as post-Sandy updates to the previous
plans and studies.
Hudson Raritan Estuary (HER) Comprehensive
Restoration Plan (CRP). Adopted in 2009, The
HER-CRP was developed in collaboration with
federal, state, municipal, and non-governmental
organizations as well as other regional stakeholders.
It sets forth a consensus vision, master plan and

strategy for ecosystem future restoration in the New
York/New Jersey Harbor. In Jamaica Bay, the plan
identified 39 potential restoration sites. Some of
these restoration projects have been acted upon,
but most have not.
Jamaica Bay, Marine Park and Plumb Beach,
New York Ecosystem Restoration Feasibility
Study. The study is a joint undertaking of the
USACE and the NYCDEP and is intended to
provide an expedited limited reevaluation of USACE
restoration projects in the bay to address postSandy changes. The interim draft report identified
8 priority restoration sites (550 acres) from the
HRE-CRP recommendations, 6 of which are in
NYRCR Communities: Dead Horse Bay, Paerdegat
Basin, Fresh Creek, Spring Creek, Hawtree Point,
Bayswater State Park, Dubos Point, and Brant
Point. In addition, the feasibility study will look at
Marsh Island Restoration Projects and two other
restoration projects being undertaken under
the USACE’s Continuing Authorities Program –
Gerritsen Creek and Upper Spring Creek, as well
as ongoing USACE Storm Reduction Studies and
Navigation projects in area.
East Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway Inlet
(Rockaway Beach) Reformulation Study This
project reevaluates
recommendations by the
existing USACE plan for the area in light of the
impacts of Sandy. Phase 1, for which the draft
report should be completed this Fall, looks at beach
nourishment and additional erosion control and/
or storm damage risk reduction measures on the
ocean side of the Rockaway Peninsula. Phase 2,

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

for which the draft report is expected in October of
2015, will investigate flooding on the Jamaica Bay
side of the peninsula and evaluate potential coastal
storm risk management reduction measures.

Additional Citywide Initiatives
Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency.
On June 11th, Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced
the release of “A Stronger, More Resilient New
York,” (SIRR Report) forming New York City’s plan
for rebuilding post-Sandy and ensuring resiliency
into the future. The plan contains actionable
recommendations both for rebuilding communities
in the City impacted by Sandy and for increasing
the resiliency of buildings and infrastructure citywide. All NYRCR communities within the city will
need to coordinate their proposed projects with
the initiatives proposed in the City’s Plan. Specific
initiatives for Broad Channel proposed in the SIRR
Report are summarized in the “Existing Plans and
Projects” table at the end of this section. More
broadly, the plan lays out numerous city-wide
initiatives to improve resiliency for systems including
coastal protection, buildings, insurance, utilities,
liquid fuels, healthcare, telecommunications,
transportation, parks, water and wastewater and
other critical networks which NYRCR communities
will need to coordinate with their own proposals.
Particularly relevant to NYRCR communities
are ongoing and potential future updates
to the building and zoning code. The City’s
Building Resiliency Task Force identified 33
recommendations to the City Council. Many
of these recommendations are still in various

states of review by the council, but five initiatives
have been passed. In addition, the Department
of City Planning's Flood Resilience Zoning Text
Amendment was approved by City Council on
October 9th. The report and latest updates on
implementation can be found on the SIRR website:
http://www.nyc.gov/html/sirr/.
NYC Recovery Program. In addition to resiliency,
the City has launched several initiatives to help
residents across the five boroughs recover from
the damage caused by Sandy. The City’s “Build
It Back” program seeks to assist homeowners,
landlords, and tenants whose homes were
damaged by Sandy. The NYC Recovery Program
is also offering business loans and grants to
small business owners damaged by Sandy. Most
of these recovery programs support resiliency
investments and will help improve individual
homes and businesses in the communities
surrounding Jamaica Bay. More information on
the NYC Recovery program can be found here:
http://www.nyc.gov/html/recovery/.
FEMA Flood Maps and Flood Risk Assessment.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) describes its assessment of flood risk
through flood maps referred to as Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRMs). These maps are used by the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) to set
flood insurance rates. When Superstorm Sandy hit
New York City, the FIRMs in use were based on
information from 1983. Sandy inundation extended
well beyond what these maps estimated would be
the 100 year floodplain, calling attention to the fact

that an update to these maps was needed. In fact,
before Hurricane Sandy, FEMA had begun a coastal
flood study to update Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMs) for portions of New York and New Jersey
using improved methods and data to better reflect
coastal flood risk.
After Sandy, FEMA first released Advisory Base
Flood Elevation (ABFE) maps based on the partially
completed flood study for certain communities which
were designed to help in rebuilding and recovery
efforts. In June of 2013, FEMA released preliminary
work maps for New York City, including the full
results of the coastal flood study. The preliminary
work maps are based on the same underlying data
as the earlier ABFE maps, but include the results
of a more refined analysis of shoreline conditions,
including the effects of erosion and wave runup.
The maps are a “draft” product that FEMA shared
in advance of the preliminary FIRMs, which are
expected to be released by the end of 2013. The
final updated FIRMs are anticipated to be released
in 2015. These final FIRMs will guide new Flood
Insurance rates for homeowners and businesses in
the floodplain.
FEMA’s flood maps do not take into account future
conditions and thus do not factor in potential sea
level rise. The New York City Panel on Climate
Change (NPCC) is continuing to analyze potential
climate change impacts on New York City, namely
sea level rise. The NPCC released a report “Climate
Risk Information 2013: Observations, Climate
Change Projections, and Maps” in conjunction
with the SIRR Report and provides New York City’s

Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning | 31

NYRCR Program

estimates for sea level rise over various time frames.
They are expected to update these estimates in the
near future. In addition, New York City has hired the
Steven’s Institute of Technology to map flood zones
with added sea level rise for future decades. This is
being done within the NPCC framework and will be
reported and released through NPCC this winter.

In Summary
Key takeaways from review of existing plans,
studies, and projects that specifically address
Broad Channel include:

•
•

Planning for Jamaica Bay restoration and
resilience is already being carried out, led by
USACE.
Infrastructure projects – including roadway,
transit, sewer, and bulkhead – are under
construction.

32 | Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning

Based on review of existing plans and initial
engagement, existing gaps in planning include:

•

More wide-scale infrastructure improvements
(such as additional street raisings or bulkhead
repair) may not have yet been studied.

•

While natural resources restoration has been
studied, funding is not necessarily identified.

•

The status of large-scale infrastructure
improvements needs to be investigated.

•

Hardening of community social services and
evacuation plans for disabled and senior
populations.

Existing plans, studies, and projects are summarized
in the below matrix indicating the organization
leading the planning process, key analysis and
proposed initiatives, the Recovery Functions these
initiatives address, and the status of the plan, study,
or project.

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

Natural & Cultural
Resources

Infrastructure

Housing

Health & Social
Services

Community Planning
& Capacity Building

6 Recovery Functions
Economic
Development

Initiative Description
Lead Organization(s)

Plan/Project
Name

Sub-Category
(Pre-Planning,
Planning, Under
Construction,
Complete/In
Operation)

NYC
Department
of Design &
Construction
(NYCDDC)
Capital Projects
(HWQ1182A)

NYCDDC/NYC
Department of
Transportation
(NYCDOT)

Install bulkheads at the end of West 11th, 12th and
13th Roads, and perform roadway reconstruction
from the new bulkheads back to Cross Bay
Boulevard. This project includes installation of
one-way storm water drain valves to decrease the
frequency, severity and duration of flooding in this
low lying area. Includes raising roadways above
flood levels.

x

Coastal Protection
/ Infrastructure

NYCDDC
Capital Projects
(HW394FED)

NYCDDC/
NYCDOT

"Roadway resurfacing w, installation of pedestrian
ramps at designated streets, and installation of
new curbs and sidewalks where directed.

x

Infrastructure

A Stronger
More Resilient
New York (SIRR
Report)

NYC Office
of Long-Term
Planning and
Sustainability
(OLTPS)

Raise bulkheads in low-lying neighborhoods across
the city to minimize inland tidal flooding (SIRR
Coastal Protection Initiative # 6)

x

Coastal Protection

A Stronger
More Resilient
New York (SIRR
Report)

NYC Economic
Development
Corp.
(NYCEDC)/
OLTPS

Develop an implementation plan to address
frequent tidal inundation in Broad Channel and
Hamilton Beach, incorporating international best
practices. (SIRR, South Queens Initiative #2)

x

Coastal Protection

A Stronger
More Resilient
New York (SIRR
Report)

OLTPS

Call on USACE to study implementation of a surge
barrier or other mechanisms to protect storm surge
through Rockaway Inlet

x

Coastal Protection

A Stronger
More Resilient
New York (SIRR
Report)

NYC
Department of
City Planning
(NYCDCP)/
OLTPS

Study and implement zoning changes to
encourage retrofits of existing buildings and
construction of new resilient buildings in the 100year floodplain (SIRR, Buildings Initiative #3); Also
additional Building Initiatives.

A Stronger,
More Resilient
NY

National Park
Service (NPS)
& City of NYC

Jamaica Bay Resiliency Institute. Establish a center
for resiliency and restoration efforts in the Jamaica
Bay-Rockaway Parks (SIRR, Parks Initiative #13)

Build It Back

NYC Recovery

Two Year Rental Subsidy; Renter Services

x

x

Status
(Pre-Planning, Planning,
Under Construction,
Complete/In Operation)

In construction
procurement; to be
completed March 2017

Coastal Protection

ongoing

Ecological
Restoration /
Coastal Protection

Consortium to be lead
by CUNY announced
8/12/2013. Resiliency
symposium initiating the
center held 10/18/2013.

Social Services

ongoing

Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning | 33

NYRCR Program

VI. Next Steps
Projects and Strategies
The next steps of the NYRCR Program planning
process will fully explore new and complimentary
strategies and projects, evaluate financial and
regulatory feasibility, and help generate a priority
list of projects to propose for funding. From this
initial stage in the process, an early understanding
of potential short-term and long-term projects is
beginning to take shape.
The Broad Channel community has identified
a number of initial projects and strategies for
consideration. This section highlights and organizes
these preliminary strategies and initiatives in order to
share the ideas generated thus far from the process
and meetings. This is not a set of formal proposals.
Over the next two months, the next steps of the
NYRCR Program planning process will be to more
fully explore strategies and potential projects,
evaluate their financial and regulatory feasibility,
and prioritize a final list of projects to propose for
funding. As such, the contents in the section will
evolve.
When Superstorm Sandy struck, the damage to
individual businesses and property owners was
extensive. But there were significant community
assets that also suffered. The Broad Channel
committee wants to ensure that its strong sense of
community is not eroded along with the beaches
that line both sides of the island. To that end, many
early proposals are focused on those facilities that

34 | Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning

support the functions of the community, provide
for its recreational outlets, serve as its meeting
and gathering places, and capture its culture and
history.
The committee is looking first and foremost at
projects that can be implemented right away that
will be of significant value to the community and will
help to strengthen the community, The proposals
are broken down into an initial phase of short term
projects which may potentially be funded out of the
current allocation of CDBG-DR funds, and which
we have classified as priority projects because they
are low cost, short term, and easy to implement.
These projects are listed in no particular order,
broken down by the NYS DOS Recovery Function
categories.

Short Term Priority Projects
Economic Development

•

Project: The Business District Complete
Street Strategy – The business district was
heavily damaged by Superstorm Sandy and
in addition is a critical need in the town as the
island geography of the town leaves residents
entirely dependent on local businesses
for supplies when critical supplies such as
gasoline are in short supply. The proposal
would develop a strategy for durable
permeable pavement, a design aesthetic for

the buildings along Cross Bay Boulevard and
additional landscape strategies to promote
development, make the streets more resilient
for flood damage, and reduce storm water
runoff to reduce impacts on the combined
sewer overflow system (CSO).

Health and Social Services

•

Project: Make Recovery and Resiliency
Improvements to the American Legion
Hall – The American Legion Hall was the
central location out of which relief efforts
were conducted and supplies were initially
distributed in the aftermath of Sandy. More
than 800 people a day from Broad Channel
and from around the region were fed in the
aftermath of the storm. In the event of another
storm event, a resilient facility will be critical
to efforts to recover. The building, however,
suffered flood and infrastructure damage
(heating and electrical damage) and needs to
be made more resilient to withstand another
such event. The Committee has suggested an
initiative to flood proof the building and retrofit
the building with generators, solar powered
phones and communication equipment.
In addition, the Committee has suggested
safeguarding critical equipment like the
heating and ventilation system, by relocating
it to the roof area. The goal is to create a

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

E1

E

RD

E3

C

RT

BE

RD

E5
W5

RD

RD

A

W 6 RD

E6

RD

E 7 RD

W
EK

AD

9

RD

NOEL RD

8

RD

E 8 RD

RD

E
CR

SH

T RD

W

WES

D

WALTON RD

F

E4

RD

LANARK RD

H

E 9 RD

W 10 RD

E 10 RD

W 11 RD

W 12 RD

E 12 RD

W 13 RD
W 14 RD

CROSS BA
Y BLVD

Broad
Channel
Short-term
Broad
Channel
Planning
Committee
Project
Priorities
Priority
Projects
A - Historical
Society
Digitizing
A - Historical
Society
DigitizingProject
Project
B - Funding
to
augment
future
New
B - Funding to augment future New
Volunteer
FireFire
Department
Volunteer
Departmentbuilding
building
C - Improvements
to
BCAC
C - Improvements to BCAC
D - Improvements
to to
VFW
D - Improvements
VFWHall
Wall
E - Improvements to America Legion
E - Improvements to America Legion Hall
Hall
F - Sunset Cove
F - Sunset Cove
G - Restore Access Along 12th Road
G - Restore
Access Along 12th Road
H - Lanark
Road
Infrastructure
H - Lanark
Road
Infrastructure
Improvements
Improvements
I - Harden Commercial and Streetscaping
I - Harden
Commercial and
of Cross Bay Blvd
Streetscaping of Cross Bay Blvd

B

RD

W 15 RD
W 16 RD

G

E 14 RD

E 16 RD

W 17 RD

CHANNEL
RD

W 18 RD

W 19 RD

W 20 RD

I

CROSS BA
Y BLVD

E 20 RD
E 21 RD

Broad Channel short-term priority projects

Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning | 35

NYRCR Program

restoration center within Broad Channel that
will be able to handle the needs of the town in
the event of another Sandy-type storm event.

•

•

Project: Digitize the historical records
for Broad Channel and seek to establish
a physical historical society – Broad
Channel’s extensive historical records have
been kept and catalogued by the Broad
Channel Historical Society and housed
within the public library. When Superstorm
Sandy hit, the library was flooded and the
records damaged. The community sees this
information as a treasure and as an important
connection to the history of the island. The
notion of preserving records is a first step in a
larger and more ambitious plan to developing
a physical home for the Broad Channel
Historical Society, which would be both a
beacon for the community and a potential
source of tourism interest and revenue.
Project: Broad Channel Volunteer Fire
Department (BCVFD) completion of the
second
floor
electrical/mechanical/
communications equipment that would
enable multi-agency utilization during
emergencies – Broad Channel Volunteer
Fire Department (BCVFD) fire house is a
known fixture on Broad Channel. Many of the
residents have served stints in the fire house.
The BCVFD has long sought to construct a
new facility that would more appropriately
service its ability to respond to fire alarms
and provide ambulance service. The effects
of Superstorm Sandy reinforce the urgency of

36 | Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning

this need. The goal has been to build the new
facility near to other community facilities at the
northern edge of the community. This project
has been funded through the New York State
Dormitory Authority and the hope is that the
fire house will soon be able to proceed with
construction. However, in the wake of Sandy,
it is clear that additional components of the
firehouse would increase its ability to serve
the community during storm events and other
crisis situations. This project seeks funding to
make those additional improvements to the
facility.

•

•

Project: Make recovery and resiliency
improvements to the Broad Channel
Athletic Club – The Broad Channel Athletic
Club, always a center of the community
serving children of all ages (including a pre-K
center, day care, summer day camp, scouts,
organizations and general community) is
currently the only community center with
a second floor above the flood plain and
became a key community center in the
weeks and months after Superstorm Sandy.
Damage to equipment, facilities, and fields
was significant. The hope is to replace lost
equipment, rebuild indoor and outdoor
facilities that were damaged, construct a new
resilient storage system, create an emergency
power system, and protect the building and
site from future storm surge.
Project: Make recovery and resiliency
improvements to the Veterans of Foreign
Wars (VFW) Hall – The VFW hall is one of

the few meeting facilities on Broad Channel.
It suffered damage during Sandy and needs
to have its main access rebuilt and include a
completely ADA accessible facility so that in
the event of another storm event, it will play its
key role as an additional resource center able
to service the community in conformance
with ADA guidelines.

Infrastructure Systems and Natural and Cultural Resources

•

Project: Rebuild the East 12th Road
Boardwalk – There is a group of homes that
are only accessible by the East 12th Road
Board Walk, a city-owned wooden structure
that suffered severe damage during Sandy.
The homes serviced by this walkway are
historic “stilt-homes” that have been featured
in numerous movies and films and represent
Broad Channel’s waterfront roots. This
project would design for a new boardwalk
and fund its reconstruction as an elevated,
stronger and more resilient access point to
these important historic waterfront homes,
preserving an element of the unique character
of Broad Channel into the next generation.

•

Project: Provide necessary infrastructure
to Lanark Road – Lanark Road homeowners
saw serious impact to their homes during
Superstorm Sandy. This is the only area in
Broad Channel that is not currently serviced
by a sanitary sewer system. The project
would develop a strategy to build a new

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

sewer system which would run from house
to house.

•

Project: Restore the bulkhead and convert
the shoreline into a wetland habitat in
Sunset Cove – Sunset Cove lies along
the southwestern edge of Broad Channel
where the residential community butts up
against the Gateway National Recreation
Area wildlife refuge. There are 17 acres of
undeveloped land at the southern portion of
Broad Channel that have been identified for
a potential restoration project. Although not
currently funded, proposals have been made
to convert the dilapidated bulkhead into a
living shoreline including wetlands, naturalstone revetments, and oyster reefs as well
as an on-land vegetated berm or dune. The
Committee has proposed that this project
be revisited and designed to protect against
future projected storm conditions.

The committee has also focused on additional
projects which are not yet funded but which may
qualify for funding through identification of potential
grant opportunities. These projects have been
classified as long term projects because they will
take longer to implement, involve greater complexity,
and may be implemented by others. The following
long term projects are listed in no particular order,
broken down by the NYS DOS Recovery Function
categories.

Long Term Projects

is a concentration of community uses in the
north (an area at higher elevation), which
could turn into a campus of community uses
and serve important gathering functions
during emergency events and for general
recreational community needs.

Economic Development

•

Project: Rebuild and make resilient
businesses along Cross Bay Boulevard –
The collection of businesses along Cross Bay
Boulevard serves as an important commercial
anchor for the community. While at a higher
elevation than other parts of Broad Channel,
Cross Bay Boulevard is still in a high-risk zone
and efforts should be made to make buildings
along the corridor more resilient, including
flood-proofing ground floors, in addition to
ensuring power, medical, and food supply
for the area through back-up generators,
emergency medical supplies, or additional
food.

Housing

•

Project: Financing to help residents
fund building-resiliency improvements,
and business-owners to fund both
building and operational recovery – Many
businesses along Cross Bay Boulevard have
been unable to reopen since Sandy. Financing
for repairs and for covering business losses
would support long-term economic recovery.

•

Project:
Consider
raising
houses
currently at ground level – While many of
the houses in Broad Channel are on stilts or
raised above the ground plane, there are still
others at ground level that face increased
flood risk. Projects should be investigated to
elevate such houses, especially those without
basements, to guard against future flooding.
When analyzing the opportunity for elevating
homes, we will need to analyze the impact on
access and the relationship to the street.

Health and Social Services

•

•

Project: Expand healthcare infrastructure
Broad Channel lacks regular and emergency
health services. This is particularly worrisome
for the community’s senior population, who
may need additional assistance in cases
of emergency. One way to expand health
access would be to include health services
within the offerings of any new multi-purpose
community or social service centers that are
developed in the area.
Project: Rebuild and enhance resiliency
of community centers – Several important
community centers were damaged in the
storm, and the community is interested in
rebuilding these spaces and making them
more resilient to sustain future storms. There

Infrastructure Systems and Natural and Cultural Resources

•

Project: Expand the street-raising pilot
that will be implemented on West 10th–
13th Roads to other similar areas on the
island – Broad Channel is proceeding with a
capital project (Project ID: HWQ1182A), which
will see three initial streets in Broad Channel

Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning | 37

NYRCR Program

•

•

raised as much as 3 feet in a shared-streets
design concept to mitigate tidal flooding. The
western side of Broad Channel west of Cross
Bay Boulevard is characterized by a number
of dead-end streets sandwiched between
inlets. By expanding the initial pilot south to
encompass all of the blocks down to 19th
Street, a comprehensive approach to flood
protection for a large section of the western
side of Broad Channel could be implemented.
Additional streets should be considered under
the current study to be funded for replication
of the initial project design and based upon
observations of its relative success.

wetlands and tidal flats. The houses along
this side are mostly clustered against Cross
Bay Boulevard and the finger roads that jut
eastward into the Bay. To the west is Cross
Bay Boulevard and to the east is the right-ofway for the A train and the island and structure
that support that piece of infrastructure.
During Superstorm Sandy, wind direction
came up this channel. Similar wind-aided
wave action has been experienced during
nor’easters. A strategy to reduce wave action
on or off-shore could reduce the impact of
wave action to this part of Broad Channel.

Project: Create a wetland and rock
revetment at the end of the western
canal blocks – While there may be a
number of locations that should be taken
into consideration for new combined wetland
and upland strategies, the committee noted
the particular location of Western Canal
as a priority concern. The goal would be
to establish a rock revetment and then,
similar to the effort undertaken with the Big
Egg restoration project, sediment could be
pumped behind the revetment to create
a zone that would help to dissipate wave
action and storm energy prior to reaching the
adjacent community.

Beyond local needs and strategies, the Broad
Channel committee has raised issues relating
to the larger region and its impact upon Broad
Channel. The community is focused on major
connections and larger regional strategies
that will benefit Broad Channel.

Project: Create combined berm and
wetland strategy to protect the eastern
side of Broad Channel – South of 9th Road
on the east side of Cross Bay Boulevard,
the island quickly becomes an area of

38 | Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning

•

Project: Develop a strategy to control
flood waters in the northeast section of
the island – When Superstorm Sandy struck,
the residents on the east side of Cross Bay
Boulevard and north of East 9th Road, like all
of the neighborhoods in Broad Channel, were
flooded. In this area, two critical weak points
were seen as the most important locations
to focus on to try and control flooding in this
section of the island. There is a culvert that sits
under Cross Bay Boulevard along the neck of
the island allowing water to flush between the
wetlands on the west and the wildlife refuge
on the east. Floodwaters poured through

this area, bringing water across the land and
into this community. In the south, there is a
backflow preventer at the southern end of
West Road that allows tidewaters to funnel
into the community from the south. These
two weak points should be investigated.

•

Project: Extend the natural gas pipeline
to Broad Channel – This island community
is the only area in the city of New York that
is not currently supplied with a natural gas
supply main. This was originally due to the
geography and the difficulty of running a gas
main across Jamaica Bay. With the advent of
recent technological advances, particularly
horizontal directional drilling, it is now possible
to run a gas main under Jamaica Bay from
Rockaway. Considering the impact that
the island experienced during Superstorm
Sandy (hundreds of overturned oil tanks
and thousands of gallons of oil spilling into
the fragile environment of Jamaica Bay), a
gas main could mitigate such future events.
In addition, the impact on the environment
would be greatly enhanced if the potential
existed to convert these homes from fuel oil
to natural gas.

•

Project: Create oyster reefs within
Jamaica Bay to reduce storm energy
and combat eutrophication of the bay –
The creation of oyster reefs within Jamaica
Bay could help to reduce storm energy and
help mitigate the eutrophication problem
that the bay is experiencing. Preliminary data
indicates that not only will oysters survive in

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

Jamaica Bay, but also that they are found to
be reproducing near the test site areas used
to date.

•

Project: Create additional wetland
islands in Jamaica Bay to minimize wave
heights – In coordination with the agencies
working towards wetland expansion solutions
in Jamaica Bay, there is an opportunity to
create additional wetland islands to help
reduce wave heights during storm events
and lessen the impact to Broad Channel
and all neighborhoods fronting on the Bay.
The committee has suggested that this
opportunity should be approached in the
following priority order:

▪▪
▪▪
▪▪
▪▪
•

Pumpkin Patch island
Duck Point
Big Egg (South)
Little Egg

Project: Explore the development of
a surge barrier or other protection
measures to protect Jamaica Bay
against future storm events – On a much
larger scale, the Committee supports the
further investigation of a protection plan at
the mouth of Jamaica Bay as proposed in the
City's plan, "A Stronger, More Resilient New
York." There are a number of agencies looking
into a larger regional Jamaica Bay solution,
but the committee saw an opportunity to
look at existing infrastructure like the Gil
Hodges Bridge and adjacent lands on both
sides of the bay to formulate a plan for a

large floodgate. Such a gate would need to
be coordinated with other projects, including
a proposed dune to protect the seaward
edge of the Rockaway Peninsula as well as
other protection measures along the Bayside
seawall that protects the Rockaways, and
wetland expansion and restoration within the
bay. A strategy of this magnitude would be
implemented with the recognition that it is
being designed to protect the assets of the
entire Rockaway Peninsula, all of the bayside
communities of Bayswater, Howard Beach,
Broad Channel, and Hamilton Beach, Mill
Basin, Canarsie, and Gerritsen Beach, as well
as JFK Airport.

Next Steps
The Conceptual Plan is the first critical milestone
in the NYRCR effort. The next step in the plan will
be to evaluate these proposal concepts and any
others brought forth by the community through
our next public meeting. These proposals will be
researched to understand their ability to reduce risk,
whether they are technically feasible, their order-ofmagnitude cost, whether there is a funding source
and/or funds available, and what co-benefits can
be achieved.
Short-term and long-term projects will then be
coordinated to formulate an overall plan of action
for resilience for the community. There will be three
additional public meetings to refine the plan and the
projects. The final plan will be completed on March
31st of 2014.

Implementation Planning
After defining priority projects and actions,
the Committee will utilize the expertise of
its planning team to identify a path towards
implementation.
The goal for the implementation plan will be to
achieve actionable results for the community which
focuses on four core components: regulation,
funding, complementary programs, and
building capacity to implement.
The plan will identify:

•

Order-of-magnitude project costs associated
with implementing resiliency projects

•
•

Potential funding sources for projects

•

Responsible parties for each of the activities
to be conducted in accordance with the
recommended project

•

Target goals, timelines and project budget for
each responsible party

•

Process for amending the work plan should
timeline lapse or costs exceeding the
projected budgets

Detailed work plan outlining activities to
implement proposed actions including
regulatory actions and program development
as well as infrastructure investment

To accomplish certain infrastructure projects,
regulatory and legislative changes may be
required. In these instances, the plan will include
the process for which these changes can be
achieved. Regulatory and legislative changes could

Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning | 39

NYRCR Program

include changes to current zoning and/or permitted
uses in a specific area. The implementation plan
will identify the regulatory and legislative entities
that will be engaged to initiate the changes as
well as the community representative who will
champion and push for the appropriate regulatory

or legislative change. The implementation plan will
consider Broad Channel's resources and identify
if implementation can be achieved with existing
resources or if additional staff will be required, and if
so, the mechanisms for securing and managing the
additional resources.

Steps Completed

Identify Assets,
Risks, Needs,
Opportunities

Define
Community
Goals & Vision

40 | Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning

Identify, evaluate,
and prioritize
Projects and
Actions

Identify Funding
Sources
and develop
Implementation
Plan

Create Final
Community
Reconstruction
Plan

Broad Channel Conceptual Plan

Rebuilding and Resiliency Planning | 41

