    
  

Canarsie

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

December 2014

  

~ NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Canarsie

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

December 2014

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

This document was developed by the Canarsie NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee as
part of the NYRCR Program within the Governor’s Office of
Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is supported by New
York State (NYS) Homes and Community Renewal and NYS
Department of State.

This document was prepared by the following consulting firms:

HR&A Advisors, Inc.
Parsons Brinkerhoff
SCAPE/LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE

Members of the Canarsie NYRCR Planning Committee:

Emily James (Co-chair)
Harold Jones (Co-chair)
Melba Brown

Lucina Clarke

Maria Garrett

Molly Griffith

Rabbi Avorhom Hecht
Rabbi Yosef Serebryanski
Debbie Tiamfook

Back Cover: Alexander Rabb!

All Photos taken by Consultant Team unless otherwise noted.
Further reproduction prohibited without permission of photographer.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Foreword Introduction

In the span of approximately one year, beginning in August 2011, the State
of New York experienced three extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the lives
of New Yorkers and their communities. These tragic disasters signaled
that New Yorkers are living in a new reality defined by rising sea levels
and extreme weather events that will occur with increased frequency and
power. They also signaled that we need to rebuild our communities in a
way that will mitigate against future risks and build increased resilience.

To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo led the
charge to develop an innovative, community-driven planning program on
a scale unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program, within the Governor's
Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR), empowers the State’s most impacted
communities with the technical expertise and funding resources needed to
develop thorough and implementable reconstruction plans to build phys-
ically, socially, and economically resilient and sustainable communities.

Program Overview

The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo in April of 2013, isa
more than $700 million planning and implementation program established
to provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities severely
damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy.
Drawing on lessons learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR
Program is a unique combination of bottom-up community participation
and State-provided technical expertise. This powerful combination rec-
ognizes not only that community members are best positioned to assess
the needs and opportunities of the places where they live and work, but
also that decisions are best made when they are grounded in rigorous
analysis and informed by the latest innovative solutions.

Launched in the summer of 2013 and completed in March 2014, Round | of
the NYRCR planning process included 50 NYRCR Planning Areas, com-
prising 102 storm-impacted localities. In January 2014, Governor Cuomo
announced a second round of the planning process, serving an additional
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

22 storm-impacted localities. Four of these localities were absorbed into
existing Round | NYRCR Planning Areas, bringing the number of locali-
ties participating in Round | up to 106; the other 18 localities formed 16
new Round Il NYRCR Planning Areas. Between Rounds | and Il, there
are 66 NYRCR Planning Areas, comprising 124 localities. The program
serves over 2.7 million New Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square miles,
which is equivalent to 14% of the overall State population and 12% of the
State’s overall geography.

In Rounds | and Il, the State allotted between $3 million and $25 million to
each participating locality for the implementation of eligible projects identi-
fied in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for these projects is provided through
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community
Development Block Grant - Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program.”

Each NYRCR Planning Area is represented by a NYRCR Planning
Committee composed of local residents, business owners, and civic
leaders. Members of the Planning Committees were identified in con-
sultation with established local leaders, community organizations and, in
some cases, municipalities. The NYRCR Program sets a new standard for
community participation in recovery and resiliency planning, with com-
munity members leading the planning process. Across the State, more
than 650 New Yorkers have represented their communities by serving
on Planning Committees. Nearly 650 Planning Committee Meetings have
been held, during which Planning Committee members worked with the
State’s team to develop community reconstruction plans, which identify
opportunities to make their communities more resilient. All meetings
were open to the public. An additional 250+ Public Engagement Events
attracted thousands of community members, who provided feedback on
the planning process and resulting proposals. The NYRCR Program’s out-
reach has included communities that are traditionally underrepresented,
such as immigrant populations and students. All planning materials are
posted on the program’s website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), pro-
viding several ways for community members and the public to submit
feedback on the program and materials in progress.

Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were supported
by staff from GOSR, planners from New York State (NYS) Department
of State and NYS Department of Transportation, and consultants from
world-class planning firms that specialize in engineering, flood mitigation
solutions, green infrastructure, and more.

The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR Plan. Governor
Cuomo has allotted over $700 million for planning as well as imple-
menting eligible projects identified in NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Planning
Areas are also eligible for additional funds through the NY Rising to the
Top Competition, which evaluates applications from Round II NYRCR
Planning Committees across three categories—Regional Approach,
Inclusion of Vulnerable Populations, and Use of Green Infrastructure. The
winner of each category will be allotted a share of the competition’s $3.5
million to fund additional eligible projects.

In April 2014, Governor Cuomo announced that projects identified in
NYRCR Plans would receive priority consideration through the State’s
Consolidated Funding Application (CFA) process and charged the
Regional Economic Development Councils (REDCs), which play an advi-
sory role in the CFA process, to support NYRCR projects. In December
2014, Governor Cuomo announced that 24 NYRCR projects received
nearly $12 million in CFA funding. This announcement is an example of the
Governor honoring his commitment to leverage the work of the NYRCR
Planning Committees to incorporate resilience into other State programs
and to find additional sources of funding for NYRCR projects. The NYRCR
Program is also working with both private and public institutions to iden-
tify existing funding sources and to create funding opportunities where
none existed before.

The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated with State and Federal
agencies to help guide the development of feasible projects. The program
has leveraged the REDC State Agency Review Teams (SARTs), composed
of representatives from dozens of State agencies and authorities, for feed-
back on projects proposed by NYRCR Planning Committees. The SARTs
review projects with an eye toward regulatory and permitting needs, policy
objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources. The NYRCR Program
is continuing to work with the SARTs to streamline the permitting process
and ensure shovels are in the ground as quickly as possible.

On the pages that follow, you will see the results of months of thoughttul,
diligent work by the Canarsie NYROR Planning Committee, which is pas-
sionately committed to realizing a brighter, more resilient future for its
community.

The NYRCR Plan

This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more resilient
community. Each NYRCR Planning Committee began the planning pro-
cess by defining the scope of its planning area, assessing storm damage,
and identifying critical issues. Next, the Planning Committee inventoried
critical assets in the community and assessed the assets’ exposure
to risk. On the basis of this work, the Planning Committee described
recovery and resiliency needs and identified opportunities. The Planning
Committee then developed a series of comprehensive reconstruction and
resiliency strategies, and identified projects and implementation actions
to help fulfill those strategies.

The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan are divided into
three categories. The order in which the projects and actions are listed in
this NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the Planning Committee’s
prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are proj-
ects proposed for funding through an NYRCR Planning Area’s allotment of
CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee has identified as important resiliency recommenda-
tions and has analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through
the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are
projects and actions that the Planning Committee would like to highlight
and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects.
The Proposed Projects and Featured Projects found in this NYRCR Plan
were voted for inclusion by voting members of the Planning Committee.
Those voting members with conflicts of interest recused themselves
from voting on any affected projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Handbook and Code of Conduct.

As part of Round II of the NYRCR Program, the Canarsie NYRCR Planning
Area has been allotted up to $11.9 million in CDBG-DR funds for the
implementation of eligible projects identified in this plan.

While developing projects for inclusion in NYRCR Plans, Planning
Committees took into account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the
effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical
assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees also
considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be eli-
gible for CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented with this
source of Federal funding must satisfy a Federally-designated eligible
activity category, fulfill a national objective (i.e., meeting an urgent need,
removing slums and blight, or benefiting low- to moderate-income individ-
uals), and have a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding is linked.
These are among the factors that GOSR will consider, in consultation with
local municipalities and nonprofit organizations, when determining which
projects and actions are best positioned for implementation.

The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan exceeds the
NYRCR Planning Area’s CDBG-DR allotment to allow for flexibility if some
Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review,
HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the
projects and actions found in this NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act. Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan does not
guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for CDBG-DR
funding or that it will be implemented. Projects will be implemented on a
staggered timeline, and the NYRCR Program will choose an appropriate
State or local partner to implement each project. GOSR will actively seek to
match projects with additional funding sources, when possible.

In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions out-
lined in this NYRCR Plan will become a reality, helping New York not only
to rebuild, but also to build back better.
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

NY Rising Communities

 

a
Ww
if :
- 1 : hy
; | | Capital District / North Country /
Niagara County Ae ae ) _Mohawk Valley
2 - ot
es , x
b j y ey |

   
 
   
  

¢

A | 7 _ | Southern Tier/
Sees Central New York = ¢

 

Hudson Valley /
Catskills

 
 

Greater
Long Island New York

City

 

 

 

Map displays the 66 NYRCR Planning Areas from Rounds | and Il. (Five of the Round | Planning Areas— Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery Counties—are not
funded through the CDBG-DR program.)
Contents

FOreWord 2.1... cee eee eee i
NY Rising Communities ........... 00000 eee eee eee vi
Executive Summary ........ 000: e eee eee eee eee ix

Community Overview

Geographic Scope .... 0.0... cea +1
Community Overview .. 0.0.00. 0 0.0 cca 2
Description of Storm Impacts... 0.0.0... 00.0. cee eee eee 8
Critical ISSueS 2... eee I-13
Community Vision... 0... ee I-18
Relationship to Regional Plans.......... 0.00.00 eee eee I-20

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Description of Community Assets.............. 00000 uae I-14
Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems............... I-15
Needs and Opportunities Assessment. ............-..00- I-20

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies ................. I-14

Implementation—Project Profiles

Projects Overview... 0... eee ete IV-1
Project List 0.0.0... 0. cette teens lV-2
Fresh Creek Coastal Protection... 0.0... cece eee ee IV-4
Fresh Creek Long-Term Restoration & Resiliency.......... IV-10
Canarsie Pier Access Improvements .............-+.055 IV-16
Canarsie Pier and Beach Community Enhancements ...... IV-22
Canarsie Youth and Environmental Education Program..... IV-28
Canarsie and Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Stormwater

Study and Pilot Projects ... 0.0.0.0... cee cee IV-32
Recovery Community Center ........ 0.00000: c eee eee IV-38
Critical Facility Upgrades Program. .............0-000005 IV-44

Canarsie Corps Program... 1.0.0.0... 0c cette eee IV-48

Homeowner Audit and Grant Program..............00005 IV-52
Resiliency Workforce Development ...............00005 IV-56
Resilient Streetscaping........... 0.0. c cece eee IV-60

Additional Materials

Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations ......... V-1
Table V-2: Master Table of Projects ...... 0.0.0... 0 cece eee V-3
Public Engagement... 1.0.0.0... 0.0 c ees V-5
Endnotes... eee eee V-16
GIOSSALY . 6 tee V-19
vi

Figures

Figure I-1: Canarsie Planning Area «1.10... tte eee 3
Figure |-2: Historic Growth in Canarsie in Relation to the Present Day Flood Map............ 5
Figure I-3: Superstorm Sandy Inundation Map... 1.0... 0.00: cet eee L9
Figure |-4: 311 Complaints 2 Weeks Following Superstorm Sandy ...........-..00000005 I-14
Figure I-5: 311 Complaints July 2013-14 2... tte I-15
Figure II-1: NYS Department of State Risk Map... 1.0... 0.0 ccc IL-3
Figure II-2: Health & Social Services Asset Map ... 0... 0.0 eect ee IL-5
Figure II-3: Economic Assets Map ....... 0.0000 c ect e ee I-7
Figure Il-4: Housing Assets Map... 0.0... ett eee IL-9
Figure II-5: Infrastructure Assets Map... 1.0... tte WI-11
Figure II-6: Natural and Cultural Resources Assets Map .......... 0000: cece ene eee I-13
Figure IV-1: Area and Levels of Protection ...... 0.00.0 c ce tte ee IV-5
Figure IV-2: Diagram Showing Public Access Points and Enhancements ................ IV-13
Figure IV-3: Conceptual Plan of Design Improvements at Canarsie Pier.................. IV-23
Figure IV-4: 311 Complaints July 2013-14 2... tee IV-33
Tables

Table Ill-1: Strategy Table 2... eens Ill-3
Table Ill-2: Strategy Table 6.0... tte II-5
Table Ill-3: Strategy Table 0.0... tte IIl-7
Table Ill-4: Strategy Table 6... ete Ill-9
Table Ill-5: Strategy Table... 0... tte I-13
Table Ill-6: Strategy Table... 0... ttt I-15
Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations. ..........0 000.0 ccc eee eee V-1
Table V-2: Master Table of Projects 2.0... 00. ccc eee eet n teen etn V-3
Table V-3: Community Asset Inventory... 0.0.0.0. tte V-9

vii
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Canarsie Pier, a popular destination for residents who enjoy fishing, picnicking, and stunning views of Jamaica Bay.
 

Executive Summary
Canarsie

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Canarsie, a serene neighborhood with striking waterfront views, sits on a
rectangular peninsula in Southeast Brooklyn and borders three expansive
bodies of water—Jamaica Bay, Paerdegat Basin and Fresh Creek. The
Community is also home to Canarsie Park, a 132-acre park under the
jurisdiction of the NYC Department of Parks and Recreation, that includes
ball fields, playgrounds, and a skate park. Canarsie Pier, extending out
from the neighborhood into Jamaica Bay, reinforces the Community's
relationship with nature, and is a popular destination for fisherman and
others looking to enjoy the waterfront.

The neighborhood is home to approximately 90,000 residents, most of
whom hail from the Caribbean. Nearly half of Canarsie’s residents are
homeowners and reside in primarily brick, low-density attached homes.
Commercial corridors run through the center of the neighborhood along
Avenue L and Rockaway Parkway, while single and multifamily homes
and low rise apartment buildings sit at the Community’s edges. Public
transportation, while present in the Community, is lacking, with more than
three-quarters of Canarsie residents commuting over an hour to down-
town Brooklyn, where most are employed.

Superstorm Sandy produced widespread damage in Canarsie, flooding
homes and critical facilities. High storm surge, coupled with a high-tide
condition during a full-moon cycle, led to waters rising above the height
of bulkheads and natural river banks. Jamaica Bay, Paerdegat Basin, and
Fresh Creek, while community amenities, also served as gateways for
rising waters during the storm. Water rose through storm sewers, eclipsing
manholes and flooding streets while wastewater rose up from toilets in
residents’ homes. Power outages were also rampant, closing businesses
and preventing residents from accessing supplies and support services.
Superstorm Sandy exposed vulnerabilities in the Community, most
notably the lack of a sufficient emergency response plan.

The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program was estab-
lished to provide additional re-building and revitalization assistance to
communities severely damaged during Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane
Irene, and Tropical Storm Lee. Through Community Development Block
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Current Flood Insurance Rate Map

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Canarsie Planning Area

| Planning Area

GBI ve zone (waves > 3)
[EJ 100 year floodplain (1% annual chance of flooding)
[| 500 year floodplain (0.2% annual chance of flooding)

The revision of the Flood Insurance Rate Maps in 2016 will bring a substantial change in the number of homes in the floodplain.

2016 Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Grant Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding from the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development, New York State has allotted up to
$11.9 million to fund eligible projects developed by the Canarsie NYRCR
Community. The community-driven process has led to projects and policy
recommendations that intend to enhance the physical, environmental,
social, and economic resiliency of the Community. The projects identified
in this Plan address Superstorm Sandy-related impacts and better pre-
pare communities for severe weather-related events in the future.

Community-Driven Process

The Committee was comprised of 9 volunteer members including home-
owners, civic leaders, and business leaders. They collaborated to devise
strategies to protect and prepare residents from future storms.

Throughout the participatory planning process, the Committee solicited
feedback from the wider community by hosting Public Engagement

= ; : Events. Over the course of many months, more than 300 residents, elected
Food trucks are a consistent presence on Canarsie Pier. officials, and professionals participated in 3 dynamic Public Engagement
Events, providing their feedback on the needs, strategies, and poten-
tial projects identified by the Committee. A fourth Public Engagement
Event is scheduled for January 2015. Ten Planning Committee Meetings
Community Vision Statement were held, all of which were open to and observed by the public. Through
active discussion and interactive exercises for soliciting feedback, the
Committee learned about resiliency measures tailored to the needs of

   

“Canarsie, a proudly diverse and peaceful their Community.
community surrounded by bountiful natural
and recreational resources, will become With the public’s input, the Committee developed alist of the most pressing

. needs and opportunities in Canarsie. They include more resilient water
a self-reliant, empowered, prosperous . . .

. . i management infrastructure, flood protection from storm surge, effective
community, and a model of sustainability emergency management and planning response, and homeowner assis-
and resilience.” tance, to name a few. The needs were used to draft a comprehensive

list of resiliency strategies, which served as the foundation for project
development.

xi
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

xii

Recovery Support Functions

The Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery has structured each plan to
focus on a set of criteria, known as the Recovery Support Functions.
These Recovery Support Functions were utilized when developing
needs, opportunities, strategies, and projects to ensure that a com-
prehensive approach is reinforced throughout the effort to shape a
well-rounded resiliency strategy for the Community.

Health & Social Services

Community Planning & Capacity Building

Economic Development

Natural & Cultural Resources

Housing

Infrastructure Systems

DOMOO®

Building on this foundation of needs, opportunities, and corresponding
strategies, the Committee developed resiliency projects. Proposed
Projects are projects recommended for funding through a NYRCR
Planning Area’s allotment of CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are
projects and actions that the Planning Committee has analyzed in depth
and identified as important resiliency recommendations, but has not
proposed for funding through the NYRGR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are projects and actions that the Planning Committee
would like to highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects
or Featured Projects.

The Canarsie NYRCR Plan contains 6 strategies, 10 Proposed Projects,
and 2 Featured Projects, intended to improve the resiliency of Canarsie.
The list below follows the order of projects as demonstrated in the Project
Profiles in Section V of this document. Each project is listed underneath
the strategy to which it corresponds most directly.

Reduce Vulnerability to Coastal Flooding and Sea Level Rise

Fresh Creek Coastal Protection (Proposed)

This project would fund a flood wall and adjoining bioswales to capture
storm surge and rising waters at the most vulnerable areas along Fresh
Creek. A flood wall is a small wall that reduces flood risk from sea-level
rise and 10-year storm events.°A bioswale is a landscaped element that
reduces gutter flow and manages water surface ponding.

Activate and Enhance Access Along the Shoreline

Fresh Creek Long-Term Restoration & Resiliency (Featured)

This project proposes a comprehensive plan for the length of Fresh Creek,
incorporating green infrastructure, improved access, and public amenities.

Canarsie Pier Access Improvements (Proposed)

This project would fund safety improvements to the Belt Parkway under-
pass and roundabout to improve and encourage pedestrian and cyclist
access between Canarsie Pier and the Community.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

   

Fresh Creek, the water body that separates Canarsie from East New York.

Canarsie Pier and Beach Community Enhancements (Featured)
This Featured project would upgrade the facilities at Canarsie Pier to create
a waterfront destination that better serves visitors and local residents.

Canarsie Youth and Environmental Education Program (Proposed)

This project would fund the development of an environmental education
program for youth in Canarsie where they can learn about the Jamaica
Bay and adjacent waterways.

Improve Wastewater and Stormwater Management

Canarsie and Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Stormwater Study and Pilot
Projects (Proposed)

This two-phase project would fund a study to examine the feasibility, costs,
and benefits of various stormwater capture and retention projects in the
Canarsie and Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Areas. The
Proposed project would also provide funding for the implementation of
recommended scalable pilot projects within both Planning Areas.

xiii
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Build and Coordinate Local Capacity for Emergency Response
Recovery Community Center (Proposed)

This project would establish a Recovery Community Center with resilient
lighting and power, the ability to distribute supplies, coordinate efforts with
government agencies, and host trainings and capacity building initiatives.

Critical Facility Upgrades Program (Proposed)

This project would fund resilient retrofits for a community-based organiza-
tion in Canarsie to ensure continuity of critical services. The organization
would also be required to provide assistance with recovery efforts after
an emergency event.

Canarsie Corps (Proposed)

This project would establish a Canarsie Corps summer youth employment
program to support resiliency and other community projects in Canarsie.

Make Homes More Physically and Financially Resilient

Homeowner Audit and Grant Program (Proposed)

This project would provide technical assistance and financial tools to low
and moderate income single- and multi-family homeowners who want to
A typical commercial corridor in Canarsie. retrofit their homes so they can mitigate future flood risk.

 

Strengthen Economic Resiliency

Resiliency Workforce Development (Proposed)

This project would train and connect local residents with sustainable job
opportunities while simultaneously building a community that can more
effectively recover from future storm events.

Resilient Streetscaping (Proposed)

This project would fund capital improvements along Avenue L and Rock-
away Parkway that help to strengthen the economic viability of local busi-
nesses and provide support to residents during and after future disasters.

xiv
 

Canarsie Park borders Jamaica Bay and is an important amenity in Canarsie.

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Outline of the Plan

The first section of the Plan includes a Community Overview, which
provides an orientation to the Community, the critical issues revealed
by Superstorm Sandy, and the Committee’s process in the context of
ongoing resiliency and recovery work.

The next section, Assessment of Risk and Needs, describes the diverse
assets at risk from future flooding and storms, and applies the Committee
and public feedback to catalog those risks. Using the risk assessment
tool developed by the NYRCR Program, this section identifies key oppor-
tunities for action that support the resiliency strategies and projects pro-
posed by the Committee.

The following section, Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies,
describes strategies developed by the Committee that respond to the
needs, opportunities, and risks to assets measured through the risk
assessment process

The Proposed and Featured Projects are described in greater detail
in the Project Profiles section. The final section, Additional Materials,
describes Additional Resiliency Recommendations strongly supported by
the Community, but which lack an identified funding source. The public
engagement process is also described in more detail, along with addi-
tional supporting documentation for the Plan.

XV
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

   

Fishing is a popular activity along the southern edge of Fresh Creek.

xvi
I. Community Overview
iv Lal
—,

ih

Why mn A }
Tah
cl
en iM

=
Se Rar

 
Geographic Scope

The Canarsie NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning
Committee (Committee) defined the NYRCR
Planning Area according to multiple fac-
tors including the Canarsie Community's
(Community) geographic boundaries,
Superstorm Sandy damage data, and areas
where assets are most at risk. To aid in the
Planning Area’s recovery and to help improve
its resiliency, New York State has allotted up
to $11.9 million to Canarsie in Community
Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery
(CDBG-DR) funding from the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).

Canarsie is located in southeast Brooklyn
and borders Jamaica Bay. Water acts as a
natural border for much of this Community,
from Paerdegat Basin along the southwest,
to Fresh Creek along the northeast. The North
Channel of Jamaica Bay borders the southeast
portion of the Community, with the 130+ acre
Canarsie Park and Pier serving as a natural
and recreational buffer between the water and
the Community.

The northern boundary of Canarsie runs from
Williams Avenue, extending beyond Fresh
Creek and the New York City Housing Authority
(NYCHA) Breukelen Houses, and _ includes
Stanley Avenue, the MTA L train line, Linden

Boulevard, and Ditmas Avenue. The east-
ern boundary of the Community spans Ralph
Avenue from Ditmas Avenue until it approaches
Paerdegat Basin at Flatlands Avenue, with
a slight break out along Farragut Road, East

Fresh Creek borders the eastern edge of Canarsie.

56th Street, Avenue H, and Glenwood Road
to include the NYCHA Glenwood Houses.
Surrounding neighborhoods include East
New York, East Flatbush, Brownsville, Bergen
Beach, and Flatlands.

 

Community Overview

I-1
Community Overview

Canarsie is a low- and middle-density water-
front community with a vibrant cultural
history dating back thousands of years to
the Canarsees tribe of Native Americans.
Canarsie’s legacy echoes throughout the
landmarks of the present-day neighborhood,
from the Wyckoff House—one of the first
structures built by European colonizers on
Long Island—to the Canarsie Pier—built for
the expectation of future commercial mari-
time activity that never materialized. Over the
decades Canarsie has established itself as
a place for working-class families seeking a
peaceful refuge from the city, shifting from
an Italian and Jewish population from the
1940s-1990s to a West Indian and Jewish pop-
ulation in the 2000s.

Present-day Canarsie is home to approxi-
mately 87,600 residents in over 29,400 house-
holds, and blends both the neighborhoods
of higher density upland along with the more
suburban waterfront communities. Currently,
Canarsie includes a sizable population that
has immigrated from, or who are first-genera-
tion descendants of immigrants from Haiti and
other Caribbean nations. There are a number of
undocumented immigrants who live in Canarsie
as well—over 15,000, according to the Brooklyn
Community Foundation. The population of the
neighborhood has remained mostly stable over

Community Overview

La” ”

Aerial view of Canarsie. Courtesy of Butch Moran.

the past decade and a half with a racial compo-
sition that is majority Black (84%), along with a
small minority of residents reporting as White
(8%), Other or Two or More Races (5%), and
Asian (2%). Nine percent of residents identify
as Hispanic. The median age in Canarsie is 36
and the Community has a large percentage of
young residents, with just 10% of Canarsie’s
population over 65, and nearly 36% of its pop-
ulation under 24."

   

The educational background of Canarsie
is mixed, with a higher percentage of high
school graduates (85%) than New York City
overall (79%) and a similar percentage as New
York State (85%). However, Canarsie has a
smaller percentage of college graduates (24%)
than both New York City (84%) and New York
State (83%).?
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure I-1: Canarsie Planning Area

 

i 'Y Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Area

 

 

 

 

 
Canarsie is a middle-class neighborhood
characterized by older, lower-density hous-
ing. The Community developed further out
onto Jamaica Bay in the 1950s, when marsh-
land was filled to build new housing, creating
the areas that would eventually bear the brunt
of inundation from Superstorm Sandy. Today,
the median household income of $54,900 is
slightly above New York City’s median income
of $51,800 and slightly below New York State’s
median income of $57,600. The neighborhood
is home to the largest concentration of New
York City municipal employees, reflecting its
middle-class character and high quality of life.°4
The median home value in Canarsie is nearly
$500,000, with a number of homeowners rent-
ing out their basement apartments to supple-
ment their income. Approximately 47% of the
homes are owner-occupied and 53% are rent-
er-occupied—a much higher share of owners
when compared to Brooklyn as a whole (28%).°

Most of the housing in the Community is low
density and attached. Eighty-two percent of
the Community resides in homes with oneto four
units, and only 9% are single-family detached
homes. Five percent of residential buildings
are comprised of 5-19 units and the remaining
13% have 20 or more units. Canarsie also has
several large NYCHA developments, including
the Glenwood, Bayview and Breukelen Houses,

Community Overview

 

Basketball courts at Canarsie Park.

each housing between 2,500 and 4,000 resi-
dents alongside community meeting areas and
open space.

The housing in Canarsie is of good quality, with
nearly 88% of the housing stock over 40 years
old. Only 580 units have been constructed since
2000, accounting for just 2% of total units.®

Canarsie has limited public transit access,
served solely by one subway line, the L train.
The L line has two stops in Canarsie, one at East
105th Street and the other at Canarsie-
Rockaway Parkway, the final stop on the line.
Bus service is more comprehensive in Canarsie,
with the BM2 express bus running between
Flatlands Avenue and 57th Street in Manhattan,
the B6 between Bensonhurst and East New York,
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure I-2: Historic Growth in Canarsie in Relation to the Present Day Flood Map

Community Overview

 
the B17 between Canarsie and Crown Heights,
the B42 between Canarsie Pier and Rockaway
Station, the B60 between Canarsie and
Williamsburg, the B82 between Coney Island
and Spring Creek Towers, and the B103 running
between Canarsie and Downtown Brooklyn.

There are a few concentrations of neigh-
borhood-serving retail along Rockaway
Parkway, Flatlands Avenue, and Avenue L.
The corridor currently stretches from around
East 92st Street to Rockaway Parkway, with
a mix of Caribbean bakeries alongside salons,
churches, event spaces and learning centers.
Until the mid-2000s, a cinema entertained resi-
dents on the strip but now sits vacant.

Two big box stores—a BJ’s Wholesale Club and
PetSmart at Avenue D and East 89th Street on
the outskirts of Canarsie— have recently opened
in the area, serving residents driving in from
the outer Brooklyn region. A merchants asso-
ciation, in existence since the late 1950s, has
spent the last 10 years formalizing and growing
the organization, becoming a registered 501(c)
(3) non-profit in 2010, and expanding to encom-
pass businesses outside of the original Avenue
L boundaries in 2014.7

The Community is largely separated from the
neighboring East New York, on the northern

Community Overview

border, by a large manufacturing district, which
is part of the Flatlands/Fairfield Industrial
Business Zone governed by the City of New
York. This district is home to hundreds of busi-
nesses varying from food-packing plants to
the many tenants who occupy the Brooklyn
Terminal Market, where wholesale and retail
shoppers can find seasonal decorations along-
side spices, produce, and a vast array of goods
from the Caribbean and West Indian islands.

Canarsie Pier and Park are major recre-
ational resources for the Community, with
the Park providing wide-open lawns and ball-
fields mixed alongside more passive and wild
spaces. Space is abundant in the park, even
at peak use, adding to the feeling of tranquility
provided by this amenity. The resource is highly
utilized by picnicking families spending week-
end afternoons alongside large groups playing
cricket and football. The Canarsie Pier, though
physically disconnected from the Community
by the Belt Parkway, is also a well-utilized
resource for locals who enjoy fishing, kayak-
ing, barbecuing, or a walk along the grasses of
Canarsie’s shoreline.

The basins provide additional open and
natural space. Along the eastern border is
the New York City Department of Parks and
Recreation (NYC DPR)-maintained Fresh Creek

 

Peter Wyckhoff House on Canarsie Lane (1934). Library
of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division, Historic
American Buildings Survey, HABS NY,24-BROK,32--1

Nature Preserve. Along the western edge of the
Community, adjacent to Paerdegat Basin, is the
New York City Department of Environmental
Protection (NYC DEP)-controlled green space,
which is inaccessible to the public. Paerdegat
Basin is also home to the Sebago Canoe Club,
which hosts free kayaking trips in Jamaica Bay
on a weekly basis during the summer, and pro-
vides more extensive trips and use of equip-
ment for members spring through fall.

Most of Canarsie is on a separated sewer
system, meaning that sanitary and stormwa-
ter is carried along different water lines, with
stormwater emptying directly into Jamaica
Bay via Paerdegat Basin and Fresh Creek. The
northwestern area of the Community above
Avenue J is on a combined sewer, as is the bulk
of New York City. In a combined sewer system,
sanitary and stormwater is carried in the same
water lines and treated at wastewater treatment
plants. However, during heavy rain events, sys-
tems can become overwhelmed, resulting in
untreated sanitary waste flowing directly into
Paerdegat Basin, Fresh Creek, and ultimately,
Jamaica Bay.

To mitigate direct, unsanitary water flow
into area waterways, NYC DEP opened a
retention facility in 2011. It is located at the
end of Paerdegat Basin and stores combined
waste during heavy rain events. The facility is
estimated to annually prevent 1.2 billion gallons
of untreated wastewater from being deposited
into Jamaica Bay, resulting in greatly improved
water quality.®

Finally, Canarsie is home to a rich array of
community and faith-based organizations
that represent the cultural fabric of the neigh-
borhood. These include organizations that
helped provide assistance to residents after
Superstorm Sandy, such as Canarsie Strong,
the Canarsie Coalition, My Time Inc., Holy Family
Church, and the Hebrew Educational Society. A
number of other organizations provide valued
and varied programming year-round. Canarsie

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Students traveling home after school along Rockaway Parkway.

Blooms maintains a community garden at East
94th Street and educates the residents about
growing vegetables and herbs. The Bridge
Street Development Corporation, a non-profit
faith-based developer provides affordable
housing, homeownership counseling, and
senior services. Millennium Development offers
youth programming, including community gar-
dening, athletic and arts classes, job training,
and anti-bullying classes.

 

Community Overview

|-7
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Description of Storm Impacts

The greatest impact from Superstorm Sandy
on the Community came from extensive
flooding from the three adjacent waterbod-
ies and from sewer backup. The combination
of a high storm surge coupled with a high-tide
condition during a full-moon cycle resulted in
waters rising above the height of bulkheads
and natural river banks at Paerdegat Basin and
Fresh Creek. Once local edges were crested,
waters ran unabated through the mostly flat
street network, with waters from Paerdegat
Basin inundating access points up to Remsen
Avenue and waters from Fresh Creek sub-
merging the residential streets up to Rockaway
Parkway. Waters from Jamaica Bay also flooded
low-lying homes immediately adjacent to the
Belt Parkway along Canarsie Road.

Surge as high as 6-9 feet passed through
residential neighborhoods, particularly those
located nearest to Fresh Creek. According to
HUD, 96% of damage within Canarsie was
from flooding. Canarsie Pier was inundated
with water over 9 feet, the highest of any area
in Canarsie. Those residential properties most
severely damaged experienced flooding from
both wastewater sewer backup and storm
surge. Some of these properties experienced
a surge as high as 3-6 feet, which, when cou-
pled with sewer backup, was enough to flood
basements with water levels reaching 7 feet.

Community Overview

According to HUD’s Analysis of Communities
Impacted by Hurricane Sandy, 83% of
Canarsie and neighboring Flatlands homes
were damaged during Superstorm Sanday,
with the estimated average damage

valued at $30,000.2 Considering that 47%
of Canarsie households are occupied by
homeowners, the individual homeowner
recovery costs were significant.

 

Street flooding caused by Superstorm Sandy adjacent to Fresh Creek. Courtesy of Canarsie Courier.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure I-3: Superstorm Sandy Inundation Map

fsa) NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
8 Canarsie Planning Area

 

| Planning Area

Sandy Inundation
(Depth of Flooding)

L_|<sr
[ss tt
GM cot
Ma >

 

  

 

 

 

 

Community Overview I-9
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

  

Although the two NYC DEP pumping stations
that service Canarsie did not sustain damage,
wastewater sewer and storm sewer backup
affected many residents. Wastewater sewer
backup was likely caused by a combination of
infiltration of stormwater into wastewater pipes,

Community Overview

Fallen trees brought down during Superstorm Sandy. Courtesy of Canarsie Courier (left), and Maria Garrett (right).

as well as the forced shut down of the Coney
Island and 26th Ward wastewater treatment
plants during Superstorm Sandy, both of which
service Canarsie’s wastewater sewers. The City
of New York enacted these shutdowns in order
to maintain the integrity of each facility, which

 

were overwhelmed by floodwaters. Canarsie’s
recovery from sewer backup was a slow pro-
cess, and individual homeowners and busi-
nesses needed private pumping and remedia-
tion services to restore their properties.
Storm surge also impacted the conditions
of the streets, exacerbating existing sinkholes,
overflowing catch basins, and damaging trees
and other vegetation. According to members of
the Community, the street flooding caused by
Superstorm Sandy created sinkholes that mea-
sured up to 3 feet in width.

The damage caused by Superstorm Sandy
displaced many residents for weeks and in
some cases months following the storm.
Those who stayed were stranded for days,
unable to access food and water beyond the
supplies they had stored. Power was spotty
and took days to return in certain places. Full L
train service remained down for a week and a
half, limiting the mobility of residents.

Volunteers and local organizations estab-
lished relief centers throughout coastal
Brooklyn in order to provide supplies and
needed assistance, yet many residents did
not know they existed. While some local com-
munity institutions opened their doors to help
with the relief effort, there was confusion as to
which churches, schools, and businesses were
offering aid. Residents did not know where or
when supplies—especially food and water—
were being delivered to Canarsie, which was
a major barrier to recovery, especially for vul-
nerable populations which include low-income

households and seniors. The American Red
Cross provided some supplies, but many res-
idents were not aware of their presence. In the
days following Superstorm Sandy, many peo-
ple chose to seek shelter within their homes—
which were often heavily damaged—surviving

i

on supplies they had on hand. Residents lost a
significant amount of personal property, includ-
ing cars that floated away from the force of the
surge. The lack of a designated local relief site
was especially problematic for people who sud-
denly had no means of transportation.

a

=
=e

 

Residents lining up for gas post-Superstorm Sandy. Courtesy of Canarsie Courier.

Community Overview

I-11
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Power outages and damage to roads forced
businesses and local organizations to remain
closed, keeping people from their jobs, limiting
the availability of supplies and interrupting the
overall economy of the Community. Residents
report that a number of businesses never
re-opened, leaving only vacant storefronts.

The damage of Superstorm Sandy continued
to affect Canarsie long after the flooding sub-
sided and the power returned. Most homes in
Canarsie have basements, exacerbating the
severe damage to homes and personal belong-
ings. Of the 7,300 flooded units in Canarsie and
the upland Flatlands Community, over half ex-
perienced 2 or more feet of water in their base-
ments. Most homes and businesses took
several months to clean up, become habitable,
and re-open. Residents who repaired their
apartments too quickly, not letting them
properly dry out, soon faced mold _ infes-
tation, forcing them to find alternative places to
live during remediation.

The experience of Superstorm Sandy has
taught the Community the value of preparing
for future storm events and improving the
overall strength and resiliency of Canarsie.
With the help of borough-based organizations,
like the Brooklyn Community Foundation,
community members have attempted to pull

Community Overview

 

Vacant storefronts are common along commercial corridors in Canarsie, a situation made worse by Superstorm Sandy.

together a holistic and unified response through
new working groups and organizations, such
as the Canarsie Coalition and Canarsie Strong.
Having never experienced inundation of
Superstorm Sandy’s magnitude, Canarsie was
caught off-guard by both the enormity of the
event and the widespread damage it caused.
As the Community continues to recover, there is
a strong sense that Canarsie is ready to engage

in meaningful efforts to build on the capacity of
local organizations in order to better prepare for
future storm events.
Critical Issues

Superstorm Sandy created and exposed a
number of critical issues across the Canarsie
Planning Area. Through the NYRCR planning
process, the Committee and public raised
issues that informed strategies for Canarsie.
These include storm drainage, risk of flooding,
responding to the physical and financial effects
from Superstorm Sandy, poor maintenance of
streets and trees, limited commercial growth,
and lack of community space.

Infrastructure

One of the most critical ongoing issues iden-
tified by the Community is poor wastewater
and stormwater drainage. Prior to Superstorm
Sandy there was a consistent problem with
drainage during heavy rains, creating flood-
ing in basements and on streets—a problem
that has been reported to have become much
worse across the Community since the storm.
The maps on pages I-16-17 show the volume
of drainage complaints to the City via 311 from
January 2010 to October 2012 compared to the
2 weeks after the storm. In particular, the heavi-
est concentration of complaints occur within
the floodplain adjacent to Paerdegat Basin and
Fresh Creek, although additional problematic
pockets exist throughout the neighborhood.

Paerdegat Basin and Fresh Creek are at
risk of flooding from storm surge, with

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

insufficient infrastructure to protect them
against a 100-year flooding event. These
inlets were the primary source of flooding during
Superstorm Sandy, and remain vulnerable to
storm surge. There have been efforts since the
storm to fill land at a height adequately above
the base-flood elevation along certain parts of
NYC DEP-owned Paerdegat Basin wetlands,
although this represents only a minor measure
of mitigation. Residents feel that homes along
Fresh Creek are especially vulnerable to flood-
ing due to the lack of infrastructure, the close
proximity of homes to the water body, and
low-lying topography in and around the Fresh
Creek Nature Preserve.

Additionally, some Community members
report an increase in road quality issues with
large sinkholes creating hazards to both pedes-
trians and vehicles. Many communities hard
hit by Superstorm Sandy described sinkholes
forming after the storm, mainly attributable to
damage incurred along storm and wastewater
sewer lines.

Natural and Cultural Resources

Both the Planning Committee and mem-
bers of the public have stated that the
natural coastline along the Fresh Creek
Nature Preserve was eroding and has fur-
ther deteriorated since Superstorm Sandy.

 

Street flooding from Superstorm Sandy may have dam-
aged many roadways in Canarsie.

Community Overview

I-13
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure I-4: 311 Complaints 2 Weeks Following Superstorm Sandy

(San NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
R82) Canarsie Planning Area

[__] Planning Area

 

311 Complaints 2 weeks following Sandy
(10/29/13-11/12/13, 214 complaints)

Sewer Back-up (154 complaints)
int

Low volume

Street Flooding (35 complaints)
* Street Flooding Complaint

- Low volume

High volume

Catch Basin Clogged/Flooding (23 complaints)
* Catch Basin Clogged/Flooding Complaint

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

l-14 Community Overview
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure I-5: 311 Complaints July 2013-14

  

(Se NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
ie) Canarsie Planning Area

[__] Planning Area

311 Complaints in the Previous Year
(07/01/13-07/01/14, 505 complaints)

Sewer Back-up (256 complaints)
* Sewer Backup Complaint
Low volume

= High volume

Street Flooding (24 complaints)
* Street Flooding Complaint

= Low volume
High volume
Catch Basin Clogged/Flooding (140 complaints)

* Catch Basin Clogged/Flooding Complaint
Low volume

_ | High volume

NY¥C 311 Complaints
New York City Department of City Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buikdings; Street Centerlines:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community Overview 1-15
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

For example, many trees remain tenuously sit-
uated in the ground with exposed roots, while
others uprooted during the storm remain as
debris. Illegal dumping within the Preserve
has been an ongoing issue, which has wors-
ened since the storm. The Community has
organized multiple clean-ups of this area over
the last decade in response. Edge conditions
are languishing, with an eroding shoreline and
degraded bulkheads providing little protec-
tion for nearby homes. Access to Fresh Creek
remains limited to residents, and is further ham-
pered by unsafe conditions for pedestrians due
to insufficient sidewalks and pathways along
the creek.

Housing

Lingering effects from Superstorm Sandy
are creating financial stress in the neighbor-
hood as well, particularly impacting homeown-
ers who are no longer able to rent out base-
ment apartments damaged by the storm. Most
residents have returned to their homes since
the storm but are unable to afford to make the
necessary repairs. Canarsie has a high per-
centage of home ownership compared to the
rest of Brooklyn, and was severely hit by the
foreclosure crisis. The decreased revenue from
inhabitable basement apartments is increas-
ingly pushing homeowners over the brink and
in danger of foreclosure. In addition, some

Community Overview

   

Future storms could bring down electric lines precariously close to trees.

homeowners who incurred damage but did not
qualify for Build it Back, the City of New York’s
managed home repair program, took out loans
with the U.S. Small Business Administration,
further adding to their debt. Compounding
these issues are larger policy changes, which
include decreasing Federal subsidies for flood
insurance and expansion of the designated
flood plain, which may increase the financial

pressures on homeowners now in the floodplain.
Notices of foreclosure have increased 37% over
the last year in Canarsie and Flatlands. '°

Economic Development

Commercial growth in Canarsie is limited.
While the past decade has seen a modest
increase in the number of Canarsie busi-
nesses, according to the Canarsie Merchants
Association, many establishments closed
along Avenue L, Rockaway Parkway, and
Flatlands Avenue after Superstorm Sandy.
The area’s small mom-and-pop shops strug-
gled during the aftermath of the storm, even
though most were not directly damaged. Many
have faced challenges staving off the competi-
tion from surrounding larger retailers, such as
those at Gateway Center in East New York and
Kings Plaza in Mill Basin. Numerous storefronts

Many storefronts on Avenue L, such as this old cinema, are vacant.

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

   

along Canarsie corridors remain vacant, and
attracting new businesses is an ongoing
challenge."

Although Canarsie is an area with a median
income and unemployment rate comparable
to the State and City overall, there are pockets
within the Community where the unemploy-
ment rate is over 15% and 25% of households
live below the poverty line. '

Community Planning and Capacity
Building, Health and Social Services
There is a lack of large meeting and com-
munity space within Canarsie, which ham-
pered both short- and long-term recovery
efforts. After Superstorm Sandy, it was difficult
to locate spaces for food and supply distribu-
tion, as well as volunteer coordination. In every-
day situations, the absence of these spaces
leaves the neighborhood without an important
amenity that could strengthen ties within the
Community. Although Canarsie has two public
libraries, both close most nights at 6 p.m., and
only one location is open on Saturdays, leaving
the Community without many options for eve-
ning or weekend meetings and events.

Furthermore, ongoing support for residents
still experiencing distress from the effects of
the storm is not believed to be sufficient. The
psychological toll and post-traumatic stress lin-
gers long after the storm, and the Community
does not feel they have adequate resources to
address this issue.

Community Overview

l-17
Community Vision

From the devastation caused by Superstorm

Sandy, the Canarsie Community has come Short-term Goals Long-term Goals
together in ways it never has before. The (2-5 Years) (5-10 Years)
Community collaborated to create a vision for
what it will become in the future, and developed ¢ Improve safety ¢ Revitalize commercial corridors
strategies to start building its resiliency today. ¢ Increase resources for youth ¢ Reduce sewer backup into homes
¢ Improve transit and access to natural assets e Establish community space for residents
The NYRCR Program aimed to engage the ¢ Integrate green infrastructure improvements * Create a completely self-reliant neighborhood
entire Community throughout the planning to guard against flooding
process. The Planning Committee discussed ¢ Install resilient infrastructure for homes &
ideas and engaged with residents across the public spaces

Planning Area to gather feedback and con-
sensus. Three vibrant public meetings were
held and attended by hundreds of residents
representing a mix of stakeholders. The goals
and vision that follow were formulated by the
Committee during the planning process and
reflect the collective voice of this large and
diverse Community.

l-18 Community Overview
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Community Vision Statement

“Canarsie, a proudly diverse and peaceful
community surrounded by bountiful natural
and recreational resources, will become
a self-reliant, empowered, prosperous
community, and a model of sustainability
and resilience.”

ae
= a.)

Dg hee wie eet

Community Overview I-19

 
I-20

Relationship to Regional Plans

Regional Perspectives: Jamaica Bay

From Sea Gate and the other NYRCR
Communities on the western edge of the
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula to South Valley
Stream at its headwaters in Nassau County,
neighborhoods in and around Jamaica Bay
suffered enormous damage from Super-
storm Sandy. This area is home to more than
800,000 people. Jamaica Bay—a unique eco-
system in an urban landscape —is famous for its
salt marsh islands, inter-tidal flats, horseshoe
crabs, and migratory birds that use the area as
a refuge during their seasonal travels. Beyond
the water, Jamaica Bay is surrounded by wood-
land and forests that host an array of wildlife.

All of the Jamaica Bay neighborhoods
suffered significantly during and after
Superstorm Sandy, some from flooding or
surge and some from wave action. Homes,
businesses, beaches, parklands, schools,
roadways, and mass transit were all damaged;
the area also endured one of the most extensive
and long-lasting power outages in the City.

Future flooding risks are likely to be exac-
erbated throughout Jamaica Bay by pro-
jected sea-level rise associated with climate
change. According to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's (FEMA) preliminary
work maps, the 100-year floodplain has been

Community Overview

especially dramatic for the Jamaica Bay area
where the number of buildings in the floodplain
has increased by 70%." It is anticipated that
this trend will continue, and the low-lying areas
surrounding Jamaica Bay communities are
likely to continue experiencing more frequent
flooding at greater flood depths.

There are also ecological factors to con-
sider: Jamaica Bay is a tidal estuary. Though
severely degraded over the 19th and 20th
centuries, Jamaica Bay remains a dynamic
ecosystem, providing critical habitats to a vari-
ety of species, including a number of protected
and threatened birds that inhabit both the
beach and Jamaica Bay. Habitat loss and
degradation of Jamaica Bay's chemical, phys-
ical, and biological environment has largely
been due to human activities; although City
and Federal policies have yielded dramatic
improvements in the quality of Jamaica Bay’s
water and habitat.

In this hydrologically connected system,
projects and interventions in one area
of Jamaica Bay can have ecological and
coastal protection ramifications across
the estuary. The cumulative impact of proj-
ects implemented in different locations around
Jamaica Bay can be greater than the sum of
their individual impacts. At the same time,

interactions between projects can sometimes
have negative effects including, though rarely,
induced wave or surge activity.

Planning for Jamaica Bay

The NYRCR Program recognizes that solu-
tions for Jamaica Bay will affect all of the
neighborhoods that front its borders and
extended waterways. This includes NYRCR
Communities from Brooklyn, Queens, and
Long Island. Acknowledging that strategies for
Jamaica Bay are complicated and consensus
building will be achieved through dialogue,
the NYRCR Program formed the Jamaica Bay
Regional Working Group to bring affected
communities together to research current and
planned projects, and to meet with local, State,
Federal officials, and other groups working in
Jamaica Bay. The Working Group will continue
to meet over the next several months to analyze
options and opportunities, discuss goals and
challenges, and strive to arrive at a consensus
on a long-term approach to resiliency in
Jamaica Bay.

To maximize benefits and minimize risk,
NYRCR Communities, as well as the vari-
ous City, State, and Federal agencies active
within Jamaica Bay, will need to coor-
dinate. In addition to the NY Rising effort,
there are many agencies, organizations, and
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Aerial view of western Canarsie. Courtesy of Butch Moran.

Community Overview  _|-21

 
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

|-22

ite

Aerial view of Fresh Creek. Courtesy of Butch Moran.

stakeholders involved in Jamaica Bay. The
recently formed Jamaica Bay Resiliency
Institute, established through an initiative led
by the City University of New York in partner-
ship with the City of New York, the National
Park Service (NPS), and the Trust for Public
Land, among other organizations, is a potential
partner and presents an opportunity for NYRCR

Community Overview

Communities in Jamaica Bay to collaborate
with other organizations and agencies.

Existing Plans, Studies, and Projects

Due to the many challenges and risks asso-
ciated with the region, plans and projects
to improve resiliency and the overall urban
environment existed before Superstorm

   

Sandy at the Federal, State, regional, and
City levels. Attention on the region has only
grown since Superstorm Sandy, as have the
number of planned and active projects.

To avoid duplication of plans and to best
identify how the NYRCR Program may fill
existing gaps, it is essential to understand
and assess the scope of, and potential rela-
tionships to, existing initiatives. This includes
overall resiliency and Superstorm Sandy-
specific recovery plans, as well as other hazard
mitigation, waterfront, infrastructure, and sus-
tainability plans. The analysis and recommen-
dations included in these reports contribute
valuable information and ideas to the NYRCR
planning process and project definitions.

Unlike other communities in Jamaica Bay,
there has been considerably less plan-
ning in Canarsie by outside entities since
Superstorm Sandy. To fill this void, members
of the Community have begun to form their own
coalitions to provide a more unified response to
the event. While much work has been done in
a wide variety of working groups, these efforts
have not yet yielded specific planning propos-
als. Key programs, plans, and projects—and
their link to Canarsie’s rebuilding, resiliency
strategies, and projects —are described below.

Federal Initiatives

Efforts in Jamaica Bay by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE) are ongoing.
USACE is a major player in both coastal pro-
tection and ecological restoration efforts within
Jamaica Bay and is currently running dredging
and ecosystem restoration studies along with
a number of related studies and projects that

could provide resiliency benefits. These include
studies that predated Superstorm Sandy as
well as post-Superstorm Sandy updates to the
previous plans and studies. While initiated and
led by the USACE, the projects that stem from
these studies may have many implementation
partners, including multiple State and City
agencies.

Among ongoing USACE studies, the East
Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway Inlet (Rockaway
Beach) Reformulation Study is of primary
importance to coastal protection planning for
Canarsie and the rest of Jamaica Bay. This
project reevaluates the existing USACE plan
in light of the impacts of Superstorm Sandy.
This report will investigate and evaluate poten-
tial coastal storm-risk management reduction
measures to address flooding along the ocean
side and throughout Jamaica Bay. The USACE
expects to present the refined alternatives at
public information sessions in early-2015.'4

In addition to its coastal protection work, the
USACE is undertaking ecosystem restoration
projects throughout Jamaica Bay. Thirty-nine
potential ecosystem restoration opportunities
in Jamaica Bay are identified in the Hudson
Raritan Estuary (HRE) Comprehensive
Restoration Plan (CRP). Adopted in 2009,
the USACE and Port Authority of New York

and New Jersey developed the HRE-CRP in
collaboration with Federal, State, municipal,
and non-governmental organizations as well
as other regional stakeholders. It sets forth a
consensus vision, master plan, and strategy for
future ecosystem restoration in the New York/
New Jersey Harbor.

Some of these ecosystem restoration oppor-
tunities are currently being reevaluated by the
USACE to assess post-Superstorm Sandy
changes and their potential to provide additional
resiliency benefits. The Jamaica Bay, Marine
Park and Plumb Beach, NY Feasibility Study
(ongoing) is an interim draft report that identi-
fied eight priority restoration sites (650 acres)
from the HRE-CRP, including Paerdegat Basin,
which is located between Georgetown and
Bergen Beach and the Canarsie Planning Area.
At Paerdegat Basin, water quality improvements
were the main goal of USACE’s work. However,
because of NYC DEP’s work developing a com-
bined sewer overflow (CSO) retention facility at
Paerdegat Basin, the report concludes that sig-
nificant progress has been made at Paerdegat
and does not require further intervention.

In addition to the USACE, HUD has had a very
active role in coordinating Superstorm Sandy
recovery efforts across the region. Primarily,
it has provided leadership and oversight in

Community Overview

I-23
1-24

programming CDBG-DR funds for recovery
and resiliency. It has also led a cutting-edge
initiative, Rebuild by Design, to catalyze devel-
opment along the coastlines.

The NPS’s Gateway National Recreation
Area: Final General Management Plan
Environmental Impact Statement (2014)
updates the Park’s prior General Management
Plan from 1979. It presents several vision and
management strategies for Gateway National
Park, which includes parts of the Canarsie
shoreline and Canarsie Pier, in the wake of
Superstorm Sandy and has recommended a
trajectory for the Park toward more active and
recreational uses. The report presents other
potential general management strategies,
assesses Superstorm Sandy affected envi-
ronments and environmental consequences,
and reviews the community participation pro-
cess NPS undertook to develop the General
Management Plan.

City and Local Initiatives

In addition to the Federal initiatives and proj-
ects centered on Jamaica Bay, there are a num-
ber of New York City-wide initiatives relevant to
resiliency planning in Canarsie. Other City and
local initiatives take a specific look at or have
projects within Canarsie.

Community Overview

The Special Initiative for Rebuilding and
Resiliency (SIRR) was convened by Mayor
Bloomberg in December 2012 to assess the
damage wrought by Superstorm Sandy and
consider the implications going forward for
New York City in light of climate change and
sea-level rise projections. In June 2013, SIRR
released its findings in a comprehensive report
that outlined New York City’s plan for rebuild-
ing post-Superstorm Sandy and ensuring resil-
iency into the future. While the SIRR report on
Southern Brooklyn does not include Canarsie,
the report does prioritize expanding NYC DPR’s
Greenstreets program in the Canarsie Park
area and makes recommendations for com-
prehensive coastal protection solutions that
would better protect all of the neighborhoods
around Jamaica Bay. The plan contains further
detailed, actionable recommendations for other
communities affected by the storm as well as
chapters covering citywide issues, including
coastal protection, buildings, insurance, util-
ities, liquid fuels, health care, transportation,
parks, water and wastewater, and other criti-
cal networks. Updates to SIRR will be occur-
ring within the PlaNYC (the City’s comprehen-
sive sustainability and resiliency plan) timeline,
with a formal update every four years starting
in 2015 and sections of the annual progress
report dedicated to SIRR initiatives. The report
and latest updates on implementation can be

found on the SIRR website: Attp://www.nyc.
gov/himl/sirr/.

New York City has also released the 2014 New
York City Hazard Mitigation Plan. Replacing
the previous Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP) from
2009, the new plan was developed by the New
York City Office of Emergency Management
(NYC OEM) in partnership with the Department
of City Planning (NYC DCP) and will be effec-
tive from April 17, 2014, to April 17, 2019. The
HMP assesses New York City’s risk and lays
out citywide mitigation strategies for a variety
of hazards that include coastal storms, coastal
erosion and flooding. As this plan assesses the
risks faced by New York City as a whole, it rarely
discusses these issues at a level smaller than
the boroughs. However, many of the risks dis-
cussed in the HMP, such as coastal storms and
flooding, are highly relevant to Canarsie, and
are occasionally called out in graphics (e.g.,
citywide storm surge modeling with a call-out
box in Canarsie detailing the local results). The
report also provides a retrospective analysis of
Superstorm Sandy. The report can be found on
the NYC OEM website: hitto://www.nyc.gov/
html/oem/himi/planning_response/planning_
hazard_mitigation_2014.shtml.

In addition to resiliency, the City has launched
several initiatives under the New York City
Mayors Office of Housing Recovery
Operations (NYC HRO) (2013) to help resi-
dents across the five boroughs recover from the
damage caused by Superstorm Sandy, which
are ongoing. The Build it Back Program seeks
to assist homeowners, landlords, and tenants
whose homes were damaged by the storm.
Some of these recovery programs support
resiliency investments and will help improve
individual homes and businesses in the com-
munities surrounding Jamaica Bay. More infor-
mation on the NYC HRO program can be found
here: htip://www.nyc.gov/htmi/Recovery/.

Particularly relevant to NYRCR Communities
are ongoing and potential future updates to the
New York City Building and Zoning Codes
(2013). New York City’s Building Resiliency
Task Force identified 33 recommendations
to the New York City Council. Many of these
recommendations are still in various states of
review, and 16 initiatives have been passed.
In addition, the NYC DCP’s Flood Resiliency
Zoning Text Amendment was approved by the
New York City Council on October 9, 2013. The
amendment removed obstacles to homes that
are rebuilding in the flood zone, allowing homes
to build to the new standards.

The New York City Regional Economic
Development Council’s (NYC  REDC)

Five-Year Strategy Plan (2011) entails a com-
prehensive economic strategy to address and
promote poverty prevention, job training, gov-
ernment fiscal responsibility and infrastructure
investment, and balanced investment among all
of New York City’s businesses. The NYC REDC
outlines four key objectives to address these
principles: improve quality of life, create a pro-
growth, pro-jobs environment, invest in the
future, and foster innovation and inter-regional
cooperation. Specific approaches supporting
small businesses and neighborhood revitaliza-
tion align with the goals of the NYRCR Program.

The NYC DCP established the Resilient
Neighborhoods Initiative (2014) in the wake
of Superstorm Sandy to develop recovery and
resiliency action plans for coastal communities
across the city, including a Southern Brooklyn
study area, which includes Canarsie. As part of
the Resilient Neighborhoods program, the NYC
DCP is collaborating with community mem-
bers to produce neighborhood planning stud-
ies that aim to reduce risks, strengthen local
communities and economies, and coordinate
land use planning. Building on input received
during NY Rising and Rebuild by Design, these
studies will incorporate community sugges-
tions about zoning and land use changes and
suggest other strategies for improving resil-
iency and mitigating flooding risk. Through the

NYRCR process in Canarsie, the NYC DCP has
remained engaged, attending meetings and
presenting an overview of the program at a
Planning Committee meeting. Several NYRCR
Committee members intend to remain involved
in the initiative.

The NYC DCP began issuing reports, most
recently Designing for Flood Risk, and Urban
Waterfront Adaptive Strategies (2013) as a
follow up to the Vision 2020 Waterfront Plan;
when Superstorm Sandy struck, these reports
evolved to reflect new, post-storm conditions
and challenges. Designing for Flood Risk offers
architectural strategies and design principles
for complying with higher flood protection stan-
dards in a manner that reflects New York City’s
diverse neighborhoods and building typology.
The Urban Waterfront Adaptive Strategies
Report identifies strategies for improving
coastal resilience, assesses the costs and ben-
efits of these strategies, and provides a frame-
work for communities to evaluate the applica-
bility of a given strategy for their neighborhood.
While these documents are not targeted toward
Canarsie specifically, the design strategies for
1 to 2 family homes in the Designing for Flood
Risk report and the evaluation framework for
assessing resiliency strategies are particularly
appropriate for Canarsie.

Community Overview

I-25
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Aerial view of upland Canarsie. Courtesy of Butch Moran.

|-26 Community Overview
The NYC DEP created the NYC DEP’s Green
Infrastructure Annual Report and Plans
(2014) to address water quality impacts that
result from CSO events. Under this program,
the NYC DEP and its partner agencies design,
construct and maintain a variety of sustainable
green infrastructure practices that include green
roofs, rain gardens, and right-of-way bioswales.
These green features capture and retain water
thereby reducing water from entering the
system, and are planned for New York City-
owned property such as streets, sidewalks,
schools, and public housing. The program
also provides grants for green infrastructure
projects on private property. Canarsie-specific
green infrastructure projects include three
bio-retention areas in a parking lot near the
Canarsie L train station. Projects in Jamaica
Bay include a long-term control plan to
achieve specific water quality standards for
the Jamaica Bay CSO area in Paerdegat Basin.
Additionally, the NYC DEP is currently operating
the Jamaica Bay Neighborhood Demonstration
Project, a trial project in the Jamaica Bay CSO
tributary area to assess the benefits of green
infrastructure use at a neighborhood level.
The results of these projects will be published
in the 2016 Performance Metrics Report. By
the end of December 2014, over 1,600 green
infrastructure projects will be completed, in
construction or will be progressing to the final

design stage in the Jamaica Bay and CSO
tributaries area.

New York City Department of
Transportation’s (NYC DOT) Planning and
Improvements (2014) include a variety of
recently completed, under construction, and
planned street and infrastructure projects in
the Canarsie area. One such major investment
involves the Jamaica Bay Greenway—a pro-
posed 28-mile multi-use path linking commu-
nities surrounding Jamaica Bay. To date the
NYC DOT andits collaborators have developed
10 miles of Greenway, including sections in
Canarsie, and they are currently undertaking
community engagement efforts to determine
additional route development. Priorities for
the final route development and implemen-
tation are expected to be released in spring
of 2015. These projects include the following
elements: the recent reconstruction and ongo-
ing landscaping of three major bridges on the
Belt Parkway in Canarsie (Fresh Creek Bridge,
Rockaway Parkway Bridge, and Paerdegat
Basin Bridge); the establishment of the
Canarsie Park Connector to facilitate exchange
between neighborhood commercial corridors,
the waterfront and the developing Jamaica Bay
Greenway; and assorted traffic calming efforts
throughout the neighborhood.

Brooklyn Recovery Fund’s Brooklyn
Communities Speak: An Action Guide for
Local Decision-Makers (2014) surveys con-
ditions in six coastal Brooklyn Neighborhoods
in the wake of Superstorm Sandy and provides
both borough-wide and neighborhood-specific
recommendations for government recovery and
resiliency programs. Issues of specific concern
in Canarsie include addressing high foreclosure
rates, ensuring that services are available to
Canarsie’s large immigrant and undocumented
immigrant population, which the report esti-
mates at over 15,000, hiring local residents to
work on construction projects, encouraging
small business re-openings, improving bus ser-
vice, and addressing widespread rotting trees.

The Brooklyn Recovery fund was established
by the Brooklyn Community Foundation in
partnership with the Office of the Brooklyn
Borough President and the Brooklyn Chamber
of Commerce. The Brooklyn Chamber of
Commerce and New York Business Develop-
ment Corporation launched a $10 million loan
fund through the New York City Business
Solutions Center to promote small businesses
in Brooklyn, with particular emphasis on immi-
grant- and veteran-owned enterprises. Loan
allowances range from $25,000 to $350,000.
The first loans were granted in December 2013.
The fund also began a number of local initiatives

Community Overview

|-27
I-28

across the borough, some of which are based in
Canarsie. These efforts have included:

Canarsie Recovery Coalition (2012) consisted
of a variety of local community-based organi-
zations convened to provide a voice, develop
recovery plans and facilitate recovery programs
in the Community. To accomplish this, the
Coalition hired a full-time Project Director and
conducted a community assessment to deter-
mine post-storm housing needs. Additionally,
the Coalition organized a Canarsie Day to
increase interaction between service agencies
and Canarsie residents, distributed $100,000
in homeowner grants, and organized a rebuild-
ing program in the neighborhood. Funding for
the full-time Director of the Coalition by the
Brooklyn Recovery Fund ended in the summer
of 2014.

Neighborhood Housing Services of East
Flatbush: Canarsie Emergency Repairs
Assistance Program (2013) was a grant giving
program funded by the Brooklyn Recovery Fund
and administered by Neighborhood Housing
Services of East Flatbush (NHS). The program
provided 50 grants and forgivable loans of up to
$10,000 to homeowners for emergency repairs.
The NHS also currently provides loans of up to
$20,000 to qualified building owners through
their Emergency Loan Programs.

Community Overview

Canarsie Strong, Canarsie New York
Resilience Network (ongoing) is a coalition of
neighborhood block associations in Canarsie
that aims to encourage collaboration and com-
munity partnerships in order to build resiliency,
disaster response capabilities, and environ-
mentally responsible communities in Canarsie.
Canarsie Strong is part of the Canarsie New
York Resilience Network and has established
working groups around a range of issues: hous-
ing, transportation, drainage, and economic
resiliency, and others.
II. Assessment of Risk and Needs
 

=
Description of Community Assets

Assets are locations, features, infrastructure
and development located within or outside of
the Canarsie NY Rising Community Recon-
struction (NYRCR) Community (Community)
whose loss or impairment due to flood/
storm events would compromise any essential
social, economic, or environmetal functions
and/or critical facilities of the Community.

Assets may facilitate economic and social activ-
ities or refer to critical infrastructure required to
support those activities. Assets may also be part
of the built or the natural environment. The goal
of the asset inventory is to assemble a descrip-
tion of the Community’s most important assets
with sufficient information to assess risk to the
assets under current and future conditions.
Assets identified through the NYRCR Program
fall within at least one of two categories:

¢ Community assets that have been dam-
aged from past storms or are at risk of
damage from future storms (i.e. assets
within high or extreme risk areas, as illus-
trated in figure II-1);

¢ Community assets that are critical in the
preparedness, response, or recovery from
future storms or other emergencies.

What Do The Risk Areas Mean?

New York State Department of State (NYS DOS),
with the assistance of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), mapped
geographic areas representing the likelihood for
coastal flooding. They identified three risk areas:

Extreme: Areas currently at risk of frequent
inundation and vulnerable to erosion and wave
action over three feet (FEMA V zone), subject

to shallow coastal flooding (within the National
Weather Service’s shallow coastal flooding advi-
sory threshold), or likely to be inundated in the
future due to sea level rise (assumes three feet).

High: Areas outside the extreme risk area that
are currently at risk of infrequent inundation
(FEMA A zone, meaning there is a 1% annual

Assets were identified using a combina-
tion of publicly available data and input from
the Canarsie NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee) and the public. The inventory and
associated maps were initially generated using
New York City land use and infrastructure data
to identify assets within the Canarsie NYRCR
Planning Area (Planning Area). The maps were

chance of flooding) or at future risk of shallow
coastal flooding with sea level rise (assumes
three feet).

Moderate: Areas outside the extreme and high
risk areas but currently at moderate risk of
inundation from infrequent events (FEMA shaded
X zone, meaning there is a 0.2% annual chance
of flooding) or at risk of being in the 100 year
floodplain with sea level rise (assumes three
feet), and any areas expected to be inundated by
a category three hurricane.

A more detailed description of the NYS DOS
Risk Assessment Area Mapping Methodology
can be found on the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program website, as
can a link to an online viewer for the risk assess-
ment area maps, at http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/
community-reconstruction-program.

refined by the Committee and presented to the
Community at the initial Public Engagement
Event for feedback. The assets described here
reflect the input and feedback of the Committee
and the wider Community. The asset inventory
is organized by the NYRCR asset class, the
categories of which are highlighted in the fol-
lowing sections.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Il-1
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Recovery Support Functions

Functions are used to frame needs and opportunities identified by the Community. These functions are derived from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) National Disaster Recovery Framework developed by President Barack
Obama in 2011 and provide a structure for analyzing the community recovery needs and the subsequent assistance that must
be provided. They also tie closely to the asset categories used in the asset inventory. They are defined as follows:

Natural & Cultural Resources

Natural infrastructure systems can play an
important role in resiliency and recovery.

The ability of natural features to withstand
disruptive events and mitigate damage is
addressed by this function. Cultural resources
can play an important role in recovery through
provision of spaces and forums for recovery.

Health & Social Services

This function addresses the ability of public health
services, health care facilities, and essential social
services to be restored after a disruptive event.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Housing
The resiliency of a community’s housing stock is

addressed by this function—including both phys-
ical resiliency and financial health and resources.

Community Planning & Capacity Building

This function addresses a community’s ability to
implement immediate storm recovery activities
and organize long-term resiliency plans. Formal
and informal community networks, dedicated
emergency education and planning efforts, and
experience recovering from past emergency
events are characteristics that may enhance this
function.

Economic Development
This function addresses the ability for economic

and business activities to return to normal.
Developing new economic opportunities that
result in a sustainable and economically strong
community is a component of this function.

Infrastructure

This function relates to local and regional trans-
portation, water management, utility systems, and
the ability of these to withstand and recover from
disruptive events. The economic development and
job creation capacity of these systems are also
critical to this function.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure II-1: NYS Department of State Risk Map

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Canarsie Planning Area

 

A Extent of High & Extreme
L Planning Area Risk Areas

NYSDOS Risk Areas
Moderate

HE Hin
|| Extreme

NYS DOS, with the assistance of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration ROAR), mapped geographic areas representing the likelihood
for coastal flooding. They identified three risk areas:

Extreme: Areas currently at risk of frequent inundation and vulnerable to erosion and
wave action over three feet (FEMA V zone}, subject to shallow coastal flooding
{within the National Weather Service's shallow coastal flooding advisory threshold),
or likely to be inundated in the future due to sea level rise (assumes three feet).

High: Areas outside the extreme risk area that are currently at risk of infrequent
inundation (FEMA A zone, meaning there is a 1% annual chance of flooding} or at
future tisk of shallow coastal flooding with sea level rise (assumes three feet}.

Moderate: Areas outside the extreme and high risk areas but currently at moderate
tisk of inundation from infrequent events (FEMA shaded X Zone, meaning there is a
0.2% annual chance of flooding} or at risk of being in the 100 year floodplain with sea
level tise (assumes of three feet}, and any areas expected to be inundated by a
category three hurricane.

    

  
  
 

  
 
 
 
   

Amore detailed description of the NYS DOS Risk Assessment Area Mapping Methodology
can be found on the NYRCR website, as can a link to on online viewer for the risk
assessment area maps, at http://stormrecovery.ny.gow/community-reconstruction-program.

SN
>

2S

    

CSoCN
6 ZO

Source: New York State Department of State (DOS) Risk Assessement Areas; New York City
Department of Gity Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

 

 

 

 

6,000
A ——— rr Foot

Assessment of Risk and Needs Il-3
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

ll-4

Health and Social Services Assets
Canarsie is home to many medical facilities and
community centers that serve the Community's
diverse population. Fairview Adult Day Care
and Four Seasons Nursing and Rehabilitation
Center serve the Community’s — senior
population while numerous day cares, some of
which are operated out of private residences,
tend to the youngest residents. Although
there is no comprehensive primary care hos-
pital within Canarsie, Staten Island University
Hospital’s property near the Canarsie-
Rockaway Parkway subway station, home to
their methadone maintenance clinic, and the
Evelyn Douglin Center for Serving People in
Need serve uniquely vulnerable populations. No
facilities or organizations offer comprehensive
in-patient services within the Community, but
there are multiple Brooklyn hospitals just out-
side of the Planning Area that do, including
Brookdale University Hospital and Medical
Center, just north of Canarsie on Rockaway
Parkway. No one facility acted as the central
point of relief and provision of supplies during
the aftermath of Superstorm Sandy, but both
the Hebrew Educational Society and the Church
of the Holy Family played a critical role in pro-
viding those affected with a place of temporary
refuge and solace. My Time, Inc. provided vital
resources and services to the disabled and
other vulnerable populations.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

 

Atrium, a nursing home located outside the flood plain.

The Pacplex sports, recreation, and education
complex along Paerdegat Avenue is the larg-
est of its kind within the borough of Brooklyn.
The South Shore Educational Complex, for-
merly South Shore High School, houses the
Brooklyn Theatre Arts High School as well
as the Academy for Conservation and the
Environment, within its campus. All of these
facilities are large structures that serve the

Sm

aa rN

ml Lath BAUS GuRtG

i:

 

Community, primarily through educational and
recreational programs.

Canarsie is served by the 69th Precinct of
the New York Police Department (NYPD) and
the New York Fire Department (FDNY) Engine
Company #257. Both of these facilities are
located within the moderate risk area and are
critical to the safety and resiliency of Canarsie.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure II-2: Health & Social Services Asset Map

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Canarsie Planning Area

 

' Extent of High & Extreme
[1] Planning area a
Health and Social Service .
Assets NYSDOS Risk Areas
Health, Social Service, | Moderate
& Emergency Response
Assets

EE Hon
HE cxveme

1 STATEN ISLAND UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL 20 FDNY ENGINE 257, LADDER 170
2 FAIRVIEW ADULT DAY CARE CENTER: 21) =SCHOOL SAFETY BIKLYN. SO. OFFICE
3 FIRST MEDGARE PRIMARY GARE CENTER tie oes ee:
4 GATEWAY DIALYSIS CENTER
5 LAKESIDE/PARKSHORE ADULT DAY HEALTH 23° YESHIVA GEDOLAH OHR YISRCEL
CARE CENTER 24 JOHN WILSON INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL 211
@ SUSAN LEVIT MEDICAL ARTS CENTER 25 JASA SENIOR DAY CARE CENTER
7 SUNRISE/PARKSHORE ADULT DAY HEALTH 2g
pepieictins SOUTH SHORE EDUCATIONAL GOMPLEX
Gi 8  VERSAGARE HEALTH CENTER 27 CANARSIE EDUCATIONAL COMPLEX
= 9 BIG APPLE DAY CARE 28

HERMAN SCHREIBER PUBLIC SCHOOL 278
10 PACPLEX SPORTS RECREATION AND
EQUCATION COMPLEX

11 GAN JEWISH DAY CARE CENTER A HEBREW OUTSIDE THE PLANNING AREA:

EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY 29 BROOKDALE UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL &
12 LITTLE PRINCETON NURSERY AND DAY MEDICAL CENTER:

‘GARE CENTER LLG 30 MAIMONDES MEDICAL CENTER
13 BROOKLYN HEBREW SCHOOL 31 FDNY EMS CENTER, PENNSYLVANIA AVE
td EIHAB HUMAN SERVICES 32 JCC CANARSIE, COUNCIL TOWERS:
15 EVELYN GOUGLIN CENTER SEAVING

PEOBLE IN NEED 33 KINGS COUNTY HOSPITAL
18 FOUR SEASONS NURSING AND 34 DOWNSTATE UNIVERSITY HOPSITAL

REHABILITATION CENTER

35 KINGSBAOOK JEWISH MEDICAL CENTER:

17 RIVER MANOR CARE CENTER
18 =NYPD69 PRECINCT
19 EMS STATIONS:

Source: New York State Depariment of State (DOS) Risk Assessement Areas; New York City
Oepartment of City Planning, MAPPiuto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 oO 1,500 3,000 6,000
A I

Assessment of Risk and Needs ll-5
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

ll-6

Y)

Economic Assets

Canarsie’s economic assets were also identified
as essential. Economic corridors and individual
businesses are important to the Community’s
preparedness, response, and recovery as they
are Critical to the supply of basic goods. They
also play an important day-to-day function as
sources of goods, jobs, and socialization for
Canarsie’s residents.

Canarsie is served by three commercial cor-
ridors, almost all of which are entirely out of
the floodplain: Avenue L, which runs from
Rockaway Plaza to East 91st Street; Rockaway
Parkway, which runs from the Canarsie-
Rockaway Parkway subway station south-
east towards the Jamaica Bay shoreline; and
Flatlands Avenue, which runs perpendicular to
Rockaway Parkway. These avenues are similar,
with primarily one- to two-story buildings inter-
laced with mixed-use and residential proper-
ties. Rockaway Parkway is the most robust eco-
nomic corridor, featuring not only various small
retail businesses, national chain storefronts and
gas stations, but also providing access to key
infrastructure and health and social services
such as private medical practices.

Land usage along all three commercial corridors
is a diverse mix of residents and businesses.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Industrial and business districts in Canarsie.

For instance, a three-block stretch of Flatlands
Avenue between East 95th Street and East 92nd
Street features an office building, single-family
residences, and mixed-use two-story build-
ings. This diversity adds vibrancy to Canarsie’s

 

commercial corridors, and contributes to the
character of the Community.
Figure II-3: Economic Assets Map

 

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

  

(Sg) NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
‘“@a) Canarsie Planning Area

CL] Planning Area Extent of High & Extreme

Risk Areas
Economic Assets. NYSDOS Risk Areas
eee Commercial Corridors Moderate
1 Avenue
2 Flatlands Avenue HN vin

3 Rockaway Parkway || Extreme

Economic Use
Mixed Residential & Commercial, Condominiums
Mixed Residential & Commercial, Residence - Multiple Use
|) Mixed Residential & Commercial, Store Buildings (Taxpayers Included)
(0) Mixed Residential & Commercial, Walk Up Apartments
PI) commercial & Office Buildings, Office Buildings
(commercial a Office Buildings, Store Buildings (Taxpayers Included)
Industrial & Manufacturing, Factory And Industrial Buildings
(ER industrial 2 Manufacturing, Warehouses

Source: New York State Department of State (DOS) Risk Assessement Areas; New York City
Department of City Planning, MAPPiuto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

 

 

 

 

Assessment of Risk and Needs ll-7
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

ll-8

Housing Assets

Canarsie’s homes are its most important assets.
Those homes within the high and extreme
risk zones have been identified as the hous-
ing assets at greatest risk from future storms.
There are approximately 5,400 residential
buildings either partially or entirely in the high
and extreme flood zone, the majority are one-
and two-family residences. The most at-risk
residences are those closest to Paerdegat
Basin, Fresh Creek, and low-lying areas near
Jamaica Bay. As residential property tends to
be the most valuable asset held by households,
and with 47% of Canarsie residents owning
their homes, the protection of the Canarsie
housing stock is critical to the livelihoods of
these residents.

There are a number of one- to four-unit
multi-family walk-up buildings, on Paerdegat
Avenue, close to Paerdegat Basin. These res-
idences are typically three-story structures with
recessed garages, making them particularly
prone to garage and basement flooding. There
are also three large New York City Housing
Authority (NYCHA) properties within Canarsie,
but none are in the high or extreme risk areas.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

 

Typical attached brick homes in Canarsie.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure II-4: Housing Assets Map

   

fae) NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
“ay Canarsie Planning Area

[rami ae [1 Reenayo# tere
Housing Assets
One and Two Family
Residences in High

NYSDOS Risk Areas
‘esidences in Hig! Medereks
and Extreme Risk Areas || High
hie ai Fanny Walk-Up
uildings in High and || Extreme
Extreme Risk Areas

‘Source: New York State Department of State (DOS) Risk Assessement Areas; New York City
Department of City Planning, MAPPiuto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

 

 

  

 

 

3,000 6,000

AEE rs F ect

Assessment of Risk and Needs ll-9
Il-10

Infrastructure Assets

A number of infrastructure assets are located
in Canarsie, all of which contribute to the
Community’s preparedness, response, and
recovery from future storms.

Canarsie is served by two subway stops on the
Metropolitan Transit Authority’s New York City
Transit (MTA-NYCT) L line, East 105th Street
and Canarsie-Rockaway Parkway. Rail yards
storing idle subway cars are located between
the two stations. Canarsie-Rockaway Parkway,
which is the terminus station of the L line, is
also a bus station and important transfer point
between the two transit systems. In 2013, the
MTA-NYCT reported an average weekday rid-
ership of 13,254 passengers per day at the
Canarsie-Rockaway Parkway station, and an
additional 3,818 passengers per day at East
105th Street. Providing a connection to points
north within Brooklyn and into Manhattan, the L
train is an important transportation asset both
during an emergency and for the day-to-day
livelihood of Community residents. Another
major component of transportation infra-
structure serving the Community is the Belt
Parkway, a highway that connects Canarsie to
other Brooklyn waterfront neighborhoods, and
bridges to Manhattan, and Queens.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

 

The terminating stop on the L train, the Rockaway Parkway station.

The majority of the Planning Area is served by
separated sanitary and storm sewer systems,
meaning that wastewater is piped out and
treated at wastewater treatment plants, while
stormwater is collected in a separate system or
flows into surrounding waterbodies. Canarsie
is serviced by two wastewater treatment
plants: the 26th Ward Wastewater Treatment
Plant in East New York and the Coney Island
Wastewater Treatment Plant in Sheepshead
Bay. Both of these plants are outside of the
Planning Area although they are critical to the

functionality of Canarsie’s separated sewer and
stormwater system.

There are two New York City Department of
Environmental Protection (NYC DEP) pumping
stations within the Community that have been
identified by the NYC DEP as potentially at
risk to future storms: the Paerdegat Pumping
Station, which resides within an above-ground
structure on Flatlands Avenue, and the below-
grade Avenue M Pumping Station.
Figure II—-5: Infrastructure Assets Map

 

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Canarsie Planning Area

 

[J Pienning Aree Extent of High & Extreme
Infrastructure Assets NYSDOS Risk Areas
° lirrastnictue Systems Moderate
ssets
<0" Belt Parkway DN bch

|| Extreme

1 GAS STATION

2 GAS STATION

3 GAS STATION

4 GAS STATION

5 GAS STATION

@ GAS STATION

7 GAS STATION

@ GAS STATION

9 GAS STATION

10 GAS STATION

11 GAS STATION

12 GAS STATION

13 CANARSIE-ROCKAWAY PARKWAY STATION (L TRAIN AND BUS)
14 MTA FACILITY

18 AVENUE M PUMPING STATION (NYC DEP}

16 PAERDEGAT PUMPING STATION (NYC DEP)

17 BELT PARKWAY

18 105 STREET STATION (L TRAIN)

OUTSIDE THE PLANNING AREA,

19 26TH WARD WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT
20 CONEY ISLAND WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT

‘Source: New York State Department of State (DOS) Risk Assessement Areas; New York City
Department of City Planning, MAPPiuto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

 

 

 

 

Assessment of Risk and Needs _ |I-11
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

I-12

Natural and Cultural Resources Assets
Canarsie has extensive parkland and open
space, concentrated primarily along the
Jamaica Bay shoreline, Paerdegat Basin, and
Fresh Creek. These shorelines contain marsh-
lands and natural areas, as well as recreational
spaces. Natural and cultural resources that
have been damaged in previous storms, or are
located within the high and extreme risk areas,
were identified as at risk and are included in the
asset inventory.

Canarsie Park is located along the south-
east edge of Canarsie, is bounded by Fresh
Creek, the Belt Parkway, Paerdegat Basin, and
Seaview Avenue, and provides a mix of recre-
ational space, ballfields, nature trails, and nat-
ural habitats for a variety of birds, animals, and
plant species.' Canarsie Park is the most active
and largest park in the Community.

The natural areas of Canarsie’s Jamaica Bay
shoreline are part of the National Park Service's
(NPS) Gateway National Recreation Area
(Gateway). As such, this shoreline ties into the
larger NPS recreation area for Jamaica Bay,
including the Jamaica Bay Greenway. At the
center of this shoreline is Canarsie Pier, an
important recreational asset for the Community
and a feature of the park highlighted in the
recently updated NPS General Management

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Canarsie Playground, a popular natural asset in Canarsie.

Plan for Gateway. On a nice day, fishermen line
the pier, families cook out, and visitors enjoy the
impressive views of Jamaica Bay and its sur-
rounding inlets and islands.

Paerdegat Basin, on the southwestern edge
of the Planning Area, is a natural resource pro-
viding marine and coastal habitats for native

   

plant and animal species and supporting water-
based recreation to Canarsie and neighboring
Bergen Beach. The NYC DEP is in the process
of restoring the tidal wetlands of the basin,
which will augment water quality and ecological
improvements along the basin.? The excavation
of the shoreline has resulted in berming along
the basin’s northern shoreline. These berms
Figure II-6: Natural and Cultural Resources Assets Map

    
 

CL] Planning Area

Natural and Cultural
Resource Assets
oe Natural and Cultural
Resource Assets
€««D Jamaica Bay Greenway

|| Parks and Open Space

 

+ JAMAICA BAY GREENWAY

CANARSIE PIER (GATEWAY NATIONAL
RECREATION AREA, NATIONAL PARKS
SERVICE)

FRESH GREEK

FRESH CREEK NATURE PRESERVE
PACPLEX SPORTS RECREATION AND
EDUCATION COMPLEX

PAERDEGAT BASIN

CANARSIE PARK (NYG PARKS)
WILSON PLAYGROUND (NYC PARKS)
HEBREW EDLICATIONAL SOCIETY

10 BAYVIEW COMMUNITY CENTEA (NYCHA)

11 HOLY FAMILY ROMAN CATHOLIC
CHURCH

ee4vre fae

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

ay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Canarsie Planning Area

Extent of High & Extreme
Risk Areas

NYSDOS Risk Areas
Moderate

HE ic
|| Extreme

‘Source: New York State Department of State (DOS) Risk Assessement Areas; New York City
Department of City Planning, MAPPiuto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

 

 

 

 

 

0 1,500 3,000
A

6,000

rs ect

Assessment of Riskand Needs [I-13
1-14

 

 

 

 

 

 

The berm along Paerdegat Basin could provide future protection for homes.

do not span the entire length of Paerdegat and
may not provide any real protection from storm
surge unless they are extended to protect all
vulnerable points of the basin’s edges.

Similarly, Fresh Creek, on the northeastern

edge of the Planning Area, is a natural asset
shared with neighboring East New York. Fresh

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Creek has been identified as an ecosystem
restoration opportunity in the Hudson Raritan
Estuary Comprehensive Restoration Plan (HRE-
CRP). It is also being studied by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE) as a potential
opportunity to provide a reduction of coastal
storm damage as well as ecosystem resto-
ration benefits. Ecological problems identified

at Fresh Creek include poor habitat quality,
filled historic wetland, poor water quality due to
combined sewer outflow (CSO) discharges, and
the presence of invasive species. Additionally,
the basin was a significant source of flooding
during Superstorm Sandy. Unlike Paerdegat
Basin, many homes along Fresh Creek are
located directly on the water’s edge, making
them more exposed to floodwaters. The land is
largely owned by the New York City Department
of Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR), which
has acknowledged the coastal restoration
and protection opportunities within the Creek.
Additionally, NYC DEP and USACE have iden-
tified Fresh Creek as a potential restoration
opportunity (costing approximately $31 million),
and a plan is being considered by the New York
City Department of Transportation (NYC DOT)
to make roadway improvements along 108th
Street, which runs parallel to the Creek’s shore-
line. Although there is currently no funding for
restoration or protection within Fresh Creek,
the attention given by these various agencies
speaks to the Creek’s potential and provides a
unique opportunity to leverage NYRCR funds to
realize improvements.
Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems

The assessment of risk to assets identified
by the Community informs the evaluation and
relative priority of projects. The waterbodies
that serve as natural borders for much of the
Community—specifically, Fresh Creek along
the northeast, Paerdegat Basin along the
southwest, and the North Channel of Jamaica
Bay along the southeast—were entry points
for inundation during Superstorm Sandy and
remain exposed to future coastal flooding. The
low-lying blocks along the waterfront, located
within an NYS DOS high risk area, remain the
most at risk of flooding from storms and sea-
level rise and are where the most at-risk com-
munity assets are concentrated. Although most
of the Community further inland is located within
the moderate risk area, these areas remain vul-
nerable to flooding from storm surge and sewer
backup, especially if pedestrian and vehicular
egress during an emergency is blocked.

In addition to physical factors, there are many
issues with respect to community capacity
that contribute to the vulnerability of residents
and assets throughout Canarsie. The lack of
an emergency response plan or a designated
local recovery site, as well as poor communi-
cation regarding recovery efforts and available
aid, hindered the Community’s ability to effec-
tively respond to and recover from Superstorm
Sandy. These issues remain unaddressed, thus

Assessing Risk

The NYRCR Program defines risk as the poten-
tial for an asset to be damaged or destroyed in
a future storm event. The assessment of risk to
assets or systems of assets in a community pro-
duced important information to evaluate needs
and opportunities and help guide Committee
decisions about resiliency strategies and proj-
ects. NYS DOS developed a risk assessment
tool that is aimed at understanding flood risk and
community functions to support this process.
The tool assigns each asset a risk score by eval-
uating three factors:

Hazard — the likelihood and magnitude of future
storm events

Exposure - the local topographic and shoreline
conditions that may increase or decrease the
impact of coastal hazards

increasing the vulnerability of residents and of
assets throughout the Community.

The assessment of risk to assets provides back-
ground information to help in the development

Vulnerability — the capacity of an asset to return
to service after a storm, taking into account its
material strength relative to the coastal hazard
as well as its regenerative capacity

Collectively, hazard, exposure, and vulnera-
bility determine the risk that an asset could be
damaged or destroyed by a coastal storm event.
This analysis identifies which assets within the
Community are most at risk from future storms
in comparison to other assets. Furthermore, it
allows potential projects to be evaluated by their
ability to reduce risk to assets. For access to the
NYS DOS Risk Assessment Tool and additional
information on how to use it, see http://stormre-
covery.ny.gov/resources-O

of projects, particularly those projects that pro-
tect assets from flooding. The assessment will
also be used as input for the subsequent eval-
uation of NYRCR projects, to reduce identified
risks to the assets, which will be discussed in

Assessment of RiskandNeeds_ [I-15
 

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

(op
Lr cag
le - oe

Jp

Si oe

Zee

Lf,
a

oS.
LDL

oo nga

Yi

eS Pte 2

 

In-home day cares such as these are in the high risk area.

ll-16 Assessment of Risk and Needs
future sections. The output from the NYS DOS
Risk Assessment Methodology is included in
Table V-3.

Health and Social Services Assets at
Risk

A number of important health and social ser-
vices assets are located in the high risk area
of the Community. These assets serve a vari-
ety of functions for the Community, including
day care, healthcare, and education services.
For instance, Big Apple Day Care and Yeshiva
Ateres Yisroelare are both located within several
blocks of Paerdegat Basin. The Evelyn Douglin
Center for Serving People in Need, Eihad
Human Services, and Fairview Adult Day Care
Center, are located just inland of Jamaica Bay.
The John Wilson Intermediate School 211 and
the Herman Schreiber Public School 279 are
located blocks from Fresh Creek. The Hebrew
Educational Society is similarly located in the
high risk area and remains vulnerable to future
storms. These health and social services assets
are critical in providing support throughout the
Community before, during, and after storm
events, and many provide special assistance
to vulnerable populations in the Community,
including seniors, people with disabilities, low-
and very-low-income populations, young chil-
dren, and people at risk of becoming homeless.
Because of this, loss or damage to these assets

could severely hinder the Community’s ability
to recover and protect vulnerable populations.

Economic Assets at Risk

The three main economic corridors in Canarsie
are located primarily in the moderate risk
zone, with the exception of a portion along
the Avenue L corridor northeast of Rockaway.
Following Superstorm Sandy, individual busi-
nesses needed private pumping and remedi-
ation services to address sewer backup, and
a number of businesses have closed perma-
nently after Superstorm Sandy. As few efforts
have been made to address these vulnerabili-
ties, economic assets remain at risk of damage
from storm surge and sewer backup.

Housing Assets at Risk

Many one- and two-family residences, in addi-
tion to some multi-family walk-up buildings,
are located within the high risk area. During
Superstorm Sandy, the residential neighbor-
hoods located nearest to Fresh Creek experi-
enced the greatest storm surge of 6-9 feet, and
the homes remain exposed to future flooding
due to the low-lying topography of the area
around the Fresh Creek Nature Preserve and
their proximity to the shoreline. These homes
are particularly vulnerable as most have base-
ments and first floors unprotected from flood-
waters. Homes throughout Canarsie have

continued to experience sewer backup since
Superstorm Sandy, suggesting that the vulner-
ability of the sewer system continues to pose a
threat during future storms. Financial stress for
homeowners as a result of loss of revenue from
damaged basements that can no longer be
rented, as well as rising flood insurance costs,
threaten residents’ ability to afford repairs and
upgrades, further exacerbating the vulnerability
of housing throughout the Community.

Infrastructure Assets at Risk

The Belt Parkway is the only infrastructure asset
within the Planning Area that is located in the
high risk area, but many other assets are located
within the moderate risk area and could still incur
damage during future storms. The Belt Parkway
is at less risk than other roadways due to its
high elevation. Other at-grade roadways in the
high and moderate risk areas are more vulner-
able, and sinkholes have plagued the ability of
drivers to navigate these streets in recent years.
During and after Superstorm Sandy the precar-
iousness of the road network was evident, as
flooding from Paerdegat Basin and Fresh Creek
engulfed access points up to Remsen Avenue
and Rockaway Parkway, and sinkholes on
streets increased. The risk of flooding, in con-
junction with the poor condition of the roadways
and limited subway access, leaves the transpor-
tation system susceptible to future damage.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

I-17
ll-18

Poor stormwater drainage is a lingering con-
cern within the Community, particularly along
the floodplains of Fresh Creek and Paerdegat
Basin. Many residents experienced sewer
backup during Superstorm Sandy and report
similar backup during heavy rain events. This
suggests that the sewer system remains vulner-
able to flooding.

The Paerdegat and Avenue M Pumping Stations
that service Canarsie are located in the moder-
ate risk area. These stations provide essential
functions in preventing sewer backups but face
a threat from both sea-level rise and increased
storm severity. While neither station was dam-
aged or lost function during Superstorm Sandy,
the Avenue M station is below grade and
exposed to potential flooding. Large popula-
tions and assets are dependent on the opera-
tions of these stations and need them to remain
online. The Paerdegat Pumping Station ser-
vices 130,000 people and a nearby beach, and
the Avenue M Pumping Station serves 19,000
people.* The NYC Wastewater Resiliency Plan
recommends elevating key machinery at the
Avenue M station and constructing a barrier
around Paerdegat Pumping Station to reduce
risk of potential shutdown.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Natural and Cultural Assets at Risk

Natural and cultural assets which are located
in the high risk area and heavily exposed to
future storm surge include the recreational
amenities and parkland along Paerdegat Basin,
Fresh Creek, and the Jamaica Bay shoreline.
The recent restoration efforts along Paerdegat
Basin, which now provide wetland and upland
habitat buffers between the basin and adja-
cent homes, may prove to reduce the expo-
sure of the park and surrounding assets from
future storm events. The highest inundation
experienced during Superstorm Sandy was at
Canarsie Pier along the Jamaica Bay shoreline,
with water levels exceeding 9 feet. There is
continued risk of flooding along this waterfront
during future storms. Canarsie Park and Pier
serve as both a natural and recreational buffer
between Jamaica Bay and the Community, but
the threat of high surge with future storms may
result in greater inundation of the inland areas.
The Pacplex Sports Recreation and Education
Complex is at risk of flooding from the adjacent
Paerdegat Basin, and the Fresh Creek Nature
Preserve is at risk due to its proximity to the
Creek. Many trees in the Preserve were partially
uprooted during Superstorm Sandy, contribut-
ing to the erosion of the Creek’s edge. Space
within Canarsie Park is less vulnerable due to
the lack of free standing structures, allowing it
to return to service faster following a storm.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

oe

View of Fresh Creek with the Belt Parkway in the background.

 

Assessment of Riskand Needs [I-19
Il-20

Needs and Opportunities Assessment

Through the NYRCR Planning Process, the
Committee and members of the public identi-
fied the Community’s key resiliency needs and
opportunities.

Needs are safety and resiliency measures iden-
tified by the Community that will help address
their critical issues and minimize extreme
weather events, rising sea levels, and other
impacts associated with climate change. Needs
may also demonstrate those elements that will
help the Community become more resilient
overall if addressed.

Opportunities include important, underutilized
assets and existing programs that can be lever-
aged to reduce risks or address issues.

Together, needs and opportunities inform
Canarsie’s strategies and projects throughout
the NYRCR process.

Canarsie’s experience during Superstorm
Sandy exposed greater levels of vulnerabil-
ity than previously understood. Residents
witnessed the shortcomings of their disas-
ter planning and the inadequacy of existing
infrastructure systems, as well as the existing
flood maps. The needs that follow reflect this
first-hand experience, and demonstrate the
steps the Community has identified in order to

Assessment of Risk and Needs

be better protected from future events. Other
needs aim to build social resilience within the
Community, establishing robust networks that
can be called upon in emergency situations.

As such, the Community identified several
needs that cut across the following recov-
ery support functions: natural and cultural
resources, infrastructure, health and social ser-
vices, housing, economic development, and
community planning and capacity building.
Residents also identified corollary opportuni-
ties that could be used to address these needs,
representing untapped potential throughout the
Community. In doing so, Canarsie can begin to
take action, implementing immediate solutions
that will better position the Community to com-
plete its recovery and catalyze a stronger future.
Canarsie identified the following needs:

¢ More resilient water management infra-
structure (Infrastructure);

¢ Resilient power and communications
infrastructure (Infrastructure);

¢ Flood protection from
(Infrastructure, Natural
Resources);

storm surge
and Cultural

 

Staff from NYC Office of Emergency Management sup-
porting residents post Superstorm Sandy. Courtesy of
Canarsie Courier.
¢ Greener, safer streets and improved
connectivity (Infrastructure, Community
Planning and Capacity Building);

Effective emergency management plan-
ning and response (Health and Social
Services, Community Planning and
Capacity Building);

Informed and financially stable homeown-
ers (Housing);

economic
amenities

Increased
recreational
Development).

vibrancy and
(Economic

More Resilient Water Management

Needs

Canarsie needs improved systems of drainage
that minimize flooding from heavy rain events
and eliminates sewer backup as a common
occurrence. On a micro level, most households
lack the proper equipment to prevent ongoing
sewer backup, such as a backflow prevention
valve. Trees also need improved maintenance,
including the removal of trees damaged during

Superstorm Sandy. Lack of tree maintenance
can lead to sewer blockages when untamed
roots damage sewer infrastructure.

Additionally, Canarsie is a predominately car-
based neighborhood with substantial non-per-
meable surfaces —a problem that contributes to
poor drainage as these surfaces do not absorb
water. Canarsie Pier’s most distinguishing fea-
ture, aside from the scenic views of Jamaica
Bay, is a large, impermeable 350-space parking
lot. Similar, but smaller, impermeable surfaces
are replicated throughout the neighborhood,
particularly in the retail centers.

Opportunities

¢ Canarsie is graced with large green spaces
that separate segments of the residential
community from the water that surrounds
it. These grand amenities create an oppor-
tunity to layer in infrastructure that can
improve the drainage of the surrounding
areas. Additionally, these areas can be
used to create an ecological transition
between the residential neighborhood and
green spaces, creating clearer connec-
tions to the neighborhoods they serve and
extending the utility of this infrastructure.

In June 2014, NYC DPR commenced a
tree removal program to remove trees

damaged during Superstorm Sandy. This
program deploys trained foresters to sur-
vey and identify trees that will need to be
cut down and replaced, throughout the
inundation zone. NYC DPR is expected to
remove and replant 10,000 trees through-
out New York City by June 2015.4

Resilient Power and Communications

Needs

Power and communications systems are vital
assets in the aftermath of a storm. Canarsie
needs more resilient systems that can function
in emergency situations, including the diversifi-
cation of power sources. Power infrastructure is
vulnerable in this Community and across New
York City even in non-storm conditions. The
2003 blackout in which a large portion of the
eastern grid went dark, and Superstorm Sandy
underscore this need.

Power outages can lead to disruptions in cell
phone service, rendering the Community com-
pletely non-digital. In the days after Superstorm
Sandy, hand-written signs became a com-
mon method for communicating important

Assessment of Risk and Needs

21
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

l-22

information throughout New York City. Ensuring
that a functional communication system is in
place will result in a real-time understanding
of what is happening on the ground—allowing
resources to get to people in need.

Opportunities

¢ Local alternative sources of power (solar
photovoltaic cells, wind turbines, and
others) are becoming increasingly afford-
able to implement as they are adopted
on a wider scale. Moving from a single
source of power for essential services
would greatly benefit the Community and
increase the resiliency of Canarsie by limit-
ing the downtime of power systems.

Flood Protection from Storm Surge

Needs

As a coastal Community with exposure to the
100-year floodplain, Canarsie needs strength-
ened flood protection to ensure the safety of
at-risk homes and businesses. Raising homes
in the neighborhood’s floodplain, however, is
broadly unfeasible due to the dominant type of
attached brick, multi-unit building structures.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

 

The berm along Paerdegat Basin has the potential to protect adjacent homes from future storm surge.

Further, while the Paerdegat Basin berm and
Canarsie Park provide a minor level of coastal
protection, it is not sufficient to meet the future
risk faced by the Community and needs to be
strengthened.

Canarsie has not historically been affected by
storm surge, but faces increasing risk due to
sea-level rise. The projection of stronger and
more frequent storms hitting a diminishing

coastline, means that storms, once considered
generational events, may now be experienced
every 10 or 20 years. As such, a mix of hard
and soft infrastructural solutions is required to
protect those who live and work along Jamaica
Bay and its inlets.

Opportunities
¢ The NYC DPR recently restored the green
spaces around Paerdegat Basin, including
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

the construction of a berm on the Canarsie only have targeted impacts on coastal pro-
side of the basin. This wide swath of pub- tection; however, the net effect of stringing
lic land provides an opportunity to extend together multiple projects can offer a sig-
this berm further along the basin. nificant reduction in exposure. Marshlands Greener, Safer Streets and
act as sponges that absorb water, specifi- Improved Connectivity
¢ Anumber of opportunities may exist to fur- cally helping to provide protection against
ther the USACE identification of ecosys- more common flooding events. Needs
tem restoration opportunities in wetlands, Some residents have reported feeling unsafe
which include Fresh Creek.? These may in the neighborhood, stressing the need for

improved lighting and safer streets. The need
for increased security is highly relevant during
states of emergency. Calm prevailed in the
wake of Superstorm Sandy, but other exam-
ples from around the country have shown how
perceptions of disorder can hinder recovery
efforts and put the lives of citizens at risk. In
these instances, it is important to ensure that
the Community’s infrastructure is able to sup-
port residents during an emergency.

Adequate lighting is essential to instill feelings
of safety and security, both on a regular basis
and to aid in recovery efforts. Canarsie needs
more lighting, specifically resilient lighting, as
existing light sources are dependent on power
fed from the grid. After Superstorm Sandy,
police were forced to spend time and resources
setting up generator-powered lights—a stop-
gap measure that can be improved upon.

   

Young people crossing the street show the need for safer pedestrian routes along Williams Avenue. The desire for safer streets in Canarsie extends

Assessment of Riskand Needs [I-23
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

I-24

to general pedestrian safety. As a result of the
Community’s car-based infrastructure, there
are many locations throughout the neighbor-
hood where people do not feel safe walking,
due to speeding cars and the absence of side-
walks. Unsafe locations include the approach
to Canarsie Pier and along 108th Street adja-
cent to Fresh Creek.

With limited access to the subway, there is
a need for diversified transportation options
within the Community. The L train stop is a
critical hub within the neighborhood and is fed
by a network of connecting buses that allow a
broader base of residents to use mass transit.
Rethinking the transit infrastructure in Canarsie
will provide better access to job opportunities,
and the Community’s retail hubs and parks.

Opportunities

¢ The need for safer streets in New York City
has been acknowledged by both New York
City and New York State governments,
and has become a high-priority agenda
item representing a major opportunity
for the Canarsie Community. New York
City’s Vision Zero initiative aims to make
streets safer for pedestrians, by reduc-
ing the speed limit. This goal has been
supported by New York State Governor
Andrew Cuomo, who signed legislation in

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Volunteers passing out supplies after Superstorm Sandy.

August 2014 mandating a 25 mph speed
limit within New York City limits.®

« The NYC DOT has also been active in

the Community through its implementa-
tion of the Jamaica Bay Greenway, which
requires safer streets so that residents can
access this new amenity.

  

¢ The last five years have seen the gradual

roll-out of Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) sys-
tems in New York. In its purest form, BRT
occupies the middle ground, as a form
of transit between trains and buses, and
is designed to create a fast and efficient
means of transit without the intensive cap-
ital expenditures and permitting necessary
to create new rail lines. It commonly
features express boarding procedures,
dedicated lanes, and vehicle design that
easily identifies these unique City buses.
The NYC DOT has targeted Flatlands
Avenue in Canarsie as a candidate for
phase II of BRT in New York City, as part
of a greater Southern Brooklyn East-West
Corridor line running from East New York
to Sunset Park. ’

Effective Emergency Management
Planning and Response

Needs

In Canarsie, there is a strong sense that bet-
ter coordination among service providers and
government entities is necessary to ensure that
the basic needs of residents are being met.
Superstorm Sandy laid bare the challenges of
emergency response at the community level.
In Canarsie, as in many places in New York
City, there was an extended period of uncer-
tainty over who was providing which services
and where these services could be accessed.
The Community needs an integrated emer-
gency preparedness plan and easily recognized

location where food, supplies, medicine, and
information will be available in an emergency.

More broadly, the Canarsie Community has
expressed a need for more social services
and programming, both to strengthen capac-
ity for future storm preparedness and to build
the social cohesion and resilience of the
Community as a whole. This need is especially
great for vulnerable populations, including
youth and seniors. There is a strong consen-
sus on the lack of services for young people
and concern about their limited opportunities
to contribute to the Community's resiliency. In
addition, the need for meeting spaces has been
continually emphasized by the Committee, with
residents citing limited locations for community
groups to meet and collaborate.

While Canarsie has access to a number of
hospitals and medical service providers just
outside the neighborhood boundaries, the
Community has voiced a desire for a broader
array of services within the Community. Having
adequate healthcare resources embedded
within at-risk neighborhoods would ease the
process of recovery by reducing the time and
distance to reach populations in need of care.
Some members of the Community are specif-
ically concerned about the lack of services to
support mental health.

Canarsie needs secure access to food in order
to be a more self-reliant Community. Some gro-
cery stores lost power during Superstorm Sandy
and this, along with limited mobility, made it
very difficult for residents to get access to food.
The area from 88th Street to 93rd Street, north
of Flatlands Avenue to Farragut Road, is consid-
ered a low-income, low-access food desert by
the U.S. Department of Agriculture, meaning that
portions of the Community lack easy access to
groceries and fresh food.* The Community could
benefit from education that builds capacity to
grow and maintain healthy food.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

I-25
Il-26

Opportunities
¢ Canarsie already is home to a small net-

work of block associations, creating a
hyper-local system for coordination,
organization, and emergency response.
These groups provide a working model
that could be replicated throughout the

Assessment of Risk and Needs

  

A typical residential street in Canarsie suffered significant flooding during Superstorm Sandy.

neighborhood, allowing for quick dis-
semination of information and supplies.
Residents know these places best and
can more quickly identify important details
during a recovery, such as the location of
vulnerable populations.

¢ During the implementation of resiliency

projects, there is a great opportunity to
enlist members of the Community to play
active roles in recovery. Such roles can
range from volunteer positions to job train-
ing and paid employment, all of which con-
tribute to the capacity of the Community
to swiftly respond to and recover from
emergency situations. For example, there
is an opportunity to augment the existing
New York City Community Emergency
Response Team (CERT) that is active in
Canarsie, by recruiting young people.
Post- Superstorm Sandy, there were many
able-bodied young people who did not
participate in recovery efforts. Connecting
these young residents with emergency
preparedness organizations prior to disas-
ters could have a profound effect on the
resiliency of the Community.
Informed and Financially Secure
Homeowners

Needs

In the face of a rapidly changing landscape of
flood insurance policies and Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) maps, homeown-
ers need better access to information. Canarsie
was hit by consecutive disasters affecting
homeowners: the foreclosure crisis in 2008 and
Superstorm Sandy in 2012. The effects of the
storm exacerbated and magnified the foreclo-
sure crisis since homeowners were saddled
with additional financial burdens. Homeowners
who were dependent on rental income from
basement units or who rented to undocu-
mented residents were not eligible for aid from
FEMA or other Federal, State, or City sources.
All of these changes and challenges present a
need for more information to help homeown-
ers better understand the physical and financial
risks they face and the potential programs they
can access to mitigate those risks.

Opportunities

e Many Citywide non-profits are working
with local community-based organizations
to provide training and individual assis-
tance on housing recovery and resiliency

A damaged basement in Canarsie following Superstorm Sandy. Courtesy of Canarsie Courier.

issues. The Canarsie Community seeks
greater access to these and other related
services that focus on helping homeown-
ers assess the physical and financial risk
they face. There may be an opportunity
to tap into existing resources and insti-
tutional knowledge from organizations
running current programs in and near the
Planning Area to ensure that those in need

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

  

sa

of information and professional assistance
receive adequate support.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

 

Il-27
Il-28

W)

Increased Economic Vibrancy and
Recreational Amenities

Needs

Canarsie has a number of commercial corri-
dors, but desires a stronger and more vibrant
local economy. Retail is an important element in
disaster recovery —it gives residents access to
services, restores jobs, and is a signal that the
neighborhood is returning to a state of work-
ing order and vitality. To help support the over-
all health of retail businesses and spur growth,
improvements to the street infrastructure can
highlight the areas’ strengths. These range
from improving the quality of lighting to add-
ing street furniture and pedestrian plazas, and
planting new trees and flower beds. In order to
strengthen individual businesses, education is
needed about how to make businesses more
resilient. This will ensure they are able to play a
role in Canarsie’s recovery.

Opportunities

¢ The Community currently has a big-box
store that serves as destination retail (BU’s
Wholesale Club) and has the potential
to attract visitors and new retail to other
commercial areas in Canarsie.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

A stronger retail base can stem from
investments in better programmed and
activated public spaces. In_ particular,
the Pier and shoreline areas represent
significant opportunities, especially as
they are the terminus of the retail corri-
dor along Rockaway Parkway. Residents
have expressed a variety of ideas related
to Canarsie Pier, from short-term solu-
tions that bring more commercial activity
to longer-term visions that would improve
access to the beach side.

The Canarsie Merchants Association could
be a major asset that helps to coordinate
pooled resources to promote a commer-
cially friendly atmosphere.

With the influx of resiliency projects in the
neighborhood, there is an opportunity to
ensure that jobs stay within the neigh-
borhood (including electricians to certify
power, EMTs, and construction workers).
This will help build the local capacity of
the Community to respond to their own
disasters, as well as provide a source of
stable and necessary employment. A sim-
ilar program, the Conservation Corps, has
been underway through the NYC DPR and
provides local residents with environmen-
tal training and job experience.
III. Reconstruction and
Resiliency Strategies
 
Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

The Canarsie NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee
(Committee) identified critical issues, needs,
and opportunities to inform strategies for
enhancing the physical, environmental, social,
and economic resiliency of the Canarsie
NYRCR Community (Community). Refined
through a dialogue with the Community at two
of the Public Engagement Events, these strat-
egies address how the Community intends to
prepare for the next severe weather or other
emergency event, and recover from the impacts
of Superstorm Sandy.

The Committee is committed to the NYRCR
process and is strongly engaged in addressing
the issues that were exacerbated by the storm.
Hundreds of residents have provided their feed-
back, assisting the Committee in shaping these
strategies to secure a resilient future alongside
Jamaica Bay for generations to come.

The strategies described below outline a com-
prehensive approach for resilient planning ini-
tiatives through the NYRCR Program as well as
other ongoing programs and funding sources.
These strategies provide the framework for the
key Proposed Projects to be funded under the
NYRCR Plan, as well as the Featured Projects
and Additional Resiliency Recommendations
developed by the Community.

Canarsie’s strategies are:

¢ Reduce vulnerability to coastal flooding
and sea-level rise;

Activate and enhance access along the
shoreline ;

¢ Improve wastewater and stormwater
management;

Build and coordinate local capacity for
emergency response ;

¢ Make homes more physically and finan-
cially resilient; and

¢ Strengthen economic resiliency.

Together, the strategies reflect the Community's
long-term, holistic vision for bolstering and
expanding the health, vitality and sustainability
of its neighborhood.

Proposed and Featured Projects

Proposed Projects are projects proposed
for funding through a NYRCR Planning

Area’s allotment of CDBG-DR funding.

Featured Projects are projects and actions
that the Planning Committee has identified
as important resiliency recommendations
and has analyzed in depth, but has not
proposed for funding through the NYRCR
Program.

Additional Resiliency Recommendations
are projects and actions that the Planning
Committee would like to highlight and that
are not categorized as Proposed Projects or
Featured Projects.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Hl-1
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Il-2

Reduce Vulnerability to Coastal
Flooding and Sea Level Rise

During Superstorm Sandy, inundation from
Paerdegat Basin, Fresh Creek, and Jamaica
Bay, revealed Canarsie’s exposure to coastal
flooding. This low-lying peninsula is projected to
experience more frequent and intense flooding
from future storm events and gradual ecologi-
cal hazards such as shoreline erosion caused
by sea-level rise. With such risks in mind, the
Committee seeks comprehensive, resilient, and
sustainable protection from coastal flooding.

Long-term, comprehensive flood resiliency for
the Canarsie Community can entail hard infra-
structure, to protect the vulnerable areas along
the coastline, as well as natural systems, and
leverage ongoing efforts to restore habitats
and enhance the water quality of Jamaica Bay.
Reducing the Community’s vulnerability also
requires interventions at different scales. The
Committee proposes the following approaches:

e Larger regional approaches that would
provide storm-surge protection for com-
munities across Jamaica Bay, including
the consideration of a storm-surge barrier
across Rockaway Inlet, as recommended
in New York City’s A Stronger, More
Resilient New York comprehensive plan.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

 

A low-lying area prone to flooding near Fresh Creek.

¢ More localized, smaller-scale approaches

that would provide flood-risk reduction
to the Canarsie peninsula. These could
include wetland restoration measures
such as living shorelines along the Fresh
Creek and Canarsie Beach shoreline that

 

provide protection from 10-year storms,
sea-level rise, and erosion.

The Committee recognizes coastal protec-
tion efforts are complicated and will take time
and significant funding to implement. Further,
Table III-1: Strategy Table

STRATEGY: Reduce Vulnerability to Coastal Flooding and Sea Level Rise

 

 

Protection
along Fresh Creek.

 

 

capture storm surge and rising waters at the most vulnerable areas

. _ Project Estimated Regional
Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)
Fresh Creek Coastal This project would fund a flood wall and adjoining bioswales to Proposed Project $7.7 million N

 

 

 

 

 

because rising waters do not follow commu-
nity or political boundaries, coastal protection
strategies require cooperation and coordina-
tion with surrounding neighborhoods and var-
ious public and private entities. The Committee
recommends focusing on nearer-term localized
strategies and leveraging measures that build
off of existing assets, while taking advantage of
ongoing plans and studies.

The Committee seeks measures that can be
enacted in the short-term to address flooding
from less-intense storm events and protect the
most at-risk areas and vulnerable assets. These
measures include green infrastructure projects,
particularly measures that provide co-benefits
such as habitat creation, water quality improve-
ments, and recreational benefits. For example,
Fresh Creek and Canarsie Beach are being
studied by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for
their potential to provide coastal storm damage

reduction benefits as well as ecosystem resto-
ration benefits. Further, Paerdegat Basin, Fresh
Creek, and Canarsie Beach were all identified
as ecosystem restoration opportunities as part
of the Hudson Raritan Estuary Comprehensive
Restoration Plan (HRE-CRP). One such project,
the Paerdegat Basin Combined Sewer Overflow
(CSO) facility, was completed in 2011.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

IlI-3
Ill-4

W)

Activate and Enhance Access Along
the Shoreline

The Planning Committee proposes a strategy
for redefining the Community’s relationship
to the water by activating the shoreline and
enhancing its resiliency. This strategy would
leverage existing New York City Department of
Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR) and National
Park Service (NPS) plans to develop projects

   

that result in a more active and accessible
Canarsie shoreline. The areas from Canarsie
Pier and Canarsie Beach to Canarsie Park,
serve as a natural buffer between Jamaica
Bay and the Community. These unique public
spaces are an integral part of the neighbor-
hood’s identity and provide access to Jamaica
Bay, views of the Canarsie Pol migratory bird
habitat, and a respite from the urban environ-
ment of the upland Community. Activating and

The underutilized walking path along Fresh Creek warrants activation and enhancement.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

enhancing access to Canarsie Pier and the
shorelines is critical to cultivating a healthy,
vibrant, and resilient community and provide
visitors with access to nearby businesses.

To this end, the Committee seeks additional pro-
grammingin the short-term and capital improve-
ments in the long-term to enhance existing con-
ditions of Canarsie Pier. The Pieris an important
gathering space for the Community and can be
improved through a series of low-cost interven-
tions. Recreational programing can be broad-
ened to reflect the NPS’s General Management
Plan (GMP) and seasonal commercial or com-
munity uses can be expanded to make the Pier
amore desirable meeting place.

The Community identified restoration and
access improvements that would capitalize on
existing plans and tie into their long-term goals.
These plans can be combined with urban design
strategies and resiliency considerations for the
shoreline, ensuring that Canarsie Pier and adja-
cent shorelines are resilient to future storms and
are safely accessible. Relevant plans include:

¢ The HRE-CRP'’s identification for wetland
restoration along Canarsie Beach;

¢ The NYC DPR’s preliminary plans to create
bicycle and pedestrian access between
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table III-2: Strategy Table

STRATEGY: Activate and Enhance Access Along the Shoreline

 

 

 

 

 

. _ Project Estimated Regional
Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)

Canarsie Pier Access This project would fund safety improvements to the Belt Parkway Proposed Project $2 million N
Improvements underpass and roundabout to improve and encourage pedestrian

and cyclist access between Canarsie Pier and the Canarsie

Community.
Canarsie Youth Environmental This project would fund the development of an environmental Proposed Project $100,000 N
Education Program education program for youth in Canarsie to learn about Jamaica Bay

and adjacent waterways.
Fresh Creek Long-Term This project proposes a comprehensive plan for the length of Fresh Featured Project $52 million N
Restoration & Resiliency Creek incorporating green infrastructure, improved access, and

public amenities.
Canarsie Pier and Beach This project would upgrade the facilities at Canarsie Pier to create a Featured Project $32.7 million N
Community Enhancements waterfront destination that better serves visitors and local residents.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Canarsie Park and the Community's
shorelines; and

¢ The NPS’s recommended GMP_ which
emphasizes Canarsie Pier as an orienta-
tion portal to Jamaica Bay with improved
recreational areas and access along the
Jamaica Bay Greenway.

In addition to leveraging existing plans for
shoreline access, the Committee has proposed
other accessibility improvements along Fresh
Creek and Paerdegat Basin. Already, Paerdegat
Basin is home to the frequently used Sebago
Canoe Club, which is considered a successful
use of the Canarsie waterfront. Similar program-
ming and community access will create new

educational opportunities, allowing residents to
interact with the natural assets around them. In
addition, the Community would like to improve
the condition of the waterfront by removing
dead trees and replacing them with salt-water
resistant species that are less likely to interfere
with storm and wastewater infrastructure.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

HI-5
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Ill-6

To reduce physical and financial vulnerabilities
caused by frequent flooding, Canarsie could
greatly benefit from improving the infrastructure
systems that manage wastewater and storm-
water within the Planning Area. Canarsie’s
water management systems are intercon-
nected and highly dependent on larger gray

Bioswales, an effective green infrastructure solution, would increase stormwater capture. alabaster crow photographic!

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

and green infrastructure throughout Brooklyn
and Queens. Large-scale strategies to address
the entire system are complex, unlikely to hap-
pen at the full neighborhood scale, and require
significant support from the City of New York.
As such, the Community proposes prioritizing
short-term strategies that would mitigate flood-
ing in the most at-risk areas, as well as actively
coordinating with the City to improve these sys-
tems over the long-term.

Appropriate government entities could strate-
gically study and evaluate the issues across
Canarsie and generate a wide-ranging strategy
to significantly reduce the Communhity’s recur-
ring flooding issues. To complement the City’s
larger strategy, the Planning Committee prior-
itizes targeted measures to address specific
areas within the Planning Area that are most
vulnerable to sewer backup and street flooding

 
Table III-3: Strategy Table

 

 

 

Brooklyn Waterfront
Stormwater Study and Pilot
Projects

 

 

costs, and benefits of various stormwater capture and retention
projects in the NYRCR Canarsie and Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
NYRCR Planning Areas. The Proposed Project would also implement
recommended scalable pilot projects within both Planning Areas.

. _ Project Estimated Regional
Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)
Canarsie and Southeast This two-phase project would fund a study to examine the feasibility, Proposed Project $650,000 Y

 

 

 

 

 

while also providing relief to an overburdened
sewer system wherever possible.

The Community seeks to:

¢ Increase stormwater capture (detention or
retention) before it enters the sewer sys-
tem to reduce the volume of water enter-
ing the storm sewer system and reduce
the volume of stormwater that may be
infiltrating the wastewater sewer system
during flood events;

¢ Decrease or prevent the backflow of sewer
water into homes; and

¢ Prevent street flooding and other runoff
from entering buildings.

Targeted improvements, such as the installa-
tion of check valves in residences to regulate
water flow, could address storm- and wastewa-
ter sewer backup into homes and onto streets.
Measures to reduce stormwater flooding and
backup include diverting and capturing storm-
water before it enters the sewer or flows to low
points in the Planning Area. Other, more local-
ized stormwater management measures (e.g.,
rain barrels, permeable paving, and storage
tanks) and green infrastructure (e.g., bioswales
and wetlands) can be installed in public open
spaces and on individual properties to cap-
ture stormwater before it enters the system. In
addition, ongoing New York City Department
of Environmental Protection (NYC DEP) green
infrastructure programs and projects can be
leveraged to supplement NY Rising funding.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Il-7
Ill-8

Build and Coordinate Local Capacity
for Emergency Response

Emergency response initiatives that are spe-
cific to Canarsie have the capacity to provide
the Community with a more targeted recovery
after a storm event. This approach makes the
Community less dependent on outside help.
While the strategy would benefit all of Canarsie,
it has important implications for vulnerable pop-
ulations, such as those who are low-income,
physically or mentally impaired, or otherwise
limited in their ability to quickly act in a disaster,
such as seniors.

In the short-term, the Committee proposes
leveraging existing assets, both physical (such
as a recreational center or other large space that
could be used as a gathering space) and social,
(such as the growing number of block associ-
ations). These assets would provide a readily
accessible network that can serve important
day-to-day functions and can be called upon to
aid during an emergency. This may require ret-
rofitting or constructing a new physical space,
where educational programming and training
could take place.

Safety is critical during emergency response

operations. In order for residents and volun-
teers to freely cooperate during relief efforts,

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

they must feel secure. The Committee has pro-
posed several strategies that would enhance
the sense of security after an emergency. For
example, an increase in block associations can
strengthen community networks and improve
safety, helping to provide additional eyes on
the street and act as a deterrent to crime. Also,
increased lighting, including resilient street
lights powered by solar energy, would improve

Food and supplies being distributed to residents of Canarsie.

   

safety, with the added benefit of being able to
function during recovery efforts.

Power outages experienced in Canarsie
during Superstorm Sandy varied in duration
and location, disrupting residents’ access to
basic resources, key facilities, communica-
tion systems, and hindering overall recovery
efforts. This proposed strategy expresses the
Table III-4: Strategy Table

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

STRATEGY: Build and Coordinate Local Capacity for Emergency Response

 

 

 

 

 

 

. ae Project Estimated Regional
Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)
Recovery Community Center This project would establish a Recovery Community Center with Proposed Project $1 million N
resilient lighting and power, the ability to distribute supplies,
coordinate efforts with government agencies, and host trainings and
capacity building initiatives.
Critical Facility Upgrades This project would fund resilient retrofits for health and social Proposed Project $500,000 N
Program service providers in Canarsie to ensure continuity of critical services.
The organizations would also be required to commit to providing
assistance with recovery efforts after an emergency event.
Canarsie Corps Program This project would establish a Canarsie Corps summer youth Proposed Project $150,000 N
employment program to support resiliency and other community
projects in Canarsie.

 

 

 

 

 

need for diversified power infrastructure in the
Community for key facilities, and highlights the
need for alternative sources of energy to ensure
a redundant and resilient power supply during
emergencies.

The majority of power outages in the Planning
Area were caused by high winds and downed
trees damaging overhead wires. To protect

against this in the long-term requires greater
protection of overhead service lines through
tree maintenance, and other methods of hard-
ening and reinforcing power lines.

In the short-term, strengthening individual
building equipment and creating opportunities
for backup and alternative forms of energy can
benefit the Community. Measures to protect

individual systems could include raising elec-
trical equipment above the base flood elevation
and hardening equipment to withstand flood-
ing. Permanent standby generators located
on key Community assets (for instance, gas
stations) would provide a source of power that
allows the facility to continue operations in the
event of a larger grid failure. Alternative forms
of energy generation, including solar and wind,

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Ill-9
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Engine Company 257 is centrally located in Canarsie.

III-10 Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

could feed into the existing grid, yet could also
function independently if the larger grid is com-
promised. Solar panels, for example, may be
installed on the roofs of critical buildings or atop
streetlights to ensure these key resources can
remain functional during emergency events.
By incorporating power strategies into multi-
ple projects, the Community ensures a greater
diversity of energy that creates redundancy and
resiliency of the power system.

In addition, the Committee seeks to increase
the availability of mental health services in
the Community in order to aid residents who
experienced trauma from past events and have
trepidation about future emergencies. While the
New York City Department of Mental Health and
Hygiene runs a City-wide outreach program
through local agencies, Project Hope, many
Canarsie residents did not take advantage of
the program.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

TO
ice f

a

epee

ie i

=
=
=
ie
sass]
=
|
=
LI}
a
md
= 8
|
=
—
aia
ac
ay
=
aa.
re
oa
=e

o
|
i

i

Ce eee Li »
9 0 BBC tee eer

~ Full Day Available
a ‘oe oi : * cepted: ACD, HRA, 1199, NTA
iii — a 718,241,300 ext. 19. j

SAL

Hebrew Educational Society aided with recovery efforts post-Superstorm Sandy. Courtesy of Canarsie Courier.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies III-11

 
Hl-12

Make Homes More Physically and
Financially Resilient

In order to address the wide range of issues
confronting homeowners in Canarsie, a number
of short-term initiatives have been proposed by
the Committee. Topics include education and
guidance on flood insurance, how building
damage is assessed, and individual housing
level flood mitigations, such as the installa-
tion of check valves. Canarsie residents have
continually underscored the need for a one-
stop shop for information and services. The
Committee recognizes the current work being
undertaken by non-profit organizations, such as
CAMBA, Neighborhood Housing Services, and
the Bridge Street Development Corporation,
throughout Central Brooklyn that could pro-
vide a good model for a similar program for
homeowners in the floodplain. An expansion
of existing outreach efforts will help to improve
utilization of these programs, as Canarsie resi-
dents feel that not all targeted populations are
currently being reached.

Prior to the reassessment of New York City’s
flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs), Canarsie
was almost entirely out of the floodplain, a
condition that is likely to change in the final
FIRMs released by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency expected in 2016. This

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

 

Although most homes in Canarsie are brick attached, detached clapboard homes are also present and require unique
interventions.

underscores the importance of housing pro-
grams that address flood insurance regulations.
Homeowner education is essential to helping
residents understand how they can reduce their
exposure to financial and physical risks.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table III-5: Strategy Table

STRATEGY: Make Homes More Physically and Financially Resilient

 

 

. _ Project Estimated Regional
Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)
Homeowner Audit and Grant This project would provide technical assistance and financial tools to Proposed Project $1.5 million N
Program low and moderate income single- and multi-family homeowners who

want to retrofit their homes so they can mitigate future flood risk.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

Images depicting both multi-family and single family homes.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies III-13
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

l-14

W)

Strengthen Economic Resiliency

The resiliency of businesses in Canarsie is
important to the Committee, and this plan
includes both short and long-term approaches
that would strengthen the local economy. This
strategy comprises a mix of short and long-term
approaches, from the more immediate pro-
grams that will train and put to work Canarsie’s
youth, to a longer-term vision of restoring the
retail corridors to the center of social life and
commerce within the Community.

In the short-term, the Community can under-
take a series of initiatives that will help support
individual job growth and promote a greater
entrepreneurial spirit within the Community. The
public and Committee members emphasized
the need for youth access to jobs in Canarsie. It
is important that the investment made through
the NYRCR program leads to the creation of
jobs for the residents of Canarsie.

In the long-term, the Committee has a vision
of fostering vibrant retail corridors along
Rockaway Parkway, Avenue L, and Flatlands
Avenue. These corridors already have the ben-
efit of being located outside the floodplain,
allowing them to play a greater role in recovery
efforts following an emergency. These commer-
cial centers have a long history of serving as

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

 

Strengthening commercial corridors in Canarsie, including Avenue L, is central to Canarsie’s long-term vision.

the vital social core of Canarsie and in recent
decades have deteriorated.

Commercial streets, such as Avenue L have
been a center for small retail for well over half
a century, transforming from movie houses
and soda shops to Caribbean bakeries and
restaurants. These streets can be activated
once again by increasing the presence of
local businesses. Healthy centers of small,

neighborhood commerce have been shown to
have greater effects on the local economy than
car-oriented big-box retail.? The Committee has
proposed initiatives that will help to analyze and
understand the dynamics of the local market,
in an effort to improve the overall conditions
of Canarsie’s economy, with the goal of filling
in gaps along retail corridors to restore these
thoroughfares as the heart of Canarsie. This will
encompass developing ways the Community
Table III-6: Strategy Table

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

rengthen Economic Resiliency

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Project Name Short Description Project Estimated Regional
Category Cost (Y/N)
Resiliency Workforce A Resiliency Workforce Development project would train and Proposed Project $1 million N
Development connect local residents with sustainable job opportunities while
simultaneously building a Community that can more effectively
recover from future events.
Resilient Streetscaping This project would fund capital improvements along Avenue L and Proposed Project $3 million N
Rockaway Parkway that help to strengthen the economic viability of
local businesses and provide support to residents during and after
future disasters.

 

 

 

can better capture the broader base of con-
sumers who shop in the region, ensuring suffi-
cient access and parking.

Finally, over the long-term, the Community
seeks to provide better connections between
residents and the economic resources in the
area, including job opportunities and commer-
cial corridors. Over 10% of Canarsie’s resi-
dents work in Downtown Brooklyn, a commute
by public transportation that takes close to an
hour each way. Within the neighborhood, there
are limited public transit options that allow for
access to local businesses. For example, a bus
line does not currently run along Avenue L, one

of Canarsie’s most active shopping districts.
Improving connections at borough-wide and
neighborhood-wide scales will lead to a more
readily accessible neighborhood, and a stron-
ger local economy making it easier for its resi-
dents to enjoy its greatest assets.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
 

Residents and visitors can buy an assortment of seasonal goods at the Brooklyn Terminal Market.

III-16 Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
IV. Implementation—Project
Profiles
: Jl ee ee

ed

 
Projects Overview

This section describes the Proposed and
Featured projects identified by the Canarsie
NYRCR Planning Committee with input from
the Canarsie NYRCR Community. Each project
description includes a summary of the potential
costs and benefits that would result from each
project if funded. In addition to preliminary cost
estimates, the Project Profiles discuss the proj-
ects’ potential benefits:

e Health and social benefits;

e Economic benefits, including potential job
creation;

e Environmental benefits; and
e Ability to reduce future risk.
Finally, the descriptions include relevant imple-
mentation factors, including the likely timeline

and the governmental jurisdiction for imple-
mentation of each project.

A path within the Fresh Creek Nature Preserve.

 

Implementation—Project Profiles

IV-1
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-2

Project List

Iv-4 IV-10 IV-16
Fresh Creek Coastal Protection Fresh Creek Long-Term Restoration & Canarsie Pier Access Improvements
Resiliency

 

IV-22 IV-28 IV-32
Canarsie Pier and Beach Community Canarsie Youth and Environmental Education Canarsie and Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
Enhancements Program Stormwater Study and Pilot Projects

Ores Cac aU ey

 

Implementation—Project Profiles
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-38 IV-44 IvV-48

Recovery Community Center Critical Facility Upgrades Program Canarsie Corps Program

 

IV-52 IV-56 Iv-60

Homeowner Audit and Grant Program Resiliency Workforce Development Resilient Streetscaping

 

Implementation—Project Profiles 1V-3
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Fresh Creek Coastal Protection

Proposed Project

STRATEGY
Reduce Vulnerability to Coastal
Flooding and Sea Level Rise

Recovery Support Functions

Infrastructure

Natural & Cultural
Resources

Cost

$7.7 MILLION

Timeline (in years)

IV-4 Implementation—Project Profiles

This project would fund a flood wall and adjoining bioswales to capture storm
surge and rising waters at the most vulnerable areas along Fresh Creek.

Project Description

The shoreline along Fresh Creek (the Creek)
is vulnerable to flooding from events like
Superstorm Sandy, more frequent storm
events, and in some locations, tidal flooding and
permanent inundation from sea-level rise. It
has also long been a priority for ecosystem
restoration and water quality enhancement for
New York State and the City of New York. This
project would address the most at-risk sections
of the Creek’s shoreline by proposing strategic
flood protection measures to reduce flood risk
from sea-level rise and 10-year storm events,'
while remaining compatible with ongoing
and long-term ecosystem restoration and
recreational plans for the Creek. Many of
these low-lying areas also experience frequent
flooding from heavy rain events, which are
anticipated to increase in intensity and
frequency with climate change.

Proposed measures’ include _ shoreline
stabilization and edge elevation paired with
stormwater management measures (such as
bioswales or rain gardens) that are compatible

with long-term plans for ecosystem resto-
ration and enhanced community access along
the Creek. Identified critical locations and
interventions would include:

e Elevated Edge at Shore Gardens (near
Avenue J): Protection measures at
this section would include an elevated
edge—a low wall (approximately 2.5
feet high)—to prevent flooding. Flood
protection would be more effective if
coupled with an ecologically enhanced
revetment or living shoreline, as proposed
in the Fresh Creek Long-Term Restoration
& Resiliency Featured Project, to address
erosion and enhance habitat along this
currently degraded shoreline edge.

Elevated Edge and Rain Gardens at Ave-
nue K and Avenue L: Protection measures
at this section would include a low wall
(approximately 18 inches) to prevent coast-
al flooding accompanied by a bioswale
or rain garden along 108th Street to cap-
ture stormwater from heavy rain events.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-1: Area and Levels of Protection

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Canarsie Planning Area

 

Cc] Planning Area

Surge Protection
== Flood Wall

Level of Protection

|| Approx. 7 ft storm surge
(approx. 10 year storm, SLR)

iz Approx. Area of Protection
(approx. 10 year storm event, SLR)

 

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-5
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-6

e Elevated Edge at Shoreline Gardens (near
Avenues M and N): Protection measures at
this section would include a raised edge to
prevent inland flooding of low-lying yards.
The design of this section would be more
effective if coupled with a living shoreline
to reduce erosion as proposed in the Fresh
Creek Long-Term Restoration & Resiliency
Featured Project.

Though some of these sections include
drainage considerations in their initial design,
all three sections would require a thorough
stormwater management analysis to ensure
that coastal protection measures do not exac-
erbate drainage concerns.

While this project focuses on the reduction
of tidal and stormwater flood risk, it is com-
patible with future potential phases detailed
in the Fresh Creek Long-Term Restoration
& Resiliency Featured Project, which would
include tidal marsh and upland habitat res-
toration, public access with recreational and
educational programs, and_bicycle/pedes-
trian access improvements. This project
would also be compatible with ongoing and
planned projects by New York City agencies,
including New York City Department of Parks
and Recreation (NYC DPR), the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection (NYC

Implementation—Project Profiles

A low-lying area at risk of flooding from Fresh Creek.

DEP), and the New York City Department of
Transportation (NYC DOT). It is anticipated that
Federal, State, and City agencies may oversee
implementation of future phases of the project
through other resiliency, restoration, and recre-
ation efforts in Jamaica Bay.

 

Cost Estimate

$7.7 MILLION

The anticipated capital construction costs
for the project components described are as
follows:
© Shore Gardens: $1.2 million
e Avenue K and Avenue L: $4.6 million
© Shoreline Gardens: $1.9 million

This is aconceptual level cost estimate based on
a preliminary design of the features described.
Potential cost increases may result if any fill
being moved is contaminated or if drainage
improvements required to channel water to
the stormwater capture area are more exten-
sive than anticipated. Additional consideration
should be given to ongoing maintenance costs
of this project upon implementation.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Environmental Benefits

The drainage components of this project, such
as rain gardens, would increase water quality in
Fresh Creek by capturing and filtering storm-
water runoff and its associated pollutants from
the adjacent roadway before it travels into the
Creek. Rain gardens would provide some hab-
itat benefits as well, particularly if planted with
native plantings.

Health and Social Benefits

This coastal protection project would benefit
the mental health and safety of those residents
who reside along the Fresh Creek shoreline.

Many community members have expressed
concern over the visibly rising waters along
108th Street, which in turn cause degradation
of the shoreline. By mitigating against sea-level
rise, this project would ease these concerns
and benefit the social fabric of the Creek’s
residential community, some of whom have
questioned whether the Creek’s upland area is
sustainable as a residential land use.

Economic Benefits

The flood wall and bioswales will protect
adjacent homes from flooding leading to
preservation of property values and overall
beautification of the neighborhood. It is esti-
mated that this project would create 11 full-time
equivalent construction jobs over the course of
the project.”

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The proposed interventions would prevent
permanent tidal inundation of approximately
17.5 acres of land, including 300 buildings and
more than 3,000 linear feet of city streets if
designed to the appropriate height. The antic-
ipated flooding would not occur over a finite
timeframe but through regular tidal inundation
due to sea-level rise, resulting in a total loss of
these assets or the need for physical elevation
of both the buildings and roadway. Additionally,
the construction of a rain garden could offset

or delay the need for other drainage improve-
ments, including the potential replacement of
sewer pipes to increase stormwater capacity,
reducing the need for additional capital invest-
ments or maintenance costs for the sewer
system.

The water-quality benefits provided by rain gar-
dens are also a priority for New York State and
the City of New York. The current waterbody and
watershed plan for Jamaica Bay and its tribu-
taries includes $31 million worth of improve-
ments within the Creek’s watershed, enhancing
water quality. While not directly included in
the project cost, this project could be imple-
mented in conjunction with bike and pedestrian
improvements already being proposed for 108th
Street by NYC DOT, potentially enhancing the
aesthetic quality of these improvements and
expediting their implementation. Although not
all costs and benefits of the project are quantifi-
able at this phase, benefits are anticipated to be
valued well beyond the $7.7 million investment
proposed for this project.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

Coastal protection would provide significant
long-term flood risk reduction by reducing the
area's exposure to flooding from high tides
and heavy rain events. This project is designed
to prevent coastal flooding to an elevation of

Implementation—Project Profiles

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-7
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-8

 

An example of the eroded, unprotected edge along Fresh Creek.

approximately 7 feet, which coincides with at
least a 10-year storm event today or 32 inches
of sea-level rise (the New York Panel on Climate
Change’s current conservative estimate for sea-
level rise by 2050). Without these interventions,
17.5 acres of land, including 300 buildings and
more than 3,000 linear feet of city streets are at
risk of inundation at high tide by 2050 or during
a 10-year storm event. The coastal protection
this project provides would reduce the risk
score for four highly valued community assets,
including the Lakeside/Parkshore Adult Health
Care Center, a gas station on 108th Street, the

Implementation—Project Profiles

Fresh Creek nature preserve, and the homes
within the high risk area along the Fresh Creek
shoreline. While the cheek wall would reduce
the risk of flooding from a 10-year storm event
and sea-level rise, residual risk remains. For
example, buildings along the shoreline would
still be at risk from flooding during a 100- or
500-year storm event despite the inclusion of a
flood wall. This project is not meant to entirely
eliminate risk from coastal flooding, but rather
to reduce risk of flooding from more frequent
storm events.

In addition, while the area and number of prop-
erties affected by stormwater flooding after
heavy rain events cannot be as accurately
calculated, the Canarsie NYRCR Community
(Community) has reported regular flooding at
the intersections of Avenues K and L. The rain
gardens proposed within this project would mit-
igate risk of streetflooding along 108th Street,
although risk of flooding west of 108th Street
would remain unchanged.

Timeframe

Once an implementing agency is identified, the
initial study and plan of this project is anticipated
to take 1 year to complete. Phases constructed
thereafter are anticipated to take 1 to 2 years to
build. In total, it is anticipated that this project
would take 2 to 3 years to complete.

Regulatory Requirements

This project would require the full support of
NYC DPR. The implementing agency would
follow regulatory guidelines as required by
various Federal and New York State and City
agencies, including the NY State Department of
Environmental Conservation and the National
Park Service.

Jurisdiction
The identified project falls within the jurisdiction
of New York City.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

FLOOD WALL TO 10 YR FLOOD 3y]21D es) ND,
PROTECTION, WHERE NEEDED EDUCATIONAL CENTER

    

BIOSWALE

g g g g qo
PARKING PARKING BIOSWALE {|
'

Proposed location of the flood wall and bioswale along the length of Fresh Creek.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-9
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Fresh Creek Long-Term Restoration & Resiliency

Featured Project

STRATEGY
Activate and Enhance Access
Along the Shoreline

Recovery Support Functions

Infrastructure

Natural & Cultural
Resources

Cost

$52 MILLION

Timeline (in years)

IV-10 Implementation—Project Profiles

This project proposes a comprehensive plan for the length of Fresh Creek,
incorporating green infrastructure, improved access, and public amenities.

Project Description

Fresh Creek (the Creek) served as an entry
point for floodwaters during Superstorm Sandy
and remains at risk from sea-level rise, while
also suffering from erosion, degraded habitats,
and inaccessibility to the public. This project
seeks to strengthen not only the resiliency of
the Creek, but its long-term sustainability as
well. Building upon the flood-risk reduction
measures proposed by the Canarsie NYRCR
Planning Committee (Committee), as well as
opportunities for habitat ecosystem restoration
identified by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) and the New York City Department of
Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR), the Creek
presents a powerful opportunity to combine
habitat enhancement, flood-risk reduction, and
waterfront access. The Committee has identi-
fied a series of planning efforts surrounding the
Creek that, if coordinated and comprehensively
developed, would contribute not only to flood-
risk reduction but to the quality of ecosys-
tems and the Canarsie NYRCR Community’s
(Community) quality of life.

This project proposes a comprehensive com-
munity resiliency and restoration plan for
Fresh Creek, comprising a series of projects
currently under consideration by USACE, such
as the Hudson Raritan Estuary Comprehensive
Restoration Plan (HRE-CRP) and Jamaica
Bay Feasibility Study, both of which identify
the Creek as a potential ecological restoration
opportunity. The Committee wishes to provide
input and guidance to ensure that these efforts
achieve flood-risk reduction, resilience, res-
toration, and community access goals for the
Creek.

Elements for a comprehensive community
resilience plan for Fresh Creek would include
the following, with sections described for the
Creek’s overall shoreline:

e North Access: This section would include
public-access improvements and wetland
restoration and reforestation of the Creek
from Flatlands Avenue to the shoreline.
Recommended improvements would
include waterfront access, a pier, picnic
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Proposed improvements to Fresh Creek would protect nearby homes and make the Nature Preserve more accessible.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-11

 
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-12

areas, and other amenities. Restoration
recommendations would include the cre-
ation of a coastal and maritime forest as
well as the construction and/or restoration
of high- and low-marsh habitats.

Shore Gardens Living Shoreline (near
Avenue J): This section would include the
build out of a living shoreline, which would
complement the low wall proposed in the
Fresh Creek Coastal Protection Project to
ensure fully realized opportunities for eco-
system enhancement.

Avenue K and Avenue L Living Shoreline
and Rain Gardens: This section would
build on the low wall and rain garden
proposed in the Fresh Creek Coastal
Protection Project and include tidal marsh
and upland habitat restoration, as well as
enhanced public access with recreational
and educational programs, overlooks, and
public space amenities.

Shoreline Gardens Living Shorelines and
Street Ends (near Avenues N and M):
Adding to the elevated shorelines pro-
posed in the Fresh Creek Comprehensive
Coastal Protection Project, this section
would further enhance the shoreline to
include living shorelines to reduce erosion

Implementation—Project Profiles

and create new habitats. This section
would also include enhancements to street
ends to improve the Community’s visual
and physical access to the waterfront.

Seaview Pier Access and Improvements:
This section would include improved
access and amenities, including an over-
look and picnic area as well as restoration
of coastal and maritime forest.

Bicycle and Pedestrian Access and Safety
Improvements: All of the above sections
would include the design and construc-
tion of a mixed-use trail or two-way bike
path and pedestrian path along 108th
Street similar to those envisioned by New
York City Department of Transportation
(NYC DOT), wherever appropriate.

Cost Estimate
$52 MILLION
The anticipated capital construction costs

for the project components described are as
follows:

¢ North Access: $29.4 million;
¢ Shore Gardens: $2.4 million;

e Avenues K and L: $16.3 million;

© Shoreline Gardens: $3 million; and
© Seaview Pier: $300,000.

This is a conceptual-level cost estimate
based on a preliminary design of the features
described. They will likely vary as the project
is further developed and refined. As the design
may alter, this estimate does not consider all
design aspects of this project.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Environmental Benefits

The Creek and its shorelines are part of NYC
DPR’s Fresh Creek Preserve, a “Forever Wild”
site proposed for restoration as part of the
HRE-CRP Jamaica Bay Feasibility Study. Most
of the Preserve is open water and much of
the Creek’s shoreline is lined with marshland.
Ecological problems identified in past studies
include poor marine habitats, fill deposited on
historic wetlands, extensive areas of non-native
invasive plant species, and poor water quality
at the head of the Creek. By coupling shoreline
stabilization with marsh and other habitat resto-
ration, the project would improve habitats and
enhance ecosystem services, addressing many
of the ecological and environmental challenges
the Creek faces.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-2: Diagram Showing Public Access Points and Enhancements

WETLAND RESTORATION

NYC Department of Parks and Recreation
|_| National Parks Service
Zz NYC Housing Authority
Existing wetlands
* Shoreline access opportunities

Ecologically enhanced revetment
RECREATIONAL PIER

 

Wetland restoration opportunities

      
 

IO Enhance park

Fountain Avenue

% Street end gardens
Landfill

Greenway expansion

 

New York City Department of City Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

Monroe Cohen
Park

 

 

 

 

 

3,000 6,000

A rs Fect

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-13
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-14

Health and Social Benefits

This project would provide the Community
with access, amenities, and activity along the
most inaccessible of the three shorelines in
Canarsie. Opportunities for waterfront access
along the Creek are limited and in some cases
even dangerous. By enhancing and activating
the Creek’s shoreline, this project would revive

Implementation—Project Profiles

   

Current conditions along Fresh Creek do not allow for safe pedestrian access.

a critical natural asset, restoring it as a source
of community pride and adding to the value of
the properties along its banks.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

While this is a potentially high-cost project, it
would provide wide-ranging benefits for the
Community. This project would take advantage

of plans in-progress for the Creek and adja-
cent areas. Given that the HRE-CRP assesses
coastal restoration along the Creek to cost an
estimated $31 million, the added benefit of
augmenting that restoration to include commu-
nity access and activation enhancements on
an underdeveloped and underutilized natural
asset may justify the added cost.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

While the Creek was a major entry point for
floodwaters during Superstorm Sandy, it is also
a source of inundation during more frequent
storm events. With sea-level rise, segments of
the shoreline may be at risk from future flooding
during high tides. Stabilizing the water’s edge
through the construction of living shorelines
and wetlands, combined with the addition of
flood walls, bulkheads and/or berms where
needed, would reduce the risk of habitual and
storm-related flooding. Similar to the Fresh
Creek Coastal Protection Project, the measures
proposed in this project would reduce the risk
score for four highly valued community assets
(the Lakeside/Parkshore Adult Health Care
Center, a gas station on 108th Street, the Fresh
Creek nature preserve, and the homes within
the high risk area along the Fresh Creek shore-
line) while also reducing the risk of erosion and
promoting the health of the Creek’s shoreline.
Residual risk remains from coastal flooding for
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

more infrequent (100- and 500-year) storms, as
well as the continued risk of erosion along the
Creek’s shoreline should its general health and
stability not be maintained in the future.

Timeframe

Once an implementing agency is identified,
the initial study and full implementation of this
project is anticipated to take more than 10
years to complete and is dependent on partner
agencies.

Regulatory Requirements

This project would require the full support of
NYC DPR. The implementing agency would
follow regulatory guidelines as required by
various Federal and New York State and City
agencies.

Jurisdiction

The identified project area falls within the juris-
diction of New York City.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-15
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Canarsie Pier Access Improvements

Proposed Project

STRATEGY
Activate and Enhance Access
Along the Shoreline

Recovery Support Functions

eo &

Infrastructure Economic
Development

Natural & Cultural
Resources

Cost

$2 MILLION

Timeline (in years)

e
0 1 2 3

IV-16 Implementation—Project Profiles

This project would fund safety improvements to the Belt Parkway underpass
and roundabout to improve and encourage pedestrian and cyclist access
between Canarsie Pier and the Canarsie Community.

Project Description

Superstorm Sandy damaged many roadways in
Canarsie and the ensuing power loss caused
safety concerns for residents crossing unlit
streets.

Canarsie Pier is an important social hub within
the Canarsie NYRCR Community (Community).
Residents spend much of their free time enjoy-
ing this beautiful community asset, whether
fishing, picnicking or socializing with friends
and family. While serviced by bus, access to
Canarsie Pier remains car-based with unsafe
pedestrian, cyclist, and driver conditions,
especially along the Belt Parkway underpass
and roundabout. A primary route for accessing
a key asset of Canarsie, three collision-re-
lated injuries occurred along the roundabout
in September 2014 alone.? This project would
redesign this section of Rockaway Parkway to
improve safety for all users while also providing
upgraded pedestrian and cyclist amenities.

Improvements would include the following:
e Lighting in the Belt Parkway underpass;
¢ Sidewalk bump outs;

e Well-lit pedestrian crossings and walking
signals; and

e Arain garden in place of the underutilized
grassy inner circle of the roundabout.

Traffic improvements, such as sidewalk bump
outs, expand pedestrian and cyclist space,
while physically narrowing the roadway to calm
traffic and reduce vehicular speeds. Enhanced
lighting at pedestrian crossings with walking
signals improves a driver's awareness of
pedestrians and cyclists and enhances overall
safety. The roundabout rain garden would bol-
ster the aesthetic appeal of the area, while also
capturing stormwater runoff from the roadway
and encouraging pedestrians to cross using
appropriate paths.
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

aa te ee
i

Cy

   

The approach to Canarsie Pier underneath the Belt Parkway currently does not allow for safe pedestrian or bicycle crossings.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-17
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

BELT PARKWAY
STRUCTURAL I-BEAM

 

 

ee es

nr De

 

Current conditions along Rockaway Parkway and Belt Parkway underpass in Canarsie.

IV-18 Implementation—Project Profiles
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

LED LIGHTING ON METAL SCREEN

   

SIDEWALK BUMPOUT MEDIAN BUMPOUT SCULPTED METAL SCREEN

 

 

 

 

 

a ne

DOT

Proposed conditions along Rockaway Parkway and Belt Parkway underpass in Canarsie.

Implementation—Project Profiles [IV-19
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-20

Already a community resource, this project
would provide greater and safer access to
Canarsie Pier and its surrounding beaches
and parks, as well as manage increased traffic
flow that may stem from proposed phases of
improvement at the Pier. Future phases could
include the restoration of North and South
Beaches, activation of the pier, and enhance-
ment of the upland park area, as detailed
in the Canarsie Pier and Beach Community
Enhancements Project.

Additionally, the New York City Department of
Transportation (NYC DOT) has plans for a trans-
portation study within the Canarsie NYRCR
Planning Area (Planning Area). This provides
an opportunity for collaboration between
New York State and City on pedestrian safety
improvements along Rockaway Parkway.

Cost Estimate

$2 MILLION

This cost includes pedestrian and cyclist safety
and access improvements, including sidewalk
bump outs, lighting, crosswalks with walking
signals, and the excavation and landscaping
costs for the rain garden.

This estimate includes demolition, construc-

tion, and design and construction contingen-
cies, but could be modified should the scope

Implementation—Project Profiles

of improvements change. This conceptual-level
cost estimate is based on similar projects within
New York City, and would likely vary as the
project is further developed and refined.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Environmental Benefits

Safety improvements to the Belt Parkway
underpass and roundabout could increase
pedestrian and cyclist ridership and reduce
automobile use to Canarsie Pier. The poten-
tial reduction of automobile use would reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and other air pol-
lutants, and would increase the environmental
sustainability of Canarsie and the surrounding
communities.

Health and Social Benefits

The access improvements would result in
improved conditions for biking and walking in
Canarsie, address existing safety concerns and
increase the use of alternative modes of trans-
portation. Enhanced access to the Canarsie
Pier and along the existing waterfront would
provide expanded opportunities for recreation
and active living for residents. Together, these
safety and access improvements would con-
tribute to the overall physical and mental health
of the Community.

Economic Benefits

Improving access to Canarsie Pier may attract
new visitors to the Pier as well as to the larger
Community, which could contribute to the local
economy. In its current state, the Belt Parkway
is a barrier preventing Canarsie Pier visitors
from crossing into the commercial areas of
Canarsie. Additionally it is estimated that this
project would create 9 full-time equivalent con-
struction jobs.*

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Pedestrian and cyclist improvements to the
Belt Parkway underpass and along Rockaway
Parkway would enable safe access to Canarsie
Pier, a_ significant community destination.
Between August 2011 and February 2014, on
the portion of Rockaway Parkway between
Seaview Avenue and Canarsie Pier, there
were 226 vehicular collisions resulting in 45
injuries, 11 of which were pedestrians.® This
project would redesign Rockaway Parkway to
encourage motorists to travel at slower speeds
while also providing improved crosswalks,
sidewalks, and lighting to enhance pedestrian
and cyclist safety.

Additionally, street safety remains a_ priority
of New York City and its Vision Zero initiative.
Since this is a priority for the City of New York
and its multiple City agency partners, support
already exists for safety and access improve-
ments in Canarsie, which could expedite imple-
mentation of the project.

Between 2009 and 2014, there were 22 fatal-
ities caused by vehicular collisions within the
Planning Area, an average of 4.4 fatalities per
year.© These numbers represent the larger
safety issues facing the Community. With
the intent to mitigate collisions, this project
would put funding towards increasing safety
and improving conditions of a portion of the
Canarsie street network that currently handles
a high-traffic volume. While the safety and eco-
nomic benefits provided by this project would
outweigh the cost, the potential to avoid loss of
life alone would justify the expenditure.

The roundabout would serve as an opportunity
for stormwater management since the con-
struction of a rain garden could help collect and
store stormwater runoff, preventing flooding to
the roadway and surrounding areas. The rain
garden could be designed to capture approx-
imately 40,000 gallons of stormwater, which
is enough to capture a 100-year rainfall. The
rain garden would also provide an aesthetic
amenity to the area while discouraging pedes-
trians from dangerously crossing through the
center of the roundabout.

NYC DOT, aware of the safety and access
issues within Canarsie, has plans for both a
transportation study for the Planning Area as
well as improved pedestrian and cyclist access
between Canarsie Pier and the upland neigh-
borhood. Although this is already a priority of
NYC DOT, the Committee’s allotment towards
this otherwise unfunded project could lead to
expedited implementation. This project may set
a precedent and lead to similar projects at other
unsafe or inaccessible intersections throughout
the Planning Area.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

The safety improvements would not decrease
the amount of risk faced by the Community
against future storm events or sea-level rise.
However, these enhancements would sig-
nificantly reduce the risk of injury or death to
pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists traveling to
Canarsie Pier, while not completely eliminating it.

Timeframe
Once a implementing entity is identified, the
project is anticipated to take 1 year to complete.

Regulatory Requirements

This project would require the full support and
coordination of NYC DOT. The implementing
agency would follow regulatory guidelines as

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

required by various Federal and New York State
agencies.

Jurisdiction
The identified project area falls within the juris-
diction of New York City.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-21
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Canarsie Pier and Beach Community Enhancements

Featured Project

STRATEGY
Activate and Enhance Access
Along the Shoreline

Recovery Support Functions

Community
Planning

Natural & Cultural
Resources

Cost

$32.7 MILLION

Timeline (in years)

@
4

IV-22 Implementation—Project Profiles

This project would upgrade the facilities at Canarsie Pier to create a waterfront
destination that better serves visitors and local residents.

Project Description

While Canarsie Pier and its adjacent beaches
experienced surge over 9 feet high during
Superstorm Sandy, these uninhabited natural
areas served as a buffer between Jamaica Bay
and upland residential areas along Seaview
Avenue. This project seeks to strengthen the
resiliency and sustainability of Canarsie Pier
and beaches while also activating the shore-
line. Canarise Pier is an important social hub
for the Community, where residents are able
to fish, picnic or relax and enjoy breathtaking
views of Jamaica Bay. The Canarsie NYRCR
Planning Committee (Committee) would like to
build upon the recommendations for activating
and improving Canarsie’s Jamaica Bay water-
front proposed in the National Park Service
(NPS) General Management Plan (GMP). The
GMP calls for recreational opportunities at var-
ious locations throughout the larger Jamaica
Bay Gateway National Recreation Area. For
Canarsie Pier and beaches specifically, the
GMP recommends activities and amenities
to improve the health, safety, and social resil-
iency of the Canarsie NYRCR Community

(Community). This project would expand on
the recommendations made in the GMP to turn
Canarsie Pier and beaches into “a vibrant des-
tination for community-oriented events as well
as water-related recreational activities.”

These enhancements would fund the develop-
ment of Canarsie Pier and adjacent beaches,
with programming and improvements based on
the GMP as well as Committee and Community
input.

The Committee has identified the following four
locations and associated improvements:

1. Canarsie Pier: Activation of the Pier could
include the following programming and
amenities:

e Welcome grove with bike parking;

e Restrooms and NPS offices or visitor
center;

¢ Diversity of seating options;
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-3: Conceptual Plan of Design Improvements at Canarsie Pier

NORTH BEACH
wm KAYAK RENTAL + LAUNCH
“m RESTORED COASTAL MEADOWS

CANARSIE PIER PARK ENHANCEMENTS

“™ EXPANDED PICNIC + BBQ AREA
mm CLEARLY DEFINE BUS STOPS
ENHANCE PLAYGROUND AREA
FISHING AREA WITH BENCHES + CUTTING TABLES
RESTORE COASTAL MARITIME FOREST
HAMMOCK GROVE
=o] =] =) Pl Aol odd
EDUCATIONAL OVERLOOK + OUTDOOR CLASSROOM
™ ECO-DOCK FOR OYSTER FARMING

CANARSIE PIER
" WELCOME GROVE WITH BIKE PARKING
» RESTROOMS + NPS OFFICES / VISITOR'S CENTER
“« DIVERSITY OF SEATING OPTIONS

* BUMP OUT PLAYGROUND AREA WITH
le} s t= )a 1] ae es) UN ed

" wn FLEXIBLE SPACE FOR PARKING / EVENTS
: N te : “m FOOD TRUCKS

BOARDWALK TO * ines] aD) MeV OL OM LO] S I ode esl UNITE)
alba S Y : mm PERMEABLE PAVING

iSO) 5) Sa i ae BS ssi : ah m= REMOVEABLE MOVIE SCREEN
| m= TREES FOR ADDED SHADE

SOUTH BEACH

Implementation—Project Profiles [IV-23

 
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

e¢ Bump out playground area;

e Flexible space for parking/events;

¢ Food trucks;

e Permeable paving;

e Removable movie screen; and

¢ Trees for added shade.

2. Canarsie Pier Upland Park: Enhancement of
Canarsie Pier’s upland park area could include
the following amenities as well as educational
and restoration opportunities:

e Expanded picnic and barbecue area;

e Aclearly defined bus stop;

e Enhanced playground area;

e Fishing area with cutting tables;

¢ Coastal maritime forest;

e Hammock grove;

e Flexible event space;

Implementation—Project Profiles

e Educational overlook and outdoor class-
room; and

e Eco-dock for oyster farming.

3. North Beach: Restoration and increased
access could include:

¢ Coastal meadows restoration; and
e Kayak rental and launch.

4. South Beach: Restoration and increased
access could include:

e Wetland restoration; and
¢ Boardwalk access to wetlands.

The Committee requests maintaining the
amount of parking on and around Canarsie Pier
and adding parking spaces as new program-
ming is introduced. Once fully developed and
coordinated with the NPS, these specific
enhancements could be implemented. In the
hopes of jump starting this project, the Com-
mittee has decided to fund the Canarsie
Pier Access Improvements Project to improve
pedestrian and cyclist access to this beautiful
amenity.

Cost Estimate

$32.7 MILLION

This amount represents the following itemized
costs of enhancing each individual area:

¢ $5.5 million to activate Canarsie Pier;

© $16.5 million to enhance the Canarsie Pier
upland park area;

¢ $3.5 million to restore South Beach; and
¢ $7.1 million to restore North Beach.

This conceptual-level cost estimate is based on
square-footage costs of similar park projects
within New York City. This cost does not include
structural improvements to Canarsie Pier.

While further analysis and engineering would
be required to determine the feasibility, effec-
tiveness, and final design of this project, the
enhancements described above illustrate the
potential type and scale of improvements that
might be employed.

Benefit/Co-Benefits
Environmental Benefits
The Canarsie Pier project would stabilize
and strengthen a key environmental asset.
Canarsie Pier and adjacent beaches serve as
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

—— t ee
7. a i
ne ee.

Components of potential design improvements to Canarsie Pier.

 

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-25
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-26

Current conditions at Canarsie Pier.

the Community’s link to Jamaica Bay. This
project would enhance this link by making it
more accessible, activating the shoreline, and
ensuring its long-term sustainability through
ecosystem restoration.

Health and Social Benefits

The plan and related project components would
incorporate community amenities, access

Implementation—Project Profiles

   

improvements, and ecosystem enhancements,
all of which would contribute to the overall
physical and mental health of the Community.

Economic Benefits

The programming of Canarsie Pier would allow
space for food vendors and other approved
small businesses to serve a new consumer
base. This would lead to the creation of new

jobs and the potential expansion of small
businesses. In addition, the entertainment and
recreational components of the proposed pro-
gramming could attract new visitors to the area
that could contribute to the local economy.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The open area of Canarsie Pier and the beaches
served as a buffer between the upland residen-
tial areas and the Jamaica Bay surge during
Superstorm Sandy. This project may reduce the
risk of flooding in future storms by strengthening
the long-term sustainability of the beaches and
coastline. Enhancing Canarsie Pier and the
surrounding beaches and parkland would also
create an amenity for the entire Community
while serving as a larger draw for those in sur-
rounding neighborhoods.

Enhancement and activation of the Pier and
park area would create a community gathering
space and provide expanded access to the
waterfront. New programming, amenities, and
events at Canarsie Pier would create new eco-
nomic opportunities and attract visitors to the
area. Currently, there is rarely more than one
food vendor servicing what is otherwise a pop-
ular place to enjoy a meal. This example illus-
trates the high opportunity cost of an underuti-
lized area and the economic and community
benefits left unrealized.
Additionally, the activation, restoration, and
safety benefits provided by these projects are
already priorities of the Federal government.
The restoration of the south beach would cap-
italize and build upon the existing ecosystem
restoration opportunity at this location identi-
fied as part of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineer’s
Hudson-Raritan Estuary Comprehensive Resto-
ration Plan. The project as a whole would build
on recommendations put forth in the GMP and
may serve as a mechanism for implementing
the proposed or similar improvements.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

While ecosystem restoration along the Jamaica
Bay shoreline would reduce the risk of erosion
and sea level rise affecting NPS and NYC DOT
property, this risk reduction would not apply
to any other property owners. This restoration
would, however, reduce the risk score of two
highly valued community assets— Canarsie Pier
and the Jamaica Bay Greenway—by reducing
their vulnerability to potential damage caused
by coastal flooding. Generally speaking, a
healthy and stabilized Jamaica Bay shoreline
leads to a reduced risk of surge waters reaching
the upland residential areas. Depending on the
strength of future storms, risk of flooding in
this area remains despite the improvements
proposed in this project, particularly during a
500-year storm event. Additionally, erosion

along the Jamaica Bay shoreline may still occur
over time should the beaches not be properly
maintained in the long-term.

Timeframe

Once an implementing entity is identified, the
initial study of this project is anticipated to take
1 year to complete. Enhancements constructed
thereafter are anticipated to take 1 to 3 years to
build. In total, it is anticipated that this project
would take 3 to 4 years to complete.

Entrance at Canarsie Pier.

Regulatory Requirements

This project would require the full support of
NPS. The implementing agency would follow
regulatory guidelines as required by various
Federal, and New York State and City agencies,
such as the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation.

Jurisdiction
The identified project area falls within the juris-
diction of New York City.

 

Implementation—Project Profiles

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-27
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Canarsie Youth Environmental Education Program

Proposed Project

STRATEGY
Activate and Enhance Access
Along the Shoreline

Recovery Support Functions

Community
Planning

Cost

$100,000

Timeline (in years)

®
0 1 2 3

IV-28

Implementation—Project Profiles

This project would fund the development of an environmental
education program for youth in Canarsie to learn about Jamaica Bay

and adjacent waterways.

Project Description

Superstorm Sandy damaged the coastline
along the basins. This edge provides an
important layer of protection for the Canarsie
NYRCR Community (Community). A number of
the NYRCR projects in Canarsie aim to restore
and augment this edge through a mix of green
and grey infrastructure. It is important to help
the Community, especially the youth, under-
stand the value of these natural protective
measures so that they are able to advocate
for their ongoing maintenance. This project
would fund the development of a curriculum
and supportive signage for a Canarsie Youth
Environmental Education Program that focuses
on harbor-scale ecosystem dynamics, critical
bay habitats and species, risk and resilience,
anthropogenic landscapes, and water quality.
A ccurriculum would be developed around these
themes and tailored for different age groups
and learning levels to help connect young resi-
dents to the natural environment.

Environmental education stations layered
into existing or proposed waterfront facilities
would serve multiple audiences. Schools and
summer programs would use the stations on
public lands to enable hands-on learning at the
water’s edge (e.g., through oyster-garden
monitoring or water quality sampling). Stations
would also be designed to facilitate passive
environmental education, providing educa-
tional signage and spatial information for park
and community users.

This curriculum could be developed in part-
nership with local schools, universities, and
scientists already working in Jamaica Bay.
Formal school curriculums, such as the Billion
Oyster Project curriculum, could be combined
with hands-on learning at points located along
the Canarsie waterfront, building incrementally
over time into a community-scale environ-
mental education circuit. Once this curriculum
is developed, it would be provided to local
Students learning about local ecology. Charlotte Murtishaw/U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Northeast Region.’

Implementation—Project Profiles [IV-29

 
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-30

schools throughout the region and incorpo-
rated into area signage and infrastructure.

Potential sites for these stations could include
areas along Fresh Creek and at Canarsie Pier.
Future phases could include the installation
of additional infrastructure, ranging from bird
blinds and overlooks to oyster-gardening sta-
tions and wetlands walks.

Cost Estimate

$100,000

The total project costs are $100,000 for the
development of a curriculum and informational
signage. Curriculum costs would be devel-
oped for a flat fee of $30,000-$40,000 and
would include public school outreach, teacher
training, and programming at sites. Signage
costs include design, materials, and installation
and would cost approximately $2,000-$4,000
each. At this cost, approximately 24-28 signs
could be installed throughout Canarsie Pier and
Fresh Creek.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Health and Social Benefits

This project would foster a stronger connection
between Canarsie residents and the surroun-
ding water bodies, promoting a better under-
standing of sustainability and the dynamics that
shape environments. These programs would

Implementation—Project Profiles

most directly impact the youth who are served
by the development of this curriculum, including
students from local elementary, intermediate,
and high schools and those who attend after-
school clubs and programs, and summer
camps. In conjunction with the Canarsie Corps
project, this program will work to better con-
nect the youth in the Community.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

All of these elements could potentially be imple-
mented as an expansion of existing curriculum,
such as the Billion Oyster Project. This project
would directly serve the 9,500 K-12 students
in Canarsie as well as the 37,000 students
who attend school in adjacent neighborhoods.
These students would become better informed
about the rich ecosystems of their neighbor-
hood. As this project complements the Fresh
Creek Restoration and Resiliency Featured
Project and the Canarsie Pier and Beach
Community Enhancements Featured Project
as well as the Community’s goals to improve
youth resources, the considerable benefits of
this project justify its modest cost.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

While risk reduction associated with this project
would be very limited, community members who
are more educated about the life cycles of the
adjacent waterways would better understand

the causes of high-tide and periodic flooding.
In doing so, residents and future generations
would be better equipped to live next to these
water bodies.

Timeframe

The timeframe for implementation could occur
fairly rapidly, with a curriculum developed within
6 months and the installation of signage on New
York City Department of Parks and Recreation
(NYC DPR) or National Park Service (NPS) land
implemented within 6 months to 1 year.

Regulatory Requirements
This project would require coordination with
NYC DPR and the NPS.

Jurisdiction
The identified project area falls within the juris-
diction of New York City.
 

Students learning about coastal ecology. Charlotte Murtishaw/U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Northeast Region.®

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-31
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Canarsie and Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
Stormwater Study and Pilot Projects

Proposed Project

STRATEGY:
Improve Wastewater and
Stormwater Management

Recovery Support Functions

Infrastructure

Cost

$650,000

Timeline (in years)

e
5

IV-32 Implementation—Project Profiles

This two-phase project would fund a study to examine the feasibility, costs, and
benefits of various stormwater capture and retention projects in the Canarsie
and Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Areas. The Proposed
Project would also provide funding for the implementation of recommended
scalable pilot projects within both Planning Areas.

Project Description

Superstorm Sandy exacerbated many of the
drainage problems that exist in the neighbor-
hood, leading to basement flooding and other
home damage.

Phase 1: Stormwater management and
mitigation study

Phase 1 of this project would include a study of
existing stormwater and groundwater concerns
facing both Canarsie and Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront, as well as potential stormwater
capture and retention strategies to be applied
within the Canarsie NYRCR Planning Area.
This would include identifying areas of greatest
need such as at the intersection of Avenue K and
108th Street. The study would examine feasi-
bility, costs, benefits, and impacts of poten-
tial stormwater capture measures; develop
proposals for governmental interventions to

incentivize stormwater capture and retention;
and suggest pilot projects.

The partnership of the Canarsie and Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning
Committees on this Proposed Project empha-
sizes the need for such a study and associated
pilot projects in order to address stormwater
management issues that equally affect both
Planning Areas.

Phase 2: Stormwater mitigation pilot
projects

Phase 2 would implement targeted pilot proj-
ects that are identified in Phase 1 as having the
highest feasibility and impact. This may include
the following:

e Measures such as_ bioswales—land-
scaped elements to reduce gutter flow
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-4: 311 Complaints July 2013-14

  

fS¥e\ NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Se) Canarsie Planning Area

CL] Planning Area

311 Complaints in the Previous Year
(07/01/13-07/01/14, 505 complaints)

Sewer Back-up (256 complaints)
* Sewer Backup Complaint
Low volume

= High volurne

Street Flooding (24 complaints)
* Street Flooding Complaint

= Low volume
High volume
Catch Basin Clogged/Flooding (140 complaints)

* Catch Basin Clogged/Flooding Complaint
Low volume

~~ High volume

NYC 311 Complaints
New York City Department of City Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implementation—Project Profiles [IV-33
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-34

and manage water surface ponding—and
permeable paving/surface treatments in
areas with poor drainage and nonporous
surfaces; and

e Improvements in and around public and
open spaces to enhance area stormwa-
ter capture capacity and to strengthen the
resiliency of community assets.

This phase would review existing informa-
tion and studies about the groundwater table
undertaken by Federal and New York State and
City agencies and would conduct borings on
key vulnerable locations to assess groundwater
levels and site conditions wherever information
is unavailable.

Cost Estimate

$650,000

The Phase 1 study cost is estimated at approx-
imately $300,000, based on prior studies
similar in scope and intent. Since this project
would be jointly pursued by both the Canarsie
and Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Communities, half of this cost—$150,000—
would be covered by Canarsie’s allotment.
The study would determine if, how, and where
stormwater capture and retention strategies
may be applied within the Planning Areas. For
Phase 2, the implementation of pilot projects,

Implementation—Project Profiles

 

Street ponding is a recurring issue in Canarsie. Flickr user alabaster crow photographic.®

a scalable cost of a typical green infrastruc-
ture stormwater capture measure is valued at
approximately $25,000. The Canarsie Planning
Committee envisions approximately 20 of
these measures —or larger interventions valued

at similar cost—implemented within at-risk
areas. Based on these considerations, a pre-
liminary cost estimate for Phase 2 pilot projects
is $500,000, bringing the total project cost to
approximately $650,000.
This cost estimate is based on engineering
experience with projects of similar scope and
scale, and would likely vary as the project is
further developed and refined.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Environmental Benefits

While this project is expected to have modest
environmental benefits in the short-term, it
could pave the way for a more comprehensive
strategy to address Canarsie’s stormwater
flooding issues, resulting in better water quality
in Jamaica Bay and its tributaries. A long-term
stormwater management strategy — particularly
one that leverages existing open park space
and natural areas — would enhance and protect
the Planning Area’s natural environment.

The majority of Canarsie and Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Areas are served
by separated sewer systems. Rather than
being piped to wastewater treatment plants,
untreated stormwater is generally discharged
through storm sewers to surrounding water-
bodies. To date, the focus of New York City’s
use of green infrastructure for stormwater man-
agement has been targeted at reducing runoff
into combined sewer systems and reducing
combined sewer overflow (CSO) events. In
areas with separated sewers, runoff from roads
and other impervious surfaces carry with it

many potential water pollutants. By capturing
and infiltrating or filtering runoff before it enters
the stormwater system, green infrastructure
can improve the quality of the water entering
surrounding waterbodies, thereby enhancing
the local ecology. The use of native plants in
green infrastructure projects can also provide
urban habitats for birds and insects.

Health and Social Benefits

This project would benefit residents, employ-
ees, and business owners who currently have to
use their funds and resources to address direct
stormwater runoff from the streets into their
properties. Stormwater management practices
may also mitigate wastewater backup concerns
by reducing stormwater infiltration into waste-
water sewers, creating an important health
benefit for those who experience wastewater
backup into the basements of their homes
and businesses during heavy rains. Depending
on the design of the stormwater retention
system, this project also has the potential
to increase biodiversity by introducing new
target ecosystems.

Economic Benefits

This project is expected to produce modest eco-
nomic benefits, mostly related to construction,
operation, and maintenance jobs associated
with the implementation of stormwater capture

measures in Phase 2. The implementation of
green infrastructure projects along commercial
corridors also has the potential to improve the
economic resiliency of local businesses by
enhancing the conditions of adjacent street
beds. Additionally, this project is estimated to
create 1 full-time equivalent construction job
over its projected timeframe."°

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The proposed stormwater capture pilot proj-
ects are a strategy to address stormwater
flooding of multiple at-risk locations throughout
Canarsie. The immediate costs of stormwater
flooding, particularly on streets, includes dis-
ruptions in traffic flow, potential flooding and
damage to adjacent private properties, as well
as additional time and maintenance required
by New York City agencies to respond to the
problem and address damage. Over time these
create serious interruptions in basic community
activities for residents, business owners, and
employees.

From 2012 through 2013, 318 of the sewer over-
flow claims filed against the City of New York,
came from Brooklyn’s Community District 18,
which includes the NYRCR Planning Areas of
Canarsie, Mill Basin, and Bergen Beach. These
accounted for 28% of the 1,168 mappable
claims, more than any other Community District

Implementation—Project Profiles

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-35
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-36

in the city. While most claims do not have dollar
values assigned to them, available values typi-
cally ranged between $250 and $5,000, which
represents a cost to both the City of New York
and to property owners. As an approximation, if
each claim is valued at $5,000, this represents
$1.6 million in damages caused by sewer over-
flow to properties within Community District 18.

In addition to the primary intended benefits of
the project, to reduce street flooding and sewer
backup, the potential water quality benefits
derived from diverting direct runoff into sur-
rounding waterbodies is important to consider.
New York State and City are currently investing
over $100 million through 2020 in long-term
control plans to improve water quality in
Jamaica Bay. These interventions may offset or
delay costs of other water quality investments
by diverting direct runoff and enhancing the
water quality of Jamaica Bay and its tributaries.
The reasonably small investment recom-
mended for this project in relation to those
made by New York City to address water quality,
storm-water flooding, and sewer backup sug-
gests this project would be a beneficial and
cost-effective investment.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

Pilot projects implemented through Phase 2
are anticipated to provide a reduction in risk

Implementation—Project Profiles

 

Bioswales like the one depicted above may be able to reduce street flooding. Steven Vance"

of flooding from heavy rain events within the
localized area where they are implemented.
The degree to which these measures mitigate
localized flooding would depend largely on the
size of the catchment area, quantity of rainfall,
and, in the case of bioswales, the depth to
groundwater and soil types. The magnitude
of the drainage issue and thus potential for

risk reduction can be conveyed by gathering
information over the course of the study. This
would include analyzing the specific locations
identified by the Canarsie Community where
reoccurring flooding is a problem. Preliminary
data shows that over the course of 2013,
there were 24 complaints to 311 regarding
street flooding.
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Should the pilot projects prove effective, this
project could pave the way for a large-scale
stormwater strategy in Canarsie, lessening the
risk of street flooding to at-risk areas of the
overall Community.

Timeframe

Once an implementing organization has been
determined, Phase 1 of this project could begin
within 6 months, while Phase 2 would take
anywhere from 3 to 5 years, depending on the
scope of the projects identified in Phase 1 and
the identification of appropriate partners.

Regulatory Requirements

While the Phase 1 study would not have any
regulatory requirements, the stormwater cap-
ture and retention projects identified for imple-
mentation during Phase 2 would require review
and approval of agencies such as the New York
City Department of Environmental Protection
(NYC DEP), New York City Department of Trans-
portation (NYC DOT) and New York City De-
partment of Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR).

Jurisdiction

The identified project area falls within the juris-
diction of New York City.

Implementation—Project Profiles [IV-37
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Recovery Community Center

Proposed Project

STRATEGY

Build and Coordinate Local
Capacity for Emergency
Response

Recovery Support Functions

Community
Planning

Health & Social
Services

Cost

$1 MILLION

Timeline (in years)

e@
4

IV-38 Implementation—Project Profiles

This project would establish a Recovery Community Center with resilient
lighting and power, the ability to distribute supplies, coordinate efforts with
government agencies, and host trainings and capacity building initiatives.

Project Description

In the wake of Superstorm Sandy, residents
were unable to quickly locate resources and
information. The Canarsie NYRCR Planning
Committee (Committee) has budgeted $1
million towards the partial funding of a retrofit
to an existing building or space to become
a Recovery Community Center. This Center
would coordinate local relief services and sup-
plies following a disaster.

It would also fund the salary of a Community
Coordinator for a 2-year period. The Commu-
nity Coordinator would develop and manage
an emergency communications plan, which
includes enhancing the local network of block
associations and building the capacity of local
community based organizations that can assist
with recovery after an emergency. Expanding
this community network would create mech-
anisms to efficiently and effectively extend
information and supplies before, during, and
after a disaster. The Coordinator would ensure

that community contact information is accurate
and up-to-date, and would hold trainings at
the Community Center for block associations
and local organizations to help them improve
communication, outreach, and emergency
preparedness.

The array of services to be provided at the
Recovery Community Center would include:

e Access to food, water, power, and basic
supplies post disaster;

Information about Federal, New York State
and City, and local emergency response
activities and efforts year-round;

e Non-urgent medical services including
first aid post disaster, and ongoing mental
health services year-round;

¢ Special services for seniors or other vul-
nerable populations year-round;
© - .
a ie ate

hi a. Beg

ae le
P| ea Vy

Supplies being distributed to Canarsie residents.

Implementation—Project Profiles [IV-39

 
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Iv-40

e Resiliency workforce training and devel-
opment programs year-round; and

e Homeowner audits for retrofitting homes
to decrease flood risk year-round.

The Recovery Community Center would be
occupied and programmed by a not-for-profit
organization, and staffed by the newly created
and funded Community Coordinator. This orga-
nization would have a local presence that could
take ownership of the day-to-day operations
and maintenance of a building. To quickly serve
the Canarsie NYRCR Community (Community)
in an emergency, a number of physical require-
ments would be necessary in addition to those
required by New York State and City regula-
tions. These requirements include:

e Location outside of the floodplain or in a
flood-proof structure;

e Reliable source of power and heating/
cooling;

e Proximity to an evacuation route;

e Proximity to vulnerable populations and
commercial centers;

e Reinforced building structure;

Implementation—Project Profiles

e Potable water system;
e Restrooms (ideally with showers);

e Parking lot or other large outdoor assem-
bly area;

e Large space on ground floor; and

e American with Disabilities Act
accessibility.

(ADA)

To ensure rapid response and effective coor-
dination during an emergency, the Community
Coordinator would liaise with local organiza-
tions as well as Federal and New York State
and City agencies. The Community Coordinator
would manage disaster preparedness-related
programming, which could include trainings
and practice drills, “know your neighbor”
events, and outreach to vulnerable popula-
tions. The Center could also host Community
Emergency Response Team (CERT) or Ready
New York trainings. This Center would posi-
tion the Community to be a good candidate
for a smaller scale version of the Emergency
Management School currently operated by the
New York City Department of Education to train
youth in disaster recovery.

Site and organization selection would occur

through a competitive process based on the
analysis of existing efforts in the Community,
organizational capacity, facility capacity, pro-
posed services, and potential to coordinate
across the organizations operating after a
disaster. Prior to securing a permanent building
or space for the Recovery Community Center,
the Canarsie NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee) would like the Community
Coordinator to be located in an existing facility
until the capital component of this project is
complete.

Cost Estimate

$1 MILLION

To retrofit an existing building or to build out
space in a building to establish the Recovery
Community Center would cost approximately
$2.2 million.

The Committee has budgeted a portion of the
funds required for this project at $1 million. It
is requested that the additional funds required
for full implementation of this Recovery
Community Center be secured through other
funding sources.

The Community Center would require fund-
ing to cover two types of expenses:

¢ Capital funding: Capital costs associated
with this project would include the pur-
chase of a building or leasing space in
a building, resilient retrofitting, a fixed
back-up generator, solar power, back-up
hardened communications equipment,
locker rooms and showers, meeting
rooms, office space and community meet-
ing space.

e¢ The market value of a small com-
mercial building along a commercial
corridor in Central Brooklyn is esti-
mated at around $1.5 million. Office
upgrades on average cost around
$70 per square foot, but this does not
include resilient energy and power,
ADA-accessibility, or locker rooms
and showers. Overall, it is expected
that the purchasing of a building
along with the necessary renovation
would cost around $2 million.

Operational funding: Funding would be
used to support a full-time Community
Coordinator to provide year-round emer-
gency programming and capacity build-
ing for 2 years. It is estimated that the
salary of one mid-level employee at a
social service organization for 2 years
would cost around $200,000 including
benefits and incidentals.

Pa |

   

Residents supporting relief efforts after Superstorm Sandy. Courtesy of Canarsie Courier.

While the costs required for capital improve-
ments would depend upon the final design, the
condition of the building or space, and the size
of the facility, retrofitting and build out of a relief
center with 1,700 square feet of usable space
could cost approximately $2 million in capital
expenses. The annual cost of the Community
Coordinator and emergency preparedness
programming (including overhead) could range
from $70,000 to $90,000 annually, in addition to

$10,000 to $15,000 for materials used for out-
reach, coordination, and additional expenses.
Therefore, the total operational cost would be
nearly $200,000 over the course of 2 years.

After 2 years, the identified non-profit would be
responsible for the modest costs of emergency
preparedness programming, maintenance of
the building on an ongoing basis, and emer-
gency supplies and equipment.

Implementation—Project Profiles

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-41
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-42

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Health and Social Benefits

Establishing a Recovery Community Center for
the entire community would reduce the health
and safety risks associated with a disaster or
storm event. Specifically, the Center would
reduce the risk of:

e Inaction or misdirected action due to con-
fusion or lack of information across the
Community;

e Sickness or discomfort related to lack of
access to basic medical supplies, food,
water, heat, and other necessities;

e Emotional or psychological distress;

¢ Displacement of children, relatives, and
friends who might need to relocate to
receive services.

Vulnerable populations stand to benefit the
most, especially through building the capacity
of the block associations. These populations
are most likely to need assistance, yet less
likely to have reliable and convenient access
to critical supplies and services. Canarsie’s
vulnerable populations include low-income res-
idents, populations with special needs, non-na-
tive English speakers, and seniors.

Implementation—Project Profiles

Building a stronger network of block associa-
tions will improve the day-to-day function and
social cohesiveness of the Community, partic-
ularly critical in times of emergency to create
successful flows of information.

Economic Benefits

The Recovery Community Center is likely to
support a full-time employee based within an
existing not-for-profit organization to plan and
build organizational capacity at the Center over
the course of 2 years. Capital expenses asso-
ciated with building retrofit would also create a
small number of temporary jobs for construc-
tion. These jobs should be sourced locally to
ensure investment and to develop local knowl-
edge and expertise in the Community around
resiliency issues.

More formally, by including training and work-
force development programs at the Recovery
Community Center, the Community's capacity
to respond to emergency events would improve.
Residents who take part in the workforce devel-
opment programs would also have increased
access to jobs in resiliency-related fields.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The Committee’s vision expresses a desire for
the Community to become “self-reliant” and
“a model of sustainability and resilience.” As a

community at-risk from future flooding events
and other shocks, this project aligns well with
this vision, enhancing the resiliency of Canarsie
and ensuring a smoother recovery for its 88,800
residents.

It also would increase access to supplies for
vulnerable populations, or groups that might
not have convenient access otherwise. This
includes the approximately 3,770 residents
over the age of 75 (4% of the population) and
the approximately 21,590 residents under the
age of 18 (25% of the population).

The project would also bolster the financial
and professional capacity of host non-profits
to meet community needs. For host organiza-
tions that may have informally provided relief
services out of their own operations budget in
the aftermath of Superstorm Sandy, this project
would now provide support for offering related
services and programming.'?

Anticipated Risk Reduction

A Recovery Community Center would reduce
risk to Canarsie residents by providing a cen-
tralized source for information during an emer-
gency and following a disaster. The Center
would provide social and support services,
guarantee publicly accessible backup power,
and more reliable and robust recovery services.
Further, investment in a Recovery Community
Center would reduce the vulnerability of the
organizations that participate in the program
by providing ongoing training and a stronger
community network.

Timeframe

Once the project has been formally initiated,
it would take approximately 2 to 4 years to
implement.

Once participating organizations are identified,
the programming would need to be tailored to
Canarsie residents and capital improvements
would need to be designed, engineered and
constructed. Depending on the scope of the
work, and taking into account the seasonality of
construction, the construction phase could take
6 to 36 months. Programming can be imple-
mented in a shorter time, ideally 3 to 6 months
after the Community Coordinator is on board.

The key issues that could most affect the time-
frame are the length and format of the selection
process and the construction challenges that
may emerge with retrofitting an existing build-
ing: installing backup power, flood proofing, or
other capital improvements.

Regulatory Requirements
It is anticipated that no regulatory review

would be needed for the execution of this
project, though all capital investments would
be required to meet building codes, including
modifications to construction in a flood zone.

It would be beneficial for the local not-for-profit
organization to consult with the New York City
Office of Emergency Management (NYC OEM)
as they launch the program and to seek ongoing
communications and coordination with NYC
OEM on Citywide emergency preparedness
efforts. Local organizations would also benefit
from coordinating with other City agencies and
other local programs to bolster information and
programming over time.

Review and/or permitting by City agencies is
anticipated for this project. Project implemen-
tation would require permits from and/or coor-
dination with the New York City Department of
Transportation and New York City Department
of Buildings.

Jurisdiction
The identified project area falls within the juris-
diction of New York City.

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Implementation—Project Profiles

IV-43
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Critical Facility Upgrades Program

Proposed Project

STRATEGY

Build and Coordinate Local
Capacity for Emergency
Response

Recovery Support Functions

Health & Social
Service

Cost

$500,000

Timeline (in years)

e
2

IV-44 Implementation—Project Profiles

This project would fund resilient retrofits for health and social service
providers in Canarsie to ensure continuity of critical services. The
organizations would also be required to provide assistance with recovery

efforts after an emergency event.

Project Description

Superstorm Sandy affected the operations of
a number of critical facilities in Canarsie. There
are two adult-care centers and two providers
that support residents with developmental
disabilities located in the floodplain. Many of
these providers were flooded and/or lost
power during the storm. This Critical Facility
Upgrades program would provide partial funding
for backup power, and on-site capital improv-
ments to organizations that provide support
services year-round to vulnerable populations.
The selected organizations would also be
required to assist with recovery efforts after
future storms. Potential capital improvements
may include:

e Backup power, including —_hybrid/
solar-powered generators; and

e Floodproofing, such as elevating mechan-
icals and applying waterproof coatings to

basement and ground floor, among other
measures.

The Canarsie NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee) recommends a power source or
backup power source that utilizes alternative
energy, such as solar power, since it would min-
imize the carbon footprint and reduce depen-
dency on fuel distribution systems that could be
interrupted during an emergency.

Floodproofing, if needed, would likewise en-
sure that the organizations would be able to
perform following a storm or flooding event
without diminished quality of services.

This program could supplement the services
provided to vulnerable populations at the
Recovery Community Center post-disaster,
employing a coordinated effort for a robust
and comprehensive recovery. An eligible site
and participating organization that provides
Back-up Generator
What generator is needed?

Generator sizing is based on a combination of factors including
building size, building type, and existing electrical systems.
Ultimately, determining generator sizing rests on which building
activities and systems will be in use during an emergency.

  
 
  

Generator Size 50 100 150 200 250
(kW):

Approx. Building

Size (sf): 5000 10,000 12,000

Generators can be powered by natural gas or diesel.
Diesel generators will be coupled with storage tanks to
ensure fuel is available in the event of an emergency.

Fuel Storage: Wh at

(gallons) 420 | 775 1270 1730 «62135
4 days, 14 hrs

Fuel Storage:
(gallons) 840 1550 2540 3460 4270 power:
8 days, 14 hrs

Cooling
Systems

©

 

Building
Gen erato r Locatio n Systems Preparation

Considerations:

Generators must be placed above flood elevation. Generators can be
placed on raised concrete mounts or on structurally sound rooftops.
For diesel generators mounted to rooftops, fuel tanks will be placed
on ground level with fuel pumped to the generator

Miscellaneous

 

 

Guidelines for generator sizing and fuel storage need to be considered.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-45
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-46

year-round support services would be selected
through a competitive bidding process. This
process would prioritize an organization with a
past history of serving vulnerable populations
in the Canarsie NYRCR Planning Area (Planning
Area), and with sufficient organizational and
facility capacity.

Possible sites that could utilize this program
include:

e Medical service providers;
e Libraries;

e Providers that serve residents with devel-
opmental disabilities;

¢ Schools

e Day cares; and

e Adult care facilities.

To receive funding for the purchase and
installation of an alternative power source or
floodproofing measures, organizations would

need to make a formal commitment to provide
recovery support in the future.

Implementation—Project Profiles

Cost Estimate

$500,000

This cost includes partial grants for purchasing
and installing 100-kilowatt generators for
buildings assumed to be approximately 10,000
square feet in area, as well as provides
additional capital funding for floodproofing
measures. This estimate is based on engineer-
ing expertise and involvement with projects of
similar scope and scale. The cost is based on
the assumption that existing building systems
are conducive to a generator hookup, and that
there is available space in the facility for the
installation of the equipment.

Additional considerations and potential infra-
structure needs that could increase the cost

include:

e Inclusion of solar-powered backup (would
vary by site);

e Extensive hardening or elevating of the
generator;

e Environmental testing and abatement for
asbestos and other materials;

¢ Demolishing existing equipment;

e Altering existing building structures; and

e Removing walls, windows, or doorways.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Environmental Benefits

This project would result in environmental
benefits if a hybrid/solar generator system is
designed and installed. While solar power is
renewable and pollution free, these benefits
would be realized only while the generator is
in operation. A traditional generator that runs
using petroleum gasoline would not be as envi-
ronmentally beneficial.

Economic Benefits

This program would reduce economic loss
after a disaster by allowing a health and
social service provider to continue operations.
Sustained operations would allow an organiza-
tion to continue to serve the Canarsie NYRCR
Community (Community) during and after a
storm. Additionally, this project is estimated to
create one full-time equivalent construction job
over its projected timeframe.'*

Health and Social Benefits

As previously mentioned, a major benefit of this
project is ensuring that vulnerable populations
are able to secure services during and after
emergencies. Services provided at each facility
could include basic physical and/or mental
healthcare, access to food and water, or a reli-
able power supply.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Strengthening at-risk buildings with flood-
proofing and backup power aligns with the
Committee’s vision to become a self-sufficient
community. This project could help Canarsie
achieve this vision and would provide the
neighborhood, as well as New York City at-large,
with an example of the kind of adaptability that
is needed in these coastal communities.

While this project is currently scaled to serve
only approximately 2 of the 20 communi-
ty-based organizations in the Planning Area, its
positive effects will be experienced by the many
residents who utilize these services.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

This project would decrease the risk of power
loss in the buildings that are awarded funds.
The project’s main goal is to support vulner-
able populations by providing access to power
and services during and after an emergency,
thereby reducing adverse health impacts and
facilitating a quick recovery. This project would
make up to two health and social service
providers more resilient, and would protect
vulnerable populations, including children and
seniors. By awarding partial grants, two of the

four critical facilities in the floodplain could be
supported with capital upgrades.

Timeframe

Once the project has been formally initiated, it
would take approximately 1 to 2 years for capital
improvements to be completed. The key issues
that could most impact the timeframe are the
length and format of the selection process and
the physical challenges that may emerge with
the installation of alternative power sources
and floodproofing measures.

Regulatory Requirements

It is anticipated that no additional regulatory
review would be needed for the execution of
this project, although it will need to abide by
all local laws and the New York City Building
Code. The New York City Office of Emergency
Management may be engaged to facilitate
coordination with Citywide emergency pre-
paredness efforts.

Jurisdiction
The identified project area falls within the juris-
diction of New York City.

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Implementation—Project Profiles

IV-47
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Canarsie Corps Program

Proposed Project

STRATEGY

Build and Coordinate Local
Capacity for Emergency
Response

Recovery Support Functions

Community
Planning

W)

Economic
Development

Cost

$150,000

Timeline (in years)

e
0 1 2 3

IV-48 Implementation—Project Profiles

This project would establish a Canarsie Corps summer youth employment
program to support resiliency and other community projects in Canarsie.

Project Description

Residents who lived through Superstorm
Sandy agree that a coordinated effort is
necessary to expedite recovery after future
storms. Immediately following the storm, there
were a number of young adults who were avail-
able but were unsure how to help. This project
would develop a Canarsie Corps program that
identifies and creates paid summer jobs for
youth to assist with resiliency and community-
based projects.

The Canarsie Corps would fund 100 positions
for local youth aged 14-21 to be stationed out
of the Recovery Community Center. These
positions would work in conjunction with the
Community Coordinator and the network of
local block associations to take on resiliency
and other projects in Canarsie, such as planting
community gardens and maintaining access
trails along Fresh Creek and within Canarsie
Park. In the event of an emergency, the Canarsie
Corps would provide a direct role in recovery,
working under the direction of the Community
Coordinator supporting vulnerable populations.

Participants will work up to 25 hours a week for
six weeks in the summer. An open application
and pre-determined approval process would
be instituted to ensure diverse participation. A
number of participants may choose to re-enroll
after serving for one year, supporting the devel-
opment of youth leaders within the program
and in the broader Community.

In the Superstorm Sandy-affected regions,
multiple organizations have provided youth
employment programs with the backing of
foundation, private, and government partners.
Through a competitive selection process, one
of these programs could be extended to admin-
ister a program tailored to Canarsie youth.

Cost Estimate

$150,000

The cost of this program would fund 50-100
positions annually for 2 years including over-
head expenses (20%). This estimate assumes
that positions will be paid at the New York State
minimum wage of $8 per hour.
_

Youth working to beautify their community. Creston National Fish Hatchery/USFWS Mountain-Prairie."“

Implementation—Project Profiles [IV-49

 
IV-50

 

AmeriCorps Team assisting post-disaster. George Armstrong/FEMA. ">

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Health and Social Benefits

This program would provide youth-oriented
programming, aligning with the Community’s
short-term goal of “increasing resources for
youth.” The Canarsie Corps would employ

Implementation—Project Profiles

young residents in positions that provide
job experience and create opportunities for
youth to work alongside organizations that are
strengthening the neighborhood. This would
give these young leaders direct experience with
community organizing.

This program would also provide a robust
education for participants as they would learn
about the vegetation and ecosystem that is
a part of their Community. Other skills taught
through this program could include emergency
response techniques and best practices, and
basic training about resilient infrastructure.

Economic Benefits

The Canarsie Corps positions would support a
total of 100 part-time jobs for youth, providing
them with the opportunity to learn money-man-
agement skills and how to handle employment
responsibilities. Canarsie Corps may also help
to shape future career paths. This program
would allow Canarsie’s youth to gain hands-on
experience in resiliency-related jobs, deepening
their investment in the future of the Canarsie
Community.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Demand for summer youth employment pro-
grams far exceeds the number of positions
that are available, forcing the City of New York
to operate a lottery-based system to select
participants. Many have voiced the need to
expand this program since it provides youth
with a background in many important life skills.
Operating a locally based version of this pro-
gram for Canarsie would create 50-100 jobs
for youth, allowing them to reap the benefits
of this program while building the resiliency of
Canarsie through capacity building, education
about coastal ecosystems and habitats, and
improved social cohesion.

Youth unemployment is a major problem in New
York City. The unemployment rate for youth, at
19.5%, is more than double the rate for all NYC
residents as a whole. '* This program would pro-
vide an opportunity for the approximately 2,730
youth who are unemployed and seeking work
in Canarsie.”

This project may provide some cost-savings
for the government since these positions are a
cost-effective means of providing emergency
response, support, and clean-up.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

The Canarsie Corps Project would provide risk
reduction by building the capacity within the
Community to respond to emergency events. If
this project were to identify a funding source
that would allow it to continue beyond the
two-year period, this could, over time, create
hundreds of trained youth familiar with emer-
gency response and recovery, helping to build
a self-reliant community.

Timeframe

Once the administering organization has been
determined, the Canarsie Corps program
could be launched within 6 to 8 months. If
this program operates in conjunction with the
Recovery Community Center and Community
Coordinator, the timeframe could be extended
by 2-4 years.

Regulatory Requirements

It is anticipated that no regulatory review
requirements would be needed for the execu-
tion of this project, though the program would
need to abide by Federal, and New York State
and City youth labor laws.

Jurisdiction
The identified project area falls within the juris-
diction of New York City.

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Implementation—Project Profiles

IV-51
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Homeowner Audit and Grant Program

Proposed Project

STRATEGY
Make More Homes Physically
and Financially Resilient

Recovery Support Functions

Housing

Cost

$1.5 MILLION

Timeline (in years)

e
0 1 2 3

IV-52 Implementation—Project Profiles

This project would provide technical assistance and financial tools to low and
moderate income single- and multi-family homeowners who want to retrofit
their homes so they can mitigate future flood risk.

Project Description

During Superstorm Sandy, homeowners were
ill-prepared to handle the flooding that se-
verely damaged their homes. By making small
capital upgrades, residents can ensure their
homes are better protected from future storms
and recurrent flooding. The project entails two
components: individualized technical assis-
tance and audits; and financial assistance.
The program aims to help property owners
in the 100-year floodplain make more in-
formed decisions about resiliency investments
and provide some financial support to make
these investments.

Many homeowners in Canarsie were counseled
to take out U.S. Small Business Administration
loans to cover the cost of damage after
Superstorm Sandy and are now facing finan-
cial uncertainty because of the additional
debt they incurred. Furthermore, because of
the expiration of the City of New York’s tax
relief program, reduced property values, and

expected increases in flood insurance rates,
homeowners are not able to afford the neces-
sary upgrades needed to protect their homes
from future disasters.

The technical assistance program would be
offered to high-need homeowners at greatest
risk of increases in flood insurance premiums
and financial hardship. For example, this
project could serve homeowners with property
in the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA)-designated Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA),
with a low-to-moderate household income.
Qualified auditors would perform technical
assistance, while counselors would help home-
owners understand the repairs recomended by
the auditor, weigh their options and connect
them to financial assistance.

Technical assistance could include:

e Accurately assessing storm damage to
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Homes such as these are difficult to elevate, but could utilize different strategies for protection.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-53

 
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-54

 

Adjustments to the homes of Canarsie will protect them
from future storms. Courtesy of Canarsie Courier.

residential properties; and

Identifying potential retrofits to mitigate
against future storm damage and poten-
tially lower insurance premiums, such as
elevation, as well as protection of mechan-
ical systems, installation of sewer check
valve(s), and floodproofing of basement
spaces.

A financial assistance program would offer
grants to building owners and ownership enti-
ties to implement select building resiliency
measures (or percentage thereof).

Implementation—Project Profiles

Financial assistance could include:

e Full grants for low-cost measures (e.g.,
installing check valves); and

e Partial grants for high-cost measures (e.g.,
elevating mechanicals).

The Canarsie NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee) has requested that individual grants
be capped at a reasonable amount to allow for
as many households as possible to benefit from
this program given the limited budget.

A Community Development Financial Institution
(CDFI) could administer the grant pool and
oversee the audit program, contracting with
engineers and/or building inspectors who
would be hired to perform resiliency audits on
individual properties. Once the CDFI verified
grantee eligibility, staff of the CDFI would work
with the grantee to schedule an on-site physical
assessment of existing issues and future risk to
the property. Audits would result in a list of rec-
ommended retrofits to mitigate against future
storm damage. The owner could then pursue
financing through the CDFI to perform some or
all of the recommended scope. The CDFI could
also provide additional technical assistance,
such as resiliency best practices information, to
help owners evaluate cost benefits or upgrades.

The CDFls are appropriate partners because
they serve middle- and low-income markets
and communities underserved by traditional
financial institutions, typically providing both
financial tools and support services to recip-
ients. There may also be other potential local
partners with capacity in grant administration
suitable to administer this program.

Cost Estimate

$1.5 MILLION

An estimate of $1.5 million includes a $670,000
estimate for the audit component and $670,000
for financial assistance. Assuming that audits
may cost $1,000 to $5,000 per home, $670,000
would support 134 to 670 audits. If the grant
program is capped at an amount between
$2,000 and $3,000 per household, between
223 and 335 households could be served by
this program.

The estimate is based on typical improvements
and similar CDFl-administered programs.
Operating costs to administer the program
through an existing organization would be
approximately $100,000 to $200,000, including
costs for a full-time program officer to do out-
reach, collect and triage applications, schedule
building audits, catalog audit reports, and pro-
vide counseling to borrowers.
Benefit/Co-Benefits

Economic Benefits

An audit program would increase resiliency
of homes in the Canarsie NYRCR Planning
Area (Planning Area) by giving low- to mod-
erate-income residents access to knowledge
and capital to make resiliency improvements.
Greater protection of homes, a critical eco-
nomic asset for individuals in Canarsie, would
allow the Planning Area to recover more quickly
following a storm event. Additionally, certain
types of improvements may reduce insurance
premiums and save owners money over time.

Health And Social Benefits

This program would target assistance to low
and moderate income residents who may
lack adequate resources to make repairs and
recover from disasters. A comprehensive audit
of risk coupled with access to financial
resources would increase financial stability,
thus contributing to the well-being of residents
and overall neighborhood health, particularly
for vulnerable low-income families.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

This project would provide customized guid-
ance for up to 670 of the 5,400 residential
buildings in the high or extreme risk area. While
this constitutes only 12% of the homes at risk,
it is presumed that not all homeowners would

participate in the program and that additional
funding sources could be leveraged to expand
this project.

With the institution of a cap on each grant
award, 268 homes in the floodplain could
benefit (about 5%). According to a post-storm
survey sent out by New York City Councilman
Alan Maisel’s office to residents of New
York City Council District 46 (which includes
Canarsie, Bergen Beach, Mill Island, Mill Basin,
Georgetown, Marine Park, and portions of Flat-
lands), the average damages from Superstorm
Sandy to homeowners in this region was esti-
mated at $30,000. Should a similar event strike
Canarsie, this project could provide some
savings from the net $8 million in damages to
those homeowners receiving the grant. This
would translate to savings for the government,
requiring less resources and aid that would
need to be deployed.

Together, this program aims to tackle the most
pressing issue facing the Community—adapta-
tion in the face of increasing risk. As such, the
benefits of this project outweigh its costs.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

This project would reduce risk by enabling
homeowners to floodproof buildings. Resiliency
improvements would decrease the chance of

damage to residential assets, making these
buildings safer and less costly to the people
who occupy them.

Timeframe

Once an administering organization has been
selected, the proposed audit program could
be launched within 6 months. Funds associ-
ated with recommended improvements could
be distributed to eligible participants over the
course of 1 year. The program would need to
leverage additional funding to extend the time
frame if grants are the preferred financing tool.

Regulatory Requirements

Audits and financial assistance administered
through an existing organization would face
minimal regulations. Changes to FIRMs and
insurance programs would impact eligibility for
the program, but the administering entity would
be responsible for maintaining current and
accurate materials as regulations and informa-
tion changes. Matching funds or additional out-
side funding could trigger additional oversight
and regulation.

Jurisdiction

This project would fall under the jurisdiction of
the City of New York.

Implementation—Project Profiles

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-55
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Resiliency Workforce Development

Proposed Project

STRATEGY
Strengthen Economic Resiliency

Recovery Support Functions

Community
Planning

W)

Economic
Development

Cost

$1 MILLION

Timeline (in years)

e
0 1 2 3

Implementation—Project Profiles

A Resiliency Workforce Development project would train and connect local
residents with sustainable job opportunities while simultaneously building a
Community that can more effectively recover from future events.

Project Description

Canarsie residents felt as though they did not
have the resources to effectively recover from
Superstorm Sandy. By funding a Resiliency
Workforce Development program, residents will
be trained and employed in sustainable jobs,
and a local labor force will be bolstered to help
with future recovery needs.

The Proposed Project would expand work-
force training and connect Canarsie residents
to employment opportunities in a range of
resiliency-related industries. It would simul-
taneously build the capacity of the Canarsie
NYRCR Community (Community) to make
physical resiliency improvements as well as
improve their capacity to respond and recover
from disasters—an expressed need in a neigh-
borhood with areas of high unemployment. This
project would fund training in areas such as:

e Building audits to determine the most
cost-effective ways to improve the

resiliency of individual homes;

Construction of resilient infrastructure,
building improvements, and electrician
certification;

Installation and maintenance of solar and
other building-scale renewable energy;

Training for emergency medical technician
and home health aides; and

General Educational Development (GED)
test preparation.

The program would be administered by an
existing workforce training provider that cur-
rently serves Canarsie. In Canarsie, there are
organizations that provide local workforce
training, borough-wide and Citywide, and a
Citywide program that connects a_ skilled
workforce to resiliency-related jobs. Through a
competitive selection process, one of these
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Green City Force Corps Members receive training in home reconstruction in Canarsie during Superstorm Sandy. Courtesy of Rebuilding Together NYC.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-57

 
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-58

providers could be selected to administer a pro-
gram tailored to the needs of Canarsie residents.

Recruitment of applicants, provision of appro-
priate and high quality instruction, establishing
relationships with apprenticeship programs,
and guaranteeing job placement are some
of the most challenging and critical functions
the program administrator would need to
ensure. The workforce training program would
target resiliency construction and green jobs
in Canarsie. Training opportunities may also
exist in coordination with the Section 3 man-
date that requires any project assisted by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) aim for 30% of new hires
to be low-income individuals and/or residents
of public housing.'* While building on existing
programs where appropriate and feasible, this
program would provide a curriculum tailored to
the specific skills required for upcoming publicly
funded projects. Instruction would be adminis-
tered through both classroom and hands-on
training. The program would teach the technical
skills needed for planned resiliency projects or
for residential building resiliency retrofits, such
as filling in basements and moving habitable
floors above the base flood elevation.

It is critical for this training to connect residents
to jobs that are in demand as a result of Citywide

Implementation—Project Profiles

resiliency efforts. By providing training in con-
struction and teaching the intricacies of bol-
stering buildings for sea-level rise and flooding
events, Canarsie residents would gain access
to important work that would be especially
needed in these urban coastal communities.

Cost Estimate

$1 MILLION

$1 million would fund a workforce develop-
ment program for approximately 100 res-
idents over 2 years. The exact number of
residents reached through the Proposed
Project would depend on a number of factors
including:

¢ Type of training provided (e.g., training for
construction of coastal infrastructure ver-
sus training for resilient building trades);

e Length and depth of training provided;

e Amount of wrap-around support services
provided such as pre-program counseling,
job placement support, and other services
to support participants in the development
of soft skills; and

e Availability of matching funds by partner-
ing organization or private foundation.

Analysis of existing workforce training programs
reveals the range of services and costs different
types of workforce programs may entail. Below
are two illustrative high- and low-cost construc-
tion training program alternatives. The proposed
workforce program would likely be closer to the
moderate cost program, but options for a more
intensive program exist and could be pursued,
especially as labor requirements surrounding
resiliency projects becomes clearer.

High-cost, intensive workforce program:

* For over $20,000 per enrollee, full-time
training for 18 weeks in building trades
can be provided. Such a program would
provide high-quality instruction, extensive
laboratory/hands-on training, small class
sizes (less than 30 enrollees), enrollee
outreach/ recruitment, as well as wrap-
around counseling services for pre- and
post-training support and job placement.

Moderate-cost, moderate-intensity workforce
program:

* For $4,000-$7,000 per enrollee, from 4
to 12 weeks, basic construction training
would be provided. A program of this scale
would provide basic training in a wide range
of construction trades through classroom
and laboratory training. In addition to cost
per student, some overhead cost may be
required to manage the program.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Economic Benefits

As identified in the New York State Regional
Economic Development Council’s New York
City Regional Economic Development Plan,
“helping small businesses access capital,
hire and train workers, and develop business
plans is an investment in sustainable economic
growth.” As impacts from storms dispropor-
tionately affect economically vulnerable pop-
ulations, connecting Canarsie to employment
opportunities in these sectors would directly
and indirectly increase the resiliency of the
Community by lowering unemployment.

Health and Social Benefits

Connecting Canarsie to employment oppor-
tunities in resiliency sectors would build the
internal capacity of the Community to deal with
emergency events, aligning with the Planning
Committee’s vision to create a_ self-reliant
community.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
The workforce development program would
train approximately 100 individuals for

resiliency-related work. This will directly benefit
a portion of the 14,000 individuals living below
the poverty level and the 8,750 residents above
the age of 25 without a high school diploma. At
7.7%, Canarsie’s unemployment rate is slightly
lower than New York City as a whole, but in
portions of the Community, unemployment
is nearing, or exceeding, 20%. The potential
to solidify capacity within the Community to
respond to events makes this a worthwhile
investment that justifies its costs.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

The project would provide reduction of risk to
physical community assets by training workers
to implement improvements that strengthen the
physical structures of the neighborhood as well
as improve its ability to effectively respond to
emergency events.

A workforce training program also reduces risk
to participating individuals and their immediate
neighborhood by increasing the employment
rate. Canarsie residents who can secure new
income by participating in this program would
be better positioned to access the goods and
services they need in a crisis.

Timeframe
Once the administering organization has been
determined, the workforce development pro-

gram could be launched within 6 to 8 months.

Regulatory Requirements

Depending on the type of training and certi-
fication required, the resiliency construction
workforce training program may be required
to follow certain certification requirements.
Should a workforce program seek to tie into
certain Federal low-income population hiring
requirements, additional regulations may apply.

Jurisdiction

The identified project area falls within the juris-
diction of New York City.

Implementation—Project Profiles

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-59
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Resilient Streetscaping

Proposed Project

STRATEGY
Strengthen Economic Resiliency

Recovery Support Functions

M)

Economic
Development

Infrastructure

Cost

$3 MILLION

Timeline (in years)

®
2

Implementation—Project Profiles

This project would fund capital improvements along Avenue L and Rockaway
Parkway that help to strengthen the economic viability of local businesses and
provide support to residents during and after future disasters.

Project Description

Canarsie residents did not feel prepared to
handle the impacts of Superstorm Sandy.
Many did not know where to obtain food, water,
and social services. Businesses also remained
closed after the flood waters receded, limiting
the options of where residents could purchase
goods. A Resilient Streetscaping project could
help to strengthen key retail corridors, by attract-
ing new businesses and providing power and
information to residents during future storms.

This Proposed Project would undertake street-
scaping that incorporates the best-practices
in street design for resiliency. The re-designed
Avenue L between Rockaway Parkway and
East 94th Streets, and Rockaway Parkway
between Gleenwood Road and the intersection
of Flatlands Avenue would operate as demon-
stration projects for the larger application of
these design elements throughout Canarsie
and New York City. The components of the
streetscaping project would include:

e Asmall public plaza with seating, shade,
and bike racks;

Solar LED pedestrian lighting;

Solar mobile-phone charging stations and
a solar-powered information board;

Planted curb bioswales; and

e Bike lanes and parking with permeable
paving.

These elements would combine to create an
active street life, improve drainage after both
common and extreme storm events, and pro-
vide a non-grid backup power supply that
provides lighting, cellphone charging, and
real-time information during an emergency. The
project would also create an opportunity for
residents to learn about resiliency initiatives and
to advocate for the project’s expansion within
their community. These educational elements
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Existing conditions along Avenue L.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-61

 
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-62

could provide information about solar power,
including live data feeds about how much
energy is being captured by the station, and
how much could be captured if these projects
were more widely adopted and implemented.

In an every day capacity, these streetscape
elements would combine to serve as a quality
public space, similar to the plazas created by
the New York City Department of Transportation
(NYC DOT) that have proliferated throughout

ROCKAWAY PKWY

the city in recent years. The focus of this pro-
gram has been on re-organizing the uses of the
street to make them safer and more habitable
for pedestrians. The Avenue L and Rockaway
Parkway Resilient Streetscaping project takes
this idea a step further, by redesigning the
street bed to not just serve a broader base
of users, but to be able to provide more uses
through multifunctional infrastructure that
can support and inform residents during and
after a disaster.

ON-STREET PARKING

HOTSPOT }

Cost Estimate

$3 MILLION

The funds for this project would be split between
both locations and as programmed will cost $3
million, or approximately $600,000 per block,
inclusive of demolition ($150,000), construction
($1.1 million), design engineering ($433,000),
street elements such as solar lighting ($336,000),
solar mobile-phone charging station ($5,000),
and solar-powered info board ($10,000).

LACK OF VEGETATION

 

Current conditions along Avenue L and Rockaway Parkway in Canarsie.

Implementation—Project Profiles

oO 10 30 60 ft
Benefit/Co-Benefits

Environmental Benefits

This project is expected to have modest envi-
ronmental benefits in the short-term, while
serving as a potential model that can lead to
more wide-spread adoption. The bioswales
would have a local impact when employed
in conjunction with a more comprehensive
strategy addressing Canarsie’s stormwater
flooding issues.

ROCKAWAY PKWY

Economic Benefits

These streetscaping improvements would pro-
vide amenities that positively contribute to the
character of the area by increasing the foot traffic
along the commercial corridors and creating a
respite for consumers. A 2012 NYC DOT study,
The Economic Benefits of Sustainable Streets,
showed that commercial areas with these kinds
of pedestrian improvements considerably out-
performed sites without these improvements,
even when parking is removed.'® Finally, this

SOLAR POWERED
INFO BOARD

SOLAR MOBILE PHONE
CHARGING STATION

SOLAR LIGHTING

SHADE & SEATING

=] 4a | PARKING

BIOSWALE

— '
H eit

Pres com | i f
H aa aan

DOT

Proposed conditions along Avenue L and Rockaway Parkway in Canarsie.

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

project would create 6-13 temporary construc-
tion jobs over the course of the project.”

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The retail areas along Avenue L and Rockaway
Parkway are key economic corridors in
Canarsie. They are in close proximity to public
transit options, and are outside of the floodplain.
This project will directly benefit the 89 busi-
nesses along Avenue L and Rockaway Parkway,
and the visitors, employees, and residents who

L... RACKS

 

60 ft

IV-63

Implementation—Project Profiles
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-64

shop and work there.?! These improvements
will lead to an improved street experience that
may aid in business attraction, helping to fill
the vacant storefronts and improve the quality
of retail.

Pedestrian street lighting utilizing alternative
energy along Avenue L would provide benefits
beyond the reduction in energy costs. The im-
plementation of solar power lighting may reduce
the amount of time that the NYC DOT would
have to spend in the area on street-light repairs.
These efficiencies would translate to modest
savings for government agencies during emer-
gency events, as generator-powered lights
would not have to be deployed in these areas.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

This streetscaping project would not dramati-
cally decrease the amount of risk faced by the
Canarsie NYRCR Community (Community),
but would demonstrate the various ways
that infrastructure can be adapted to provide
environmental and economic co-benefits that
bolster the broader resiliency of Canarsie. The
Community would be able to recover from
events more quickly with the establishment
of a centrally located, easily identifiable place
that provides information (through the use of
the solar-powered information board) and ser-
vices. These strategies could be pursued on a

Implementation—Project Profiles

broader scale and adopted by New York State
and City agencies as a result of these demon-
stration projects.

This project would reduce the risk score for
Avenue L and Rockaway Parkway—two of
Canarsie’s three commercial corridors—by
enhancing their resiliency and in turn reducing
their vulnerability to damage during or after a
severe storm event. This reduced risk would
affect four highly valued community assets
located along Avenue L and Rockaway Park-
way. These assets include the Gateway Dialysis
Center, the Canarsie-Rockaway Parkway
Station, the Holy Family Roman Catholic
Church, and the New York City Fire Depart-
ment’s Engine 257, Ladder 170—the only New
York City Fire Department facility within the
Canarsie NYRCR Planning Area.

Timeframe

Once approved, and assuming a straightfor-
ward permitting process, this short-term project
would require approximately 1 to 2 years to
design, review, permit, and construct.

Regulatory Requirements

Review and/or permitting by Federal and New
York State and City agencies is anticipated for
this project. Environmental review is prescribed
by the New York State Quality Review Act

and the New York City Environmental Quality
Review process. Project implementation may
require permits from and/or coordination with
NYC DOT.

Jurisdiction
The identified project area falls within the juris-
diction of New York City.
V. Additional Materials
   

artgnt sifal

of (pONa
throes mst HTIGY:

ea

iting,
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. a Cost Regional
Strate: Project Name Short Description .
gy 1 P Estimate (Y/N)

Reduce vulnerability to coastal flooding USACE Coastal Protection The Committee recommends that existing coastal protection plans N/A Y
and sea level rise Recommendation for Jamaica Bay include measures to enhance coastal protection in

the Planning Area, while favoring natural and living strategies.
Reduce vulnerability to coastal flooding Paerdegat Coastal Protection The Committee recommends the study and design of a system of >$10 million Y
and sea level rise protective measures by the USACE along Paerdegat Basin and the

western corner of Canarsie Park to reduce the risk to areas of the

Canarsie neighborhood that are subject to flooding from Paerdegat

Basin during future coastal storm events.
Improve wastewater and stormwater Assessment of Area’s Sewer The Committee recommends that the NYC Department of $3-10 million N
management System Environmental Protection (NYC DEP) examine vulnerabilities of

the Planning Area’s sewer system and determine improvements to

enhance the resiliency of the system.
Build and coordinate local capacity for ConEd Recommendation The Committee recommends that Con Edison protects vulnerable N/A N
emergency response substations within the Planning Area, as well as hardens all

overhead power lines.
Build and coordinate local capacity for Repair Sinkholes The Committee recommends that NYC Department of $3-10 million N
emergency response Transportation (NYC DOT) examines sinkhole issues and make

rapid repairs.
Build and coordinate local capacity for Tree Maintenance The Committee recommends that trees on public lands are well $3-10 million N
emergency response maintained and that a plan is in place to replace dead trees and

plants with salt-water tolerant species.
Build and coordinate local capacity for Street Lighting Improvements The Committee recommends that NYC DOT install street lighting $3-10 million N
emergency response where needed to better illurninate dark areas.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Additional Materials V-1
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Cost
Estimate

Regional

(Y/N)

 

Make homes more physically and
financially resilient

Home Resiliency Improvement
Grant

The Committee recommends the creation of a broader home
resiliency grant program, as identified in SIRR.

>$10 million

 

Make homes more physically and
financially resilient

Building-Level Resiliency
Education

The Committee recommends the NYC Housing Recovery Office
create a program that would provide oversight, up-to-date
information, training, access to subject matter experts, and
funding to local community-based organizations (CBOs). Qualified
counselors and auditors within the CBOs would provide education
and technical assistance to the Community.

$3-10 million

 

Strengthen economic resiliency

Select Bus Service Extension

The Committee recommends that the Metropolitan Transit Authority
(MTA)/DOT institute a Select Bus Service route from east-to west
along Flatlands Avenue, as identified in the 2010 NYC DOT bus
rapid transit phase 2 study.

>$10 million

 

Strengthen economic resiliency

Transportation and Parking
Study

The Committee recommends the NYC DOT complete a
transportation study for the Canarsie Planning Area. This study
would emphasize defining transportation initiatives that improve
pedestrian, cycling, and vehicular safety along Canarsie’s streets,
that enhance and encourage access to key commercial corridors,
and that provide parking solutions that cater to the needs of the
Community.

<$500,000

 

Strengthen economic resiliency

Capacity Building of Merchants
along Avenue L

The Committee recommends the capacity building of merchants
along Avenue L, including the development of a marketing plan for
the corridor.

<$500,000

 

 

Strengthen economic resiliency

 

Market Study Analysis

 

The Committee recommends a local business advocacy
organization undertake a comprehensive update to previous
business studies to create strategies that can improve market
conditions.

 

<$500,000

 

 

V-2

Additional Materials

 
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table V-2: Master Table of Projects

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. ae Project Estimated | Regional
Strategy Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)

Reduce vulnerability to coastal Fresh Creek Coastal This project would fund a cheek wall and adjoining bioswales to Proposed Project $7.7 million N
flooding and sea level rise Protection capture storm surge and rising waters at the most vulnerable areas

along Fresh Creek.
Reduce vulnerability to coastal USACE Coastal The Committee recommends that existing coastal protection plans for Additional Resiliency N/A Y
flooding and sea level rise Protection Jamaica Bay include measures to enhance coastal protection in the Recommendation

Recommendation Planning Area, while favoring natural and living strategies.

Reduce vulnerability to coastal Paerdegat Coastal The Committee recommends the study and design of a system of Additional Resiliency >$10 million Y
flooding and sea level rise Protection protective measures by the USACE along Paerdegat Basin and the Recommendation

western corner of Canarsie Park to reduce the risk to areas of the

Canarsie neighborhood that are subject to flooding from Paerdegat

Basin during future coastal storm events.
Activate and enhance access Fresh Creek Long-Term This project proposes a comprehensive plan for the length of Fresh Featured Project $52 million N
along the shoreline Restoration & Resiliency | Creek incorporating green infrastructure, improved access, and public

amenities.
Activate and enhance access Canarsie Pier Access This project would fund safety improvements to the Belt Parkway Proposed Project $2 million N
along the shoreline Improvements Underpass and Roundabout to improve and encourage pedestrian and

cyclist access between Canarsie Pier and the Canarsie Community

(Community).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Additional Materials

V-3
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

capacity for emergency
response

 

 

Upgrades Program

 

organization in Canarsie to ensure continuity of critical services. The
organization would also be required to commit to providing assistance
with recovery efforts after an emergency event.

 

 

 

. _ Project Estimated | Regional
Strategy Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)
Activate and enhance access Canarsie Pier and This project would upgrade the facilities at Canarsie Pier to create a Featured Project $32.7 million N
along the shoreline Beach Community waterfront destination that better serves visitors and local residents.
Enhancements
Activate and enhance access Canarsie Youth This project would fund the development of an environmental Proposed Project $100,000 N
along the shoreline Environmental education program for youth in Canarsie to learn about Jamaica Bay
Education Program and adjacent waterways.
Improve wastewater and Canarsie and Southeast This two-phase project would fund a study to examine the feasibility, Proposed Project $650,000 Y
stormwater management Brooklyn Waterfront costs, and benefits of various stormwater capture and retention
Stormwater Study and projects in the NYRCR Canarsie and Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
Pilot Projects Planning Areas. The Proposed project would also implement
recommended scalable pilot projects within both Planning Areas
Improve wastewater and Assessment of Area’s The Committee recommends that the NYC Department of Additional Resiliency $3-10 million N
stormwater management Sewer System Environmental Protection (NYC DEP) examine vulnerabilities of Recommendation
the Planning Area’s sewer system and determine improvements to
enhance the resiliency of the system.
Build and coordinate local Recovery Community This project would establish a Recovery Community Center with Proposed Project $1 million N
capacity for emergency Center resilient lighting and power, the ability to distribute supplies,
response coordinate efforts with government agencies, and host trainings and
capacity building initiatives.
Build and coordinate local Critical Facility This project would fund resilient retrofits for a community-based Proposed Project $500,000 N

 

v-4

Additional Materials

 
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. . oe Project Estimated | Regional
Strategy Project Name Short Description J 3
Category Cost (Y/N)
Build and coordinate local Canarsie Corps This project would establish a Canarsie Corps summer youth Proposed Project $150,000 N
capacity for emergency Program employment program to support resiliency and other community
response projects in Canarsie.
Build and coordinate local ConEd The Committee recommends that Con Edison protects vulnerable Additional Resiliency N/A N
capacity for emergency Recommendation substations within the Planning Area, as well as hardens all overhead Recommendation
response power lines.
Build and coordinate local Repair Sinkholes The Committee recommends that NYC Department of Transportation Additional Resiliency $3-10 million N
capacity for emergency (NYC DOT) examines sinkhole issues and make rapid repairs. Recommendation
response
Build and coordinate local Tree Maintenance The Committee recommends that trees on public lands are well Additional Resiliency $3-10 million N
capacity for emergency maintained and that a plan is in place to replace dead trees and plants Recommendation
response with salt-water tolerant species.
Build and coordinate local Street Lighting The Committee recommends that NYC DOT install street lighting Additional Resiliency $3-10 million N
capacity for emergency Improvements where needed to better illuminate dark areas. Recommendation
response
Make homes more physically Homeowner Audit and This project would provide technical assistance and financial tools to Proposed Project $1.5 million N

and financially resilient

 

Grant Program

 

low and moderate income single- and multi- family homeowners who
want to retrofit their homes so they can mitigate future flood risk.

 

 

 

 

 

Additional Materials

V-5
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Extension

 

(MTA)/DOT institute a Select Bus Service route from east-to west
along Flatlands Avenue, as identified in the 2010 NYC DOT bus rapid
transit phase 2 study.

 

Recommendation

 

 

. _ Project Estimated | Regional
Strategy Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)
Make homes more physically Home Resiliency The Committee recommends the creation of a broader home resiliency | Additional Resiliency >$10 million Y
and financially resilient Improvement Grant grant program, as identified in SIRR. Recommendation
Make homes more physically Building-Level The Committee recommends the NYC Housing Recovery Office create | Additional Resiliency $3-10 million Y
and financially resilient Resiliency Education a program that would provide oversight, up-to-date information, Recommendation
training, access to subject matter experts, and funding to local
community-based organizations (CBOs). Qualified counselors and
auditors within the CBOs would provide education and technical
assistance to the Community.
Strengthen economic resiliency Resiliency Workforce A Resiliency Workforce Development project would train and connect Proposed Project $1 million N
Development local residents with sustainable job opportunities while simultaneously
building a Community that can more effectively recover from future
events.
Strengthen economic resiliency Resilient Streetscaping This project would fund capital improvements along Avenue L and Proposed Project $3 million N
Rockaway Parkway that help to strengthen the economic viability of
local businesses and provide support to residents during and after
future disasters.
Strengthen economic resiliency Select Bus Service The Committee recommends that the Metropolitan Transit Authority Additional Resiliency >$10 million Y

 

V-6

Additional Materials

 
Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

 

. ae Project Estimated | Regional
Strategy Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)
Strengthen economic resiliency Transportation and The Committee recommends the NYC DOT complete a transportation Additional Resiliency <$500,000 Y
Parking Study study for the Canarsie Planning Area. This study would emphasize Recommendation
defining transportation initiatives that improve pedestrian, cycling, and
vehicular safety along Canarsie’s streets, that enhance and encourage
access to key commercial corridors, and that provide parking
solutions that cater to the needs of the Community.
Strengthen economic resiliency Capacity Building The Committee recommends the capacity building of merchants Additional Resiliency <$500,000 N
of Merchants along along Avenue L, including the development of a marketing plan for the Recommendation
Avenue L corridor.
Strengthen economic resiliency Market Study Analysis The Committee recommends a local business advocacy organization Additional Resiliency <$500,000 N

 

 

undertake a comprehensive update to previous business studies to
create strategies that can improve market conditions.

 

Recommendation

 

 

 

Additional Materials

V-7

 
V-8

PublicEngagement

As a community-driven planning process, pub-
lic engagement has been central to the itera-
tive development of the Canarsie NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Plan.
Over the course of six months, more than 300
residents, elected officials, and professionals
participated in Canarsie NYRCR events includ-
ing three Public Engagement Events and over
10 Committee Meetings. Public input guided
each step in the reconstruction process, includ-
ing the identification of assets, risks, needs,
strategies, and ultimately the formulation of
projects that are proposed for funding in the
NYRCR Plan. Extensive public engagement
has ensured that the NYRCR Plan reflects the
Canarsie NYRCR Community’s (Community)
priorities for rebuilding and resiliency.

Planning Committee

The Canarsie NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee) is comprised of 7 volunteer
Committee Members and two volunteer
Co-Chairs who represent various constitu-
encies within the Planning Area including but
not limited to, homeowners, civic leaders,
and business owners. Committee Members
serve as ambassadors of the NYRCR process
and are responsible for ensuring Community
voices were heard throughout the process.
The Committee spearheaded community out-
reach, identifying avenues for outreach and

Additional Materials

pa

   

Canarsie residents stayed informed and provided feedback at the Public Engagement Events.

developing a strategy for effectively soliciting
public feedback.

Planning Committee Meetings were the cen-
tral venue for Committee discussion and deci-
sion-making. Specific tasks and discussions
held at the meetings included: identification
of community assets, assessment of critical

issues, needs and opportunities, formaliza-
tion of reconstruction and resiliency strate-
gies, refinement of projects, and finalization
of Proposed and Featured Projects. Planning
Committee Meetings were held at the Hebrew
Educational Society and were open to the pub-
lic. The NYRGR website hitp://stormrecovery.
ny.gov/nyrcr/community/canarsie served as the
official portal of information for the Committee
meetings, including both meeting time and
location, and post-meeting summaries.

Public Engagement Process

Public Engagement Events were designed
to be highly interactive and maximize com-
munity feedback on the priorities and needs
of the community. Three Public Engagement
Events were held prior to the submission of
the NYRCR Plan. The events were similarly
held at the Hebrew Educational Society, a local
community center easily-accessible to mem-
bers of the Community. At the three Public
Engagement Events, the Committee offered
general information about the NYRCR process,
presented outcomes and information gathered
to date and solicited feedback through dynamic
discussions and interactive displays. The
fourth Public Engagement Event will present
the finalized Proposed and Featured Projects
to the public. A translator was on hand at all
events to accommodate Haitian Creole speak-
ers. Following each Public Engagement Event,
community feedback was aggregated and ana-
lyzed in order to guide discussion during sub-
sequent Planning Committee meetings.

Public Engagement Event Outreach
Extensive outreach was undertaken in advance
of each Public Engagement Event. Committee

members leveraged community distribution
channels and relationships with local CBOs to
distribute printed flyers and storefront post-
ers in English and Haitian Creole, specifically
targeting vulnerable populations, such as
seniors, individuals with developmental disabi-
lites, and the linguistically isolated. Flyers were
distributed at a number of local schools and
given to students to bring home to their par-
ents. Committee members also visited English
and Creole churches and asked that flyers be
inserted in church bulletins on Sunday.

The Committee handed out flyers along key
commercial corridors, including at the L train
Station. Email blasts in both English and Haitian
Creole were sent to community centers, local
not-for-profits, schools, religious intuitions,
elected officials, local businesses, and resi-
dents. Online and print advertisement cam-
paigns were launched through two local media
outlets, the Canarsie Courier and Caribbean
Life.

Online Engagement and Social Media
Outreach

The NYRCR website, located at www.storm-
recovery.ny.gov/nyrcr, served as a valuable
public resource. The aforementioned Canarsie
NYRCR page featured announcements, meet-
ing dates and locations, and materials produced

by the Planning Committee throughout the pro-
cess. The NYRCR website also directed visi-
tors to the NYRCR Facebook page (located at
https://www.facebook.com/NYStormRecovery
and Twitter account (@NYStormRecovery).
Communities were also able to submit com-
ments through the NYRCR website and by
emailing info@stormrecovery.ny.gov.

Public Engagement Event #1

(July 2014)

Program Scope; Goals and_ Timeline;
Community feedback on Community Vision,
Critical Issues, Needs and Opportunities,
Geographic Scope and Community Assets
The first Public Engagement Event showcased
the NYRCR program scope and presented the
Planning Committee’s preliminary community
vision, assessment of community assets, crit-
ical issues, and needs and opportunities. The
Public Engagement Event began with a for-
mal presentation to the Community that intro-
duced the NYRCR Program and its objectives.
Following the presentation, an open house style
event was held and Committee Members facili-
tated group discussion and invited input on the
community vision, community assets, critical
issues, and needs and opportunities as featured
on the display boards. While the public engaged
in conversation around the display boards, they
were also invited to write their feedback directly

Additional Materials

V-9
V-10

on the boards. The event ended with a wrap-up,
including reports from each display station and
a general question and answer session. Over
125 members of the Community attended the
event and contributed valuable feedback that
guided subsequent Committee discussions.

Public Engagement Event #2
(September 2014)

Summarized feedback from Public
Engagement Event #1; Presentation of and
gathering community feedback on list of
strategies

The second Public Engagement Event solicited
public responses to the resiliency strategies
presented by the Committee and the public.
The event followed a similar format to the previ-
ous Public Engagement Event and featured an
introductory presentation, an open house with
display boards and feedback mechanisms, and
a wrap-up. Members of the community not
only engaged with Committee members staff-
ing the display boards, but were additionally
encouraged to vote for three of their preferred
resiliency strategies. Once again, the Canarsie
Community was avidly engaged at the event,
with over 100 residents in attendance, and
contributed valuable feedback on the strate-
gies that helped shape the Committee conver-
sation during the formulation of Proposed and
Featured Projects.

Additional Materials

Public Engagement Event #3
(November 2014)

Presentation of and Community feedback
on Proposed and Featured Projects, and
additional resiliency recommendations

The third Public Engagement Event provided
a critical opportunity to share the Proposed
and Featured Projects with the Community
and obtain feedback on these projects. The
event featured an open house with educational
boards on the Proposed and Featured Projects
staffed by Committee members. A central
component of the open house was the projects
voting board which provided a space for the
public to indicate their support for up to three
Proposed and Featured Projects. By the end of
the night, over 60 members of the public partic-
ipated in the voting which provided a range of
feedback on the projects.

Public Engagement Event #4

(January 2015)

Presentation of NYRCR Plan

Public Engagement Event #4 will take place
in January of 2015 and conclude the Public
Engagement Event series. At this event the
Planning Committee will present the Proposed
and Featured Projects as well as the full NYRCR
Plan to the public.
 

 

 

 

 

Lively debate flourished at stations categorized around strategies.

Additional Materials

 
Table V-3: Community Asset Inventory

Meaning of Risk Scores

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Severe (>70)
High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)
Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
5 e{|.|e e | 2/8 2 | §
3 4 2 (€] 2 )s tele] 2]2] ./2122 heels
5 < S 2 |2|2 |2]}2/e/2]e/2s]'. Bale lele
aA > oO a A s a 8 RL fiat =
z = o = 5 3 =
5 a|°
Moderate : :
AVENUE L COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR Economic Employment Hub |No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.00] 2 12
FLATLANDS AVENUE COMMERCIAL Moderate
CORRIDOR Economic Employment Hub |No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.00] 2 12
ROCKAWAY PARKWAY COMMERCIAL Moderate
CORRIDOR Economic Employment Hub |No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.00] 2 12
EVELYN DOUGLIN CTR SERV. PEOPLE IN High Health_and_Social_ }|Healthcare
NEED 9 Services Facilities Yes |No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.50] 2 15
. Supportive
EIHAB HUMAN SERVICES High Housing Housing Yes |No High No No Yes No | Yes} No 1 3 12.00] 2 12
GAN JEWISH DAY CARE CENTER & HEBREW High Health_and_Social_ |Daycare and
EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY g Services Eldercare Yes |No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.50] 2 15
LITTLE PRINCETON NURSERY AND DAY High Health_and_Social_ |Daycare and
CARE CENTER LLC Services Eldercare Yes |No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.50] 2 15
J Health_and_Social_ [Daycare and
BIG APPLE DAY CARE INC. High Services Eldercare Yes |No High No No Yes No | Yes} No 1 3 12.00] 2 12
PACPLEX SPORTS RECREATION AND High Health_and_Social_
EDUCATION COMPLEX Services Schools No No High No 0 Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes 2 3 13.00] 2 18

 

V-12 Additional Materials

 
 

Meaning of Risk Scores

Severe (>70)
High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
= 3 = 3 o | = =| 3 » | &
s g = =| s 1/2 elel2]s/.]/2] 22k. 2]2]/s
i : S = |e] |e P2]sl]2] else] ei als] ale
g =| ° | 86 Le =| 2. ~ | =
3 &|7
Extreme Natural_and_Cultura}Parks and
EMS STATION 58 |_Resources Recreation No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3.73.50] 2 21
Emergency
Moderate Health_and_Social_ JOperations/Resp Yes,
FDNY ENG 257, LAD 170 Services onse No FEMA High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 72.00] 2 12
Extreme Natural_and_Cultura}Parks and
RIVER MANOR CARE CENTER |_Resources Recreation No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3.73.50] 2 21
FOUR SEASONS NURSING AND Moderate Health_and_Social_ |Daycare and
REHABILITATION CENTER Services Eldercare Yes |No High No No Yes Yes | Yes | Yes 2 3 12.50] 2 15
Moderate Health_and_Social_ |Healthcare
FIRST MEDCARE PRIMARY CARE CENTER Services Facilities Yes |No High No No | Yes No | Yes | No 1 3 11.50] 2 9
SUNRISE/PARKSHORE ADULT DAY HEALTH Moderate Health_and_Social_ |Daycare and
CARE CENTER Services Eldercare Yes |No High No No Yes No | Yes | No 1 3 71.50] 2 9
Moderate Health_and_Social_ }Healthcare
STATEN ISLAND UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL Services Facilities Yes |No High No No | Yes No | Yes | No 1 3 11.50] 2 9
Health_and_Social_ ]Healthcare Yes,
SUSAN LEVIT MEDICAL ARTS CENTER Moderate Services Facilities Yes |FEMA High No | No | Yes | No | Yes] Yes} 1.5 3 | 2.00] 2 | 12

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Additional Materials V-13
Meaning of Risk Scores

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Severe (>70)
High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)
Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
= 3 - g » | = | 4 » | &
, 4 2 fe] 2/s]./e]2]2], 12/82 be elels
3 = c 3 a| =£ |} 2ye]/e]/e] 2/2 Ss] 8. Bele] 2]
2 & E B =! 8 | 27&/2)]e]2/4le|l3e% E44 2)2 lz
= 2 ¢ s/ ee =! s/s B| 8 2/2 /é&
& = 3 “1s sl2z “| 3
E s|°
Moderate Health_and_Social_ |Healthcare Yes,
GATEWAY DIALYSIS CENTER Services Facilities Yes  |FEMA High No No Yes No | Yes} No 1 3 11.50) 2 9
LAKESIDE/PARKSHORE ADULT DAY HEALTH Moderate Health_and_Social_ |Daycare and Yes,
CARE CENTER Services Eldercare Yes  |FEMA High No No Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes 2 3 12.50] 2 15
J Health_and_Social_ [Daycare and
FAIRVIEW ADULT DAY CARE CENTER High Services Eldercare Yes  |No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.50] 2 15
Health_and_Social_ |Healthcare Yes,
VERSACARE HEALTH CENTER Moderate Services Facilities Yes |FEMA High No | No | Yes | No | Yes] No 1 3 ]150] 2 | 9
Emergency
Moderate Health_and_Social_ |Operations/Resp Yes,
NYPD 69 PRECINCT Services onse No FEMA High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.00] 3 18
SCHOOL SAFETY BKLYN. SO. OFFICE Moderate Health_and_Social_
(SOUTH SHORE H.S.) Services Schools No No High No No Yes No | Yes | No 1 3 71.50] 2 9
High Health_and_Social_
JOHN WILSON INTERMEDIATE SCHOOL 211 Services Schools No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.50] 2 15
J Health_and_Social_
YESHIVA GEDOLAH OHR YISROEL High Services Schools No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.50] 2 15
J Health_and_social_
YESHIVA ATERES YISROEL High Services Schools No No High No No Yes No | Yes} No 1 3 12.00) 2 12
J Health_and_Social_ |Daycare and
JASA SENIOR DAY CARE CENTER High Services Eldercare No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.50] 2 15

 

V-14 Additional Materials

 
Meaning of Risk Scores

Severe (>70)
High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
= 2 ~ 2 2 | = 2/3 _ » | &
« g g = | el=tslel2lslelzel2¢k-lé2/2ls
E = © Z e| = | 22/2/22 els] ei Bale |2le
g =] ° [és “|e =| 2 ~ | =
E al?
J Health_and_social_
BROOKLYN HEBREW SCHOOL High Services Schools No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.50] 2 15
Moderate Health_and_Social_
SOUTH SHORE EDUCATIONAL COMPLEX Services Schools No No High No No Yes No | Yes | No 1 3 11.50] 2 9
Health_and_social_
CANARSIE EDUCATIONAL COMPLEX Moderate Services Schools No  |No High No | No | Yes | No | Yes] No 1 3 |150]/ 2 | 9
Moderate Health_and_Social_
HERMAN SCHREIBER PUBLIC SCHOOL 279 Services Schools No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.00} 2 12
CANARSIE-ROCKAWAY PARKWAY STATION Moderate Infrastructure_Syste
(L TRAIN AND BUS) ms Transportation |No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 | 2.00] 3 18
Infrastructure_Syste
MTA FACILITY Moderate ms Transportation |No No High No | No | Yes | No | Yes| Yes| 1.5 3 |2.00] 2 | 12
Infrastructure_Syste Yes,
GAS STATION (#1) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No |FEMA  |High No | No | Yes | No | Yes] No 1 3 [150] 3 | 14
Intrastructure_syste Yes,
GAS STATION (#2) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No |FEMA — {High No | No | Yes | No | Yes} Yes| 1.5 3 | 200] 3 | 18
Intrastructure_syste Yes,
GAS STATION (#3) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No  |FEMA — |High No | No | Yes | No | Yes} Yes| 1.5 3 | 200] 3 | 18
Infrastructure_Syste Yes,
GAS STATION (#4) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No |FEMA — JHigh No | No | Yes | No | Yes] No 1 3/150] 3 | 14
Intrastructure_syste Yes,
GAS STATION (#5) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No |FEMA — High No | No | Yes | No | Yes] No 1 3 1150] 3 | 14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Additional Materials V-15
Meaning of Risk Scores

Severe (>70)
High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
a el - {38 2 | = =| 3 2 | §
a > oO 3 na Ss a aA a Ss
Z = ° = 3 = =
Z s|-
Intrastructure_syste Yes,
GAS STATION (#6) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No |FEMA — |High No | No | Yes | No | Yes] No 1 3 1150] 3 | 14
Intrastructure_syste Yes,
GAS STATION (#7) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No |FEMA — |High No | No | Yes | No | Yes] No 1 3 1150] 3 | 14
Infrastructure_Syste Yes,
GAS STATION (#8) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No |FEMA JHigh No | No | Yes | No | Yes| Yes} 1.5 3 | 2.00] 3 | 18
Intrastructure_syste Yes,
GAS STATION (#9) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No |FEMA — |High No | No | Yes | Yes | Yes} Yes 2 3 |250| 3 | 23
Infrastructure_Syste Yes,
GAS STATION (#10) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No |FEMA — |High No | No | Yes | No | Yes} Yes] 1.5 3 | 200] 3 | 18
Infrastructure_Syste Yes,
GAS STATION (#11) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No |FEMA — |High No | No | Yes | No | Yes] No 1 3 ]150| 3 | 14
Intrastructure_oyste Yes,
GAS STATION (#12) Moderate ms Liquid Fuels No |FEMA — JHigh No | No | Yes | No | Yes} No 1 3/150] 3 | 14
Infrastructure_Syste
AVENUE M PUMPING STATION (NycDEP) [Moderate dng Wastewater [No [No High | No | No | Yes | No | Yes] Yes} 1.5 3 | 2.00| 4 | 24
Moderate Infrastructure_Syste
PAERDEGAT PUMPING STATION (NYCDEP) ms Wastewater No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes 2 3 72.50] 4 30
J Intrastructure_syste
BELT PARKWAY High ms Transportation |No No High No No Yes Yes | Yes | Yes 2 3 13.00] 2 18
THTaStUCture_oyste
E 105 STREET STATION (L TRAIN) Moderate ms Transportation |No No High No No | Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 | 2.00] 3 | 18

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

V-16 Additional Materials
Meaning of Risk Scores

Severe (>70)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)
Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
5 e{ = {3 g | =| 3 2» | &
g 4 = = 3 SfT.-/2¢]2/8/.]/212¢h s/2 |e
3 = S 2 2/ =£_ | 272/22] 2/2/15] 5. Ese] 2/4
< 2 2 B =| efe|/ef]e]2 4/2] ee FF] 2]2]2
< z s|é | & a |= SB) ge e|2 |=
2 = S = =| “|S
E a|°
High Natural_and_Cultura]Parks and
CANARSIE PIER |_Resources Recreation No No High No Yes Yes Yes | Yes | Yes 2.5 3.73.50] 2 21
High Natural_and_Cultura]Parks and
JAMAICA BAY GREENWAY |_Resources Recreation No No High No Yes Yes Yes | Yes | Yes 2.5 3.73.50] 2 21
High Natural_and_Cultura}Parks and
WILSON PLAYGROUND |_Resources Recreation No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 72.50] 2 15
High Natural_and_Cultura
FRESH CREEK NATURE PRESERVE |_Resources Natural Habitats [No No High No Yes Yes Yes | Yes | No 2 3 73.00] 2 18
High Natural_and_Cultura]Parks and
CANARSIE PARK |_Resources Recreation No No High No Yes Yes Yes | Yes | Yes 2.5 3.73.50] 2 21
Extreme Natural_and_Cultura
PAERDEGAT BASIN |_Resources Water Bodies No No High No Yes Yes Yes | Yes | No 2 3.) 4.00] 1 12
Extreme Natural_and_Cultura
FRESH CREEK |_Resources Water Bodies No No High No Yes Yes Yes | Yes | No 2 3.) 4.00] 1 12
High Natural_and_Cultura]Community
HEBREW EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY |_Resources Centers No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3.72.50] 3 23
Additional Materials V-17
Meaning of Risk Scores

 

 

 

 

 

Severe (>70)
High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)
Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
= =| . 2 2 | 2) 3 o | 8
‘ g - (£] 2 /2]ele]2}elel2]22keleléls
3 = S 2 e| = |Z]2/2]/2]2/2 3] 2: Bale ]2le
“a > oO a A = a 8 a fiat =
< = o = S 2 >
5 a|°
Moderate Natural_and_CulturajCommunity
BAYVIEW COMMUNITY CENTER (NYCHA) |_Resources Centers No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 72.00] 2 | 12
Cultural or
Moderate Natural_and_Cultura]Religious
HOLY FAMILY ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH |_Resources Establishments |No No High No No Yes No | Yes | No 1 3.71.50] 2 9
J Mult-Family
HOUSING IN HIGH RISK AREAS High Housing Residence No No High No Yes | Yes No | Yes | Yes 2 3 13.00] 3 27

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

V-18 Additional Materials
Endnotes

Introduction
1. Licensed under Creative Commons BY-NC-ND 2.0

2. Five of the Round | Planning Areas —Niagara,
Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery
Counties—are not funded through the CDBG-DR
program.

3 10-year storm protections are currently assessed
at 7.7' North American Vertical Datum of 1988.

Section |

1 ESRI. “Census 2010 Summary Profile: Canarsie.”
2010 U.S. Census. U.S. Census Bureau, 2010.
Web. 3 September 2014.

2 ESRI. “ACS Population Summary: Canarsie.”
2008-2012 American Community Survey, U.S.
Census Bureau, 2008-2012. Web. 3 September
2014.

3 Melendez, Steven. Analysis of NYC Department
of Administrative Services data, 2014. 15 October,
2014.

4 The median home value in the planning area.
ESRI. “ACS Population Summary: Canarsie.”
2008-2012 American Community Survey, U.S.
Census Bureau, 2008-2012. Web. 3 September
2014.

10

11

ESRI. “Census 2010 Summary Profile: Canarsie.”
2010 U.S. Census. U.S. Census Bureau, 2010.
Web. 3 September 2014.

ESRI. “ACS Population Summary: Canarsie.”
2008-2012 American Community Survey, U.S.
Census Bureau, 2008-2012. Web. 3 September
2014.

Del Priore, Jerry. “Avenue L Merchants
Association Receives Non-Profit Group Status.”
Canarsie Courier. Canarsie Courier Publications,
Inc., 25 March 2010. Web. 10 August 2014.

NYC Department of Environmental Protection.
“DEP Completes Paerdegat Basin CSO Facility.”
NYC Department of Environmental Protection, 05
May 2011. Web. 11 August 2014.

Richardson, Todd and Winter, Ben. “Analysis of

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

12

13

14

ESRI. “ACS Population Summary: Canarsie.”
2008-2012 American Community Survey, U.S.
Census Bureau, 2008-2012. Web. 3 September
2014.

NYC Special Initiative for Rebuilding and
Resiliency. “A Stronger, More Resilient, New
York.” NYC Special Initiative for Rebuilding and
Resiliency, June 2013. Web. 2 August 2014.

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. “FACT SHEET -
Atlantic Coast of New York City, East Rockaway
Inlet to Rockaway Inlet (Rockaway Beach) and
Jamaica Bay.” U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
September 2014. Web. 2 December 2014.

Section II

1

Communities Impacted by Hurricane Sandy.” U.S.

Department of Housing and Urban Development,
29 January 2013. PDF. 29 July 2014.

NYU Furman Center. “State of New York City’s
Housing and Neighborhoods in 2013.” NYU
Furman Center, 2013. PDF. 25 August 2014.

Lefkowitz, Melanie. “Diverse Housing, Parks and
Challenges in Canarsie, Brooklyn.” Wall Street
Journal, August 22, 2014. Web. 25 August 2014.

NYC Department of Parks and Recreation.
“Paerdegat Basin Park.” NYC Department of
Parks and Recreation, 2014. Web. 29 August
2014.

NYC Department of Environmental Protection.
“Paerdegat Basin Natural Area Park and Ecology
Park.” Slideshare.net, 6 May 2014. Web. 16
September 2014.

NYC Department of Environmental Protection.
“NYC Wastewater Resiliency Plan.” NYC
Department of Environmental Protection, October
2013. Web. 12 September 2014.

Additional Materials V-19
NYC Department of Parks and Recreation. “Dead
Tree and Stump Removal.” NYC Department of
Parks and Recreation, 2014. Web. 29 August
2014.

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. “Hudson Raritan
Estuary Comprehensive Restoration Plan -
Potential Restoration Opportunities - Project
Summary Sheets Jamaica Bay NY.” U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, June 2014. Web. 29 July
2014.

NY Governor’s Press Office. “Governor Cuomo
Signs Legislation to Lower Speed Limit in New
York City.” NY Governor’s Press Office, 9 August
2014. Web. 10 October 2014.

NYC Department of Transportation. “Bus

Rapid Transit Phase II: Future Corridors.” NYC
Department of Transportation, Metropolitan
Transit Agency, June 2010. Web. 23 August 2014.

U.S. Department of Agriculture. “Food Access
Research Atlas.” U.S. Department of Agriculture,
May 2014. Web. 23 August 2014.

Federal Emergency Management Agency.
“Community Emergency Response Teams.”
Federal Emergency Management Agency, May
2014. Web. 12 August 2014.

V-20 Additional Materials

Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Section Ill

1

Licensed under Creative Commons, BY-NC-ND
2.0 https://flic.kr/p/fAtjH, cropped from original.

2 Asanexample, a 2011 study compared the

economic impacts related to spending at a local
stores and chain stores. The study found that
every $100 spent at a local store contributed an
additional $58 to the local economy, while every
$100 spent at a chain store contributed only $33
to the local economy.

Martin, Garrett and Patel, Amar. “Going Local:
Quantifying the Economic Impacts of Buying from
Locally Owned Businesses in Portland, Maine.”
Maine Center for Economic Policy, December
2011.” Web. 14 August 2014.

Section IV

1

Fresh Creek Coastal Protection
10-year storm protections are currently assessed
at 7.7' North American Vertical Datum of 1988.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, HR&A Analysis.
“Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
2012.” Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012. Excel. 30
November 2014.

Canarsie Pier Access Improvements
3 NYC.gov. “Vision Zero View.” NYC Open-Data, 1

October 2014. Web. 30 November 2014.

10

11

Bureau of Labor Statistics, HR&A Analysis.
“Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
2012.” Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012. Excel. 30
November 2014.

Krauss, John. “NYC Crashmapper.” Crashmapper.
com, February 2014. Web. 30 November 2014.

NYC.gov. “Vision Zero View.” NYC Open-Data, 1
October 2014. Web. 30 November 2014.

Canarsie Youth Environmental Education
Program

Licensed under Creative Commons, BY-NC-SA
2.0 hitp:/flic.kr/ploqMxTu

Licensed under Creative Commons, BY-NC-SA
2.0 hitos://flic.kr/pin8X5yc

Canarsie and Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront Stormwater Study and

Pilot Projects

Licensed under Creative Commons, BY-NC-ND
2.0 http://flic.kripHHATJH

Bureau of Labor Statistics, HR&A Analysis.
“Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
2012.” Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012. Excel. 30
November 2014.

Licensed under Creative Commons, BY 2.0
https://flic.krip/gRzith
12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Recovery Community Center
Based on existing scope of project.

Critical Facility Upgrades Program
Bureau of Labor Statistics, HR&A Analysis.
“Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
2012.” Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012. Excel. 30
November 2014.

Canarsie Corps Program
Licensed under Creative Commons, BY 2.0
hitp://flic.kr/pld9y49o

http://1.usa.gov/1BiuVeZ

Center for an Urban Future. “Bridging The
Disconnect.” Center for an Urban Future, 2014.
Web. 13 October 2014.

Estimate based on percentage of youth in
Canarsie and city-wide youth unemployment
rate. Center for an Urban Future. “Bridging The
Disconnect.” Center for an Urban Future, 2014.
Web. 13 October 2014.

ESRI. “ACS Population Summary: Canarsie.” 2008-
2012 American Community Survey, U.S. Census
Bureau, 2008-2012. Web. 3 September 2014.

Resiliency Workforce Development
“Resident Economic Empowerment &
Sustainability (REES) Program Information.” New

19

20

21

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

York City Housing Authority. NYCHA. 11 June
2013. Web. 3 Mar 2014.

Resilient Streetscaping

NYC Department of Transportation. “The
Economic Benefit of Sustainable Streets.” NYC
Department of Transportation, 2012. Web. 13
October 2014.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, HR&A Analysis.
“Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
2012.” Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2012. Excel. 30
November 2014.

HR&A Advisors, Inc. “Retail survey analysis of
Google Streetview.” HR&A Advisors, Inc., October
2014. Web. October 2014.

Additional Materials

V-21
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

V-22

Glossary

ACS

United States Census Bureau American Community
Survey A continuous survey provided by the United
States Census Bureau that provides demographic
data between decennial censuses.

ADA

{Americans with Disabilities Act) A United States

law enacted by Congress prohibiting discrimination
against people with disabilities in employment, trans-
portation, public accommodation, communications,
and government activities.

BFE

(Base Flood Elevation) The computed elevation
resulting from floodwater that has a 1% chance of
equaling or exceeding that level in a given year.

BLS

(United States Bureau of Labor Statistics) The agency
within the United States Department of Labor respon-
sible for measuring and tracking employment rates
and projections, workplace conditions, employee
benefits and earnings, commodity prices, sector pro-
ductivity, and other statistics concerning the United
States labor market.

BRT

(Bus Rapid Transit) A bus-based mass transit
system that operates with a variety of dedicated
lanes, busway alignment, off-board fare collection,

Additional Materials

intersection treatment, and platform-level boarding to
reduce delays of a typical bus transit system. Within
New York City it is operated jointly by the New York
City Department of Transportation NYC DOT and the
Metropolitan Transportation Authority MTA.

CBO
{Community-Based Organization) A not-for-profit
organization that operates within a local community.

CDBG-DR

{Community Development Block Grant-Disaster
Recovery) Federal grants administered by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Develop-
ment HUD and allotted to cities, counties, and states
to facilitate rebuilding and recovery of disaster-im-
pacted areas as designated by the President of the
United States.

CDFI

{Community Development Financial Institution)

A community-based organization CBO tasked with
administering grants, providing credit and capital
loans, financing home improvements, and investing
in economically underserved communities as man-
dated by the 1994 establishment of the CDFI Fund as
a federal agency within the United States Department
of Treasury.

CEQR
(New York City Environmental Quality Review) The

New York State Environmental Quality Review SEQR
Act-mandated process by which City agencies
determine the environmental effect, if any, of the
City’s approval of a discretionary action.

CERT

{Community Emergency Response Team) An orga-
nization composed of volunteers trained and tasked
to provide supplementary emergency care during a
major disaster.

CRP

(Comprehensive Restoration Plan) A master plan de-
veloped among stakeholders to facilitate ecosystem
restoration within a defined area.

cso

(Combined Sewer Overflow) Water pollution caused
by large variations of flow in a sewer system that
collects both sanitary sewage and stormwater runoff
in a single pipe system.

CUNY
{City University of New York) The public university
system of New York City.

EMT

(Emergency Management Technician) A profession-
al trained to provide immediate medical care, life
support, and specialized transportation in advance
of a patient’s admission to a medical facility fora
life-threatening injury or illness.

FDNY

{Fire Department of the City of New York) The New
York City government agency responsible for provid-
ing first responders to fires, public safety and emer-
gency situations, disasters, and acts of terrorism.

FEMA

(Federal Emergency Management Agency) An agency
within the United States Department of Homeland
Security responsible for the coordination of the re-
sponse to a state-of-emergency-declared disaster.

FIRM

(Flood Insurance Rate Map) The official map of a
community used by the Federal Emergency Man-
agement Agency FEMA to delineate a community’s
base flood elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries.

GMP

{General Management Plan) A plan developed and
implemented by the United States National Park
Service NPS concerning the preservation, protection,
and management of a national park.

HMP
{Hazard Mitigation Plan) A New York City plan,
revised in 2014 by the Office of Emergency Manage-

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

ment NYC OEM and the Department of City Planning
NYC DCP, that assesses the City’s risk and provides
city-wide mitigation strategies for natural disasters.

HRE

{Hudson Raritan Estuary) An estuary within the
boundaries of New York State and New Jersey State
that includes Jamaica Bay, Lower Bay, Arthur Kill, Kill
Van Kull, Newark Bay, Hackensack River and Passaic
River, Lower Hudson River, Harlem River, East River,
Western Long Island Sound, and Upper Bay.

HRE CRP

(Hudson Raritan Estuary Comprehensive Resto-
ration Plan) A plan developed in 2009 by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers USACE and the Port
Authority of New York/New Jersey that established a
vision, master plan, and strategy for future ecosys-
tem restoration in the New York/New Jersey Harbor.

HSE

{High School Equivalency) The educational level
equal to that of a high school degree and granted
by New York State’s High School Equivalency Office
within the State’s Department of Education NYS ED
through the administration of the Test Assessing
Secondary Completion TASC, intended for students
unable to achieve a high school diploma by the time
they become 21 years of age.

HUD

(United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development) The United States Federal government
executive department responsible for executing fed-
eral policies concerning housing and metropolises.

HUD RBD

{HUD Rebuild by Design) A design competition
launched in June 2013 by the United States Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development HUD under
Secretary Sean Donovan with the goals of addressing
structural and environmental vulnerabilities exposed
by Hurricane Sandy throughout the northeast and
developing fundable solutions for protection against
natural disasters in light of climate change.

JBRWG

(Jamaica Bay Regional Working Group) A collection
of representatives from the NY Rising Community Re-
construction NYRCR communities closest to Jamaica
Bay tasked with reviewing the NYRCR Final Plan.

LED

{Light-Emitting Diode) A semiconductor device
through which a current passes through in one di-
rection and upon doing so gives off light for practi-
cal usage as a light source in electronic equipment
components. The type of light source emits less
energy and is therefore more efficient than other light

sources.

Additional Materials V-23
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

V-24

MTA

(Metropolitan Transportation Authority) A public
benefit corporation responsible for providing public
transportation in twelve counties in southeastern
New York and two counties in southwestern Con-
necticut.

NDRF

{National Disaster Recovery Framework) A guide
provided by Federal Emergency Management Agen-
cy FEMA that provides a flexible, recovery-support
structure for disaster-impacted areas.

NFIP

(National Flood Insurance Program) A Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency FEMA-run program that
provides government-sponsored flood insurance to

homeowners, renters, and business owners.

NHS

{Neighborhood Housing Services) A not-for-profit
community-based organization CBO that provides
financial and lending services and counseling for
homeowners and engages in the preservation of
affordable housing within the New York City metro-
politan area with particular attention to five neighbor-
hoods in Brooklyn, the Bronx, and Queens.

NOAA

{National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)
A scientific agency within the United States Depart-

Additional Materials

ment of Commerce responsible for monitoring the
condition of the environment, including the oceans
and the atmosphere.

NPCG

(New York City Panel on Climate Change) A
cross-disciplinary task force —comprised of sci-
entists, academics, and legal, insurance, and risk
management professionals — established within the
Mayor’s Office in August 2008 and supported by the
Rockefeller Foundation in tandem with the PlaNYC
initiative and the New York City Mayor's Office of

Long-Term Planning and Sustainability OLTPS efforts.

NPS

(United States National Park Service) The United
States Federal government executive department re-
sponsible for the management of national parks and
monuments, as well as historic properties.

NYBDC

(New York Business Development Corporation) An
organization that promotes small business interests
in New York State by providing loans through the
Empire State Certified Development Corporation.

NYC Business Solutions

(New York City Business Solutions Centers) A net-
work of hubs throughout the City, established in
2005 and under the auspices of the New York City

Department of Small Business Services SBS, offering
a range of free services dedicated to business estab-
lishment, operation, and expansion.

NYC DCAS

(New York City Department of Citywide Administra-
tive Services) The New York City government agency
responsible for providing support to other agencies
through recruiting, hiring, and training municipal
employees and ensuring equal employment opportu-
nities; managing facilities, utility accounts, real estate
assets, and city-owned fleets; overseeing supplies
and equipment; and promoting energy management
and conservation.

NYC Building Resiliency Task Force

An extensive team of 200 volunteer professionals
created by the Urban Green Council—the not-for-
profit New York City chapter of the United States
Green Building Council USGBC —tasked by the City
with putting forth recommendations for resiliency
initiatives, thirty-three of which were released in June
2013, in part through collaboration with the Special
Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency SIRR.

NYC DCP

(New York City Department of City Planning) The
New York City government agency responsible for
the strategic development of the City’s physical and
socioeconomic planning.
NYC DEP

(New York City Department of Environmental Protec-
tion) The New York City government agency respon-
sible for providing the City’s water supply; managing
the City’s wastewater system; and regulating the
City’s environment, including air quality, hazardous
waste, and quality of life issues.

NYC DOB

(New York City Department of Buildings) The New
York City government agency responsible for the en-
forcement of building codes and zoning regulations,
the issuance of building permits, and the inspection
of new and existing buildings.

NYC DOE

(New York City Department of Education) The New
York City government agency responsible for man-
aging, maintaining, and funding public schools and
educational programs, accounting for pre-kinder-
garten through twelfth grade; adult and continuing
education; and career and technical instruction.

NYC DOHMH

(New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene) The New York City government agency
responsible for enacting and administering policy for,
and ensuring public awareness of, a range of health
initiatives and services.

NYC DOT

{New York City Department of Transportation) The
New York City government agency responsible for
the management of the City’s transportation infra-

structure.

NYC DPR

(New York City Department of Parks and Recreation)
The New York City government agency responsible
for the management of City parks, monuments, and
historic house museums; the preservation of the
City’s ecological diversity; and the provision of recre-
ational and athletic facilities and programs.

NYR HRO

(New York City Mayor’s Office of Housing Recovery
Operations) A New York City government agency
founded in 2013 to assist municipal residents with
hurricane recovery through such initiatives as the
Build it Back Program.

NYC OEM

(New York City Office of Emergency Management)
The New York City government agency responsible
for preparation, coordination, and education con-
cerning emergency response and recovery.

NYC ORR

(New York City Office of Recovery and Resiliency)
The New York City government agency, established
in March 2014, responsible for implementation of

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

citywide initiatives set forth in A Stronger, More Re-
silient New York SIRR Report, as well as assisting the
New York City Mayor’s Office of Long-Term Planning
and Sustainability OLTPS with enacting long-term
goals established in 2007 by the PlaNYC initiative.

NYC REDG

(New York City Regional Economic Development
Council) One of ten regional councils, created by
Governor Andrew M. Cuomo, tasked with develop-
ing strategic plans over the long-term for economic
growth in New York City.

NYC SBS

(New York City Department of Small Business
Services) The New York City government agency re-
sponsible for promoting small businesses’ economic
growth, providing technical assistance, and assisting
businesses with employment.

NYCHA

(New York City Housing Authority) A public authority
responsible for administering public housing for low-
and moderate-income residents in New York City.

NYPD

(New York City Police Department) The New York City
government agency responsible for the City’s law
enforcement.

Additional Materials V-25
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

V-26

NYRCR

{NY Rising Community Reconstruction) A New York
State program established by Governor Andrew M.
Cuomo to provide additional rebuilding and revi-
talization assistance to communities damaged by
Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical
Storm Lee.

NYS DEC

(New York State Department of Environmental Con-
servation) The New York State government agency
responsible for the conservation, improvement, and
protection of natural resources; the management of
State-owned lands; and the regulation of environ-
mental laws and regulations.

NYS DOS

(New York State Department of State) The New York
State government agency responsible for strategic
investment in the revitalization and economic growth
of regions.

NYS ED

(New York State Department of Education) The New
York State government agency, under the auspices
of the elected New York State Board of Regents

and part of the University of the State of New York
educational services system, responsible for carrying
out the Board’s education policy, including State
curriculum and testing, and comprising offices over-
seeing pre-kindergarten through high school, higher

Additional Materials

education, cultural education, and adult career and
continuing education services.

NYS REDCG

{New York State Regional Economic Development
Council) The ten regional councils, created by Gov-
ernor Andrew M. Cuomo, tasked with developing
long-term strategic plans for economic growth in
New York City.

OLTPS

(New York City Mayor’s Office of Long-Term Planning
and Sustainability) The New York City government
agency, instituted within the Mayor’s Office in 2008,
responsible for enacting short-term strategies and
approving long-term studies for enhancing quality

of life, responding to climate change, and promoting
sustainability, as well as for putting forth the PlaNYC

initiative.

PlaNYG

A report published in 2007 and overseen jointly

by the New York City Mayor’s Office of Long-Term
Planning and Sustainability OLTPS and the New York
City Office of Recovery and Resiliency NYC ORR
that seeks to increase the City’s sustainability and
resiliency in the face of climate change by propos-
ing strategies to be accomplished by the year 2030.
Progress will be reported annually and the plan will
be revised every four years.

ROW
(Right-of-way) A strip of land granted or reserved for
public purposes.

SBA

(United States Small Business Administration) The
United States Federal agency, created in 1953,
responsible for protecting the interests of small busi-
nesses by providing financial assistance, counseling,
and training; promoting and guiding subcontractor
procurement opportunities; advocating for legislation
and fair treatment; conducting research; and sup-
porting businesses of underserved subsets.

SBS

(Select Bus Service) The Bus Rapid Transit BRT
system of New York City operated jointly by the New
York City Department of Transportation NYC DOT and
the Metropolitan Transportation Authority MTA.

SEQR

{New York State Environmental Quality Review) A
State-mandated process by which the sponsoring
or approving government body determines and mit-
igates the environmental effect, if any, of a govern-
ment entity’s approval of a discretionary action.

SFHA

(Special Flood Hazard Area) An area within the base
floodplain designated by the National Flood Insur-
ance Program NFIP and indicated on Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency’s FEMA Flood Insurance
Rate Map FIRM.

SIRR

{Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency) A
special task force convened by the City in December
2012 to assess damage in the wake of Superstorm
Sandy and consider implications for climate change
and sea level rise as they might affect the City mov-
ing forward.

SIRR

(Report A Stronger, More Resilient New York) A
comprehensive citywide plan released in 2013 and
commissioned by the City detailing actionable
recommendations for rebuilding and increasing the
resiliency of communities and infrastructure impact-
ed by Superstorm Sandy.

TASG

{Test Assessing Secondary Completion) The New
York State-approved achievement test, instituted
January 1, 2014 and administered by the State’s High
School Equivalency HSE Office within the State’s
Department of Education NYS ED, assessing mastery
of the educational level equivalent to a high school
degree.

Canarsie— NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

USACE

(United States Army Corps of Engineers) The United
States Federal agency, under the Department of
Defense, composed of civilian and military person-
nel and responsible for providing public and military
engineering services.

USDA

(United States Department of Agriculture) The United
States Federal government executive department re-
sponsible for monitoring and promoting the country’s
agricultural economy; financially assisting rural com-
munities; supporting conservation and restoration

of natural resources; providing nutrition information;
and promoting food safety.

USGBC

(United States Green Building Council) A national
not-for-profit organization, comprised of chapters
and collaborating extensively with numerous partner
institutions, dedicated to promoting sustainability in
building design and construction through advocacy
and professional education opportunities.

WWTP
{Wastewater Treatment Plant) A facility designed to
remove biological or chemical waste products.

Additional Materials

V-27
Canarsie—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

V-28 Additional Materials
 
