NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

FIRE ISLAND

ARTISTIC

BEAUTIFUL

SMALL TOWN

SERENITY

BOATING SUNNY
CALM
escape
RELAXATION

CARING HISTORIC
inspiring
DUNES
PEACEFUL

SPECIAL
PARADISE
water
SIMPLE FUN
FAMILY

people

FRIENDS relax

SAFE CALM

STRONG DUNES

NEIGHBORLY

HAPPY
BEACH SUN

STRONG DUNES TRANQUILITY
TIMELESS SUNSETS SURF
BOATING SOOTHING SURF
SPECIAL FRIENDLY NATURE
NATURAL BEAUTY OASIS
CULTURE BEACHES OCEAN
CULTURE FAMILY OCEAN
WAGONS SMALL TOWN
PEACEFUL UNIQUE FUN
TRANQUILITY BEACHES
FISHING PARADISE
PEACEFUL COMMUNITY
PROTECTING NO CARS

PARADISE

OCEAN

HISTORIC

BOATING

WILDLIFE

NATURAL

QUIET

FRESH AIR

PEOPLE

HISTORIC

home
FRIENDLY

CULTURAL

STRONG DUNES

INSPIRING

DIVERSE

FRIENDSHIP

BICYCLES

ARTISTIC

beaches

SMALL TOWN

neighborhoods

SMALL TOWN

BEACHES

CULTUREBEACHES
fresh air FRAGILE HOME

RELAXATION

OASIS
NATURE ocean
FRIENDLY

FRIENDLY

NEIGHBORS

FISHING

FISHING COMMUNITY

WELCOMING

ESCAPE
SMALL TOWN BEAUTIFUL
OCEAN

HISTORIC DEER

wildlife RELAXATION

SENSE OF COMMUNITY

SANCTUARY BEACHES

REJUVENATING

BIKES

SIMPLE serenity

ACCEPTANCE BARE FEET

SAFE

NO CARS SAFE

POOL

NATURE

RELATIONSHIPS

QUIET
FRIENDLY
people
CULTURE

beaches PEACEFUL

SERENITY BEAUTIFUL STRONG DUNES HAVEN CALM FRESH AIR RESTORATIVE SAFE FRAGILE SIMPLE WELL MAINTAINED CLEAN
FRIENDLY ARTISTIC TRANQUIL UNIQUE WELCOMING BIKES ESCAPE RELAXING WILDLIFE BARE FEET OASIS PEACEFUL SUNSETS SURF
RECREATION PEOPLE

FAMILY SOLITUDE

HISTORIC ACCEPTANCE ICE CREAM HEAVENLY PROTECTION QUIET FISHING NATURE OCEAN

BOATING OCEAN MAGICAL PRIVATE WARM SAND BEACHES WAGONS SMALL TOWN COMMUNITY FAMILY TIMELESS PARADISE NATURAL CALM

MARCH 2014

This document was developed by the Fire Island Planning Committee as part of the NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Program within the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR). The NYRCR Program is supported by NYS Homes
and Community Renewal, NYS Department of State, and NYS Department of Transportation. Assistance was provided by the
following consulting firms (NYRCR Consultant Team):
 Jacobs
 Cameron Engineering & Associates, LLP
Table 1: Fire Island NYRCR Committee Member List

Committee
Role
Co‐Chair
Co‐Chair
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member

Name
Susan Barbash
Suzy Goldhirsch
John Adams
Alan Altman
Dominic Bertucci
Forrest Clock
Judy Corcoran
Alan Goldberg
Vern Hendrickson

*Non‐voting member

Committee
Role
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member

Name
Scott Hirsch
Marsha Hunter
John Lund
Patrick Macri
Tim Mooney
Steve Norring
Mary Parker
Steve Placilla
Jennifer Rider

Committee Role
Federal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative

Name
Chris Soller*
Steve Brautigam*
Bob Cox*
Paul Fusco*
Jim Mallot*
Tom Marquardt*
Tim Mazzei*
Matthew Miner*
Mario Posillico*
Harry Sundin*
Dan Sicilian*

FOREWORD
Introduction
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in August 2011,
the State of New York experienced three extreme weather events.
Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked
havoc on the lives of New Yorkers and their communities. These
tragic disasters signaled that New Yorkers are living in a new reality
defined by rising sea levels and extreme weather events that will
occur with increased frequency and power. They also signaled that
we need to rebuild our communities in a way that will mitigate
against future risks and build increased resilience.

to communities severely damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical
Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy. Drawing on lessons learned from
past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program is a unique combination
of bottom‐up community participation and State‐provided technical
expertise. This powerful combination recognizes not only that
community members are best positioned to assess the needs and
opportunities of the places where they live and work, but also that
decisions are best made when they are grounded in rigorous
analysis and informed by the latest innovative solutions.

To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo led the
charge to develop an innovative, community‐driven planning
program on a scale unprecedented and with resources unparalleled.
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program
empowers the State’s most impacted communities with the
technical expertise needed to develop thorough and implementable
reconstruction plans to build physically, socially, and economically
resilient and sustainable communities.

Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo in April of
2013, is a more than $650 million planning and implementation
process established to provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance
Foreword

Note: Map includes those NYRCR Communities funded through the CDBG‐
DR program, including the NYRCR Communities announced in January
2014.

Page | i

One hundred and two storm‐affected localities across the State
were originally designated to participate in the NYRCR Program. The
State has allocated each locality between $3 million and $25 million
to implement eligible projects identified in the NYRCR Plan. The
funding for these projects is provided through the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community
Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG‐DR) program.1

and proposals. The NYRCR Program’s outreach has included
communities that are traditionally underrepresented, such as
immigrant populations and students. All planning materials are
posted on the NYRCR Program’s website
(www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several ways for
community members and the public to submit feedback on
materials in progress.

Forty‐five NYRCR Communities, each comprising one or more of the
102 localities, were created and led by a NYRCR Planning Committee
composed of local residents, business owners, and civic leaders.
Members of the Planning Committees were identified in
consultation with established local leaders, community
organizations, and in some cases municipalities. The NYRCR
Program sets a new standard for community participation in
recovery and resiliency planning, with community members leading
the planning process. Across the State, more than 500 New Yorkers
represent their communities by serving on Planning Committees.
More than 400 Planning Committee Meetings have been held,
during which Planning Committee members worked with the State’s
NYRCR Program team to develop community reconstruction plans
and identify opportunities to make their communities more
resilient. All meetings were open to the public. An additional 125‐
plus Public Engagement Events attracted thousands of community
members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR planning process

Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were
supported by staff from the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery
(GOSR), planners from New York State (NYS) Department of State
(DOS) and NYS Department of Transportation (DOT), and
consultants from world‐class planning firms that specialize in
engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green infrastructure, and
more.

1

Five of the 102 localities in the program—Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida,
Madison, and Montgomery Counties—are not funded through the CDBG‐
DR program.

Foreword

With the January 2014 announcement of the NYRCR Program’s
expansion to include 22 new localities, the program comprises over
2.7 million New Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which
is equivalent to 14% of the overall State population and 12% of the
State’s overall geography.
The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR Plan. Governor
Cuomo has allocated over $650 million of funding to the program
for implementing projects identified in the NYRCR Plans. NYRCR
Communities are also eligible for additional funds through the
program’s NY Rising to the Top Competition, which evaluates
NYRCR Communities across eight categories, including best use of
technology in the planning process, best approach to resilient
Page | ii

economic growth, and best use of green infrastructure to bolster
resilience. The winning NYRCR Community in each category will be
allocated an additional $3 million of implementation funding. The
NYRCR Program is also working with both private and public
institutions to identify existing funding sources and create new
funding opportunities where none existed before.
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated with State and
Federal agencies to help guide the development of feasible projects.
The program has leveraged the Regional Economic Development
Council’s State Agency Review Teams (SARTs), comprised of
representatives from dozens of State agencies and authorities, for
feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR Communities. The SARTs
review projects with an eye toward regulatory and permitting
needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources.
The NYRCR Program is continuing to work with the SARTs to
streamline the permitting process and ensure shovels are in the
ground as quickly as possible.
On the pages that follow, you will see the results of months of
thoughtful, diligent work by NYRCR Planning Committees,
passionately committed to realizing brighter, more resilient futures
for their communities.

The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more
resilient community. Each NYRCR Planning Committee began the
planning process by defining the scope of its planning area,
Foreword

assessing storm damage, and identifying critical issues. Next, the
Planning Committee inventoried critical assets in the community
and assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On the basis of this work,
the Planning Committee described recovery and resiliency needs
and identified opportunities. The Planning Committee then
developed a series of comprehensive reconstruction and resiliency
strategies, and identified projects and implementation actions to
help fulfill those strategies.
The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan are divided
into three categories. The order in which the projects and actions
are listed in this NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the
NYRCR Community’s prioritization of these projects and actions.
Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding through a
NYRCR Community’s allocation of CDBG‐DR funding. Featured
Projects are projects and actions that the Planning Committee has
identified as important resiliency recommendations and has
analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through the
NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are
projects and actions that the Planning Committee would like to
highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects or
Featured Projects. The Proposed Projects and Featured Projects
found in this NYRCR Plan were voted for inclusion by official voting
members of the Planning Committee. Those voting members with
conflicts of interest recused themselves from voting on any affected
projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics Handbook and Code of
Conduct.
Page | iii

NYRCR Fire Island is eligible for up to $3.0 million in CDBG‐DR
implementation funds.
While developing projects for inclusion in this NYRCR Plan, Planning
Committees took into account cost estimates, cost‐benefit analyses,
the effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and
critical assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning
Committees also considered the potential likelihood that a project
or action would be eligible for CDBG‐DR funding. Projects and
actions implemented with this source of Federal funding must fall
into a Federally‐designated eligible activity category, fulfill a
national objective (meeting an urgent need, removing slums and
blight, or benefiting low to moderate income individuals), and have
a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding is linked. These are
among the factors that the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery will
consider, in consultation with local municipalities and nonprofit
organizations, when determining which projects and actions are
best positioned for implementation.

CDBG‐DR funding or that it will be implemented. The Governor’s
Office of Storm Recovery will actively seek to match projects with
funding sources.
In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions
outlined in this NYRCR Plan will become a reality helping New York
not only to rebuild, but also to build back better.

The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan exceeds the
NYRCR Community’s CDBG‐DR allocation to allow for flexibility if
some Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to
environmental review, HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other
factors. Implementation of the projects and actions found in this
NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State, and local laws
and regulations, including the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan does not
guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for
Foreword

Page | iv

Table of Contents
Foreword
Executive Summary
Section 1:
Community Overview
A. Geographic Scope
B. Description of Storm Damage
C. Critical Issues
D. Community Vision
E. Relationship to Regional Plans
Section 2:
Assessment of Risk and Needs

i
ES‐1
1
14
23
30
31
32
44

A.

Description of Community Assets and
Assessment of Risk
B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
Section 3:
Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

45
67
77

Section 4:

Implementation – Project Profiles

92

Proposed Project: Convene Fire Island Planning Forum
Proposed Project: Employ Local Disaster Recovery
Manager (LDRM)
Proposed Project: Implement an Enhanced GIS
Emergency Management System
Proposed Project: Repair and Reconstruction of
Emergency Access Route
Proposed Project: Emergency Communication Systems
Proposed Project: Air Compressor

96
99
102

Proposed Project: Back‐Up Power Generation for
Critical Facilities
Proposed Project: Engineering and design study for
bayside shoreline management with regulatory
coordination and pilot projects (Phase 1)
Proposed Project: Bayside Shoreline Management
Implementation (Phase 2)
Featured Project: Bayside Shoreline Management
Implementation (Phase 3)
Proposed Project: Make Docks More Resilient ‐ Freight
and passenger dock repairs and improvements
(Phase 1 – Design/Phase 2 – Construction)
Featured Project: Make Docks More Resilient ‐ Freight
and passenger dock repairs and improvements
(Phase 3 – Construction)
Proposed Project: Enhance Revive FI Campaign
Section 5:
Additional Materials
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.

Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Master Table of Projects
Public Engagement Process
Community Asset Inventory
Glossary
End Notes

115

118
118
118

122

122
126
128
129
133
140
146
176
179

105
109
112
Page | v

Table of Figures
Figure 1: Geographic Scope ..................................................................... 15
Figure 2: Geographic Scope and Land Ownership, Map 1 of 3 ................ 16
Figure 3: Geographic Scope and Land Ownership, Map 2 of 3 ................ 17
Figure 4: Geographic Scope and Land Ownership, Map 3 of 3 ................ 18
Figure 5: Jurisdiction Map ........................................................................ 19
Figure 6: Risk Area and Hurricane Inundation, Map 1 of 4 ...................... 46
Figure 7: Risk Area and Hurricane Inundation, Map 2 of 4 ...................... 47
Figure 8: Risk Area and Hurricane Inundation, Map 3 of 4 ...................... 48
Figure 9: Risk Area and Hurricane Inundation, Map 4 of 4 ...................... 49
Figure 10: Assets at Risk, Map 1 of 4 ....................................................... 62
Figure 11: Assets at Risk, Map 2 of 4 ....................................................... 63
Figure 12: Assets at Risk, Map 3 of 4 ....................................................... 64
Figure 13: Assets at Risk, Map 4 of 4 ....................................................... 65
Figure 14: Breach at Old Inlet Location.................................................... 72
Figure 15: GIS Emergency Management Map ....................................... 103
Figure 16: Emergency Access Route Repair and
Reconstruction Locations ................................................................ 107
Figure 17: TOUGHSAT System................................................................ 109
Figure 18: Air Compressor ..................................................................... 112
Figure 19: Back‐up Power Generation Location Map ............................ 117
Figure 20: Dock Design and Dock Repair Locations ............................... 125
Figure 21: Revive FI Logo ....................................................................... 126
Figure 22: View of the Online Public Meeting Website ......................... 143

Page | vi

Table of Tables
Table 1: Fire Island NYRCR Committee Member List .................................. i
Table 2: Economic Resources................................................................... 50
Table 3: Police Stations ............................................................................ 51
Table 4: Fire Stations ................................................................................ 52
Table 5: Federal Non‐Recreation Area ..................................................... 52
Table 6: Schools ....................................................................................... 52
Table 7: State‐owned Buildings and Properties ....................................... 52
Table 8: Town/Village/City Hall................................................................ 52
Table 9: Housing Resources ..................................................................... 53
Table 10: Ferry Terminals ........................................................................ 54
Table 11: Helipads .................................................................................... 54
Table 12: Bridges in Poor Condition......................................................... 54
Table 13: Infrastructure Resources .......................................................... 55
Table 14: Parkland Resources .................................................................. 56
Table 15: Natural Resources .................................................................... 57
Table 16: National Register Listed Historic Resources ............................. 57
Table 17: Asset Key .................................................................................. 60
Table 18: Needs and Opportunities ......................................................... 75
Table 19: Strategy Summary 1 ................................................................. 81
Table 20: Strategy Summary 2 ................................................................. 82
Table 21: Strategy Summary 3 ................................................................. 83
Table 22: Strategy Summary 4 ................................................................. 85
Table 23: Strategy Summary 5 ................................................................. 86
Table 24: Strategy Summary 6 ................................................................. 87
Table 25: Strategy Summary 7 ................................................................. 88

Table 26: Strategy Summary 8 ................................................................. 89
Table 27: Strategy Summary 9 ................................................................. 91
Table 28: Additional Resiliency Recommendations ............................... 129
Table 29: Master Project Table .............................................................. 133
Table 30: Asset Inventory Worksheet.................................................... 150
Table 31: Risk Assessment Tool ............................................................. 164

Page | vii

Executive Summary
Overview of NY Rising Community Reconstruction
Community: Fire Island
NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Fire Island (Community) is one
of eight NYRCR Communities identified
within Suffolk County. The geographic
scope of the NYRCR Fire Island
Community includes the western tip of
Robert Moses State Park eastward
approximately 30 miles to the
municipal Town boundary of
Brookhaven and Southampton,
including the Cupsogue Beach County
Fire Island Lighthouse
Park on the east side of Moriches Inlet.
Photo Credit: Consultant Team
With the exception of a number of bay
islands within the Towns of Islip and Brookhaven and the three large
public parks (Robert Moses State Park at the west end of Fire Island
and Smith Point County Park and Cupsogue Beach County Park at the
east end of the Fire Island), the bulk of the NYRCR Fire Island
Community lies within the boundary and jurisdiction of the Fire
Island National Seashore (FINS). Within this area is all of the
Community “in‐holdings” or privately‐owned real estate within the
outer beach portions of the Towns of Islip and Brookhaven.

Executive Summary

A total of up to $3 million has been allocated for resiliency projects
within this Community.
The Fire Island “neighborhoods” are distinct and discrete Villages and
hamlets totaling 4,000 homes in all, from Kismet on the west end to
Davis Park on the east. Each Village or hamlet averages less than 1%
of Fire Island’s total land area. All the rest of this special island –
more than 80% – consists of spectacular beaches, dunes, and
undeveloped parkland and visitor facilities. FINS contains the Otis
Pike Wilderness area, a unique “Sunken Forest,” a historic
lighthouse, recreational facilities including nature trails and
waterfront access for canoeing, boating and fishing, campgrounds
and the marinas at Watch Hill and Sailors Haven. Residents and
visitors alike get to the island by ferry across the Great South Bay.

Page | ES‐1

There are no paved roads on Fire Island, although there is an
emergency access route through the sand for essential service and
emergency vehicles.
Fire Island has a rich maritime history that predates the European
colonization of Long Island. Much of this history is celebrated at the
museum at the base of the Fire Island Lighthouse. Native Americans
hunted and fished in the vicinity long before Colonists established
settlements and expanded salt hay harvesting, waterfowl hunting
and shell fishing as their primary industries. The booming growth of
New York Harbor after the Civil War also saw the development of the
U.S. Life Saving Service (USLSS), the pre‐cursor of the U.S. Coast
Guard (USCG), which maintains a base at the western end of the
island at Robert Moses State Park.
Today, land use on Fire Island consists mostly of residences with
some institutional and community facilities and small commercial
businesses. Other than two bridges which terminate at parking areas
at the western (Robert Moses Causeway to Robert Moses State Park)
and the eastern ends (William Floyd Parkway to Smith Point County
Park), Fire Island is only accessible by boat.
The impact of Superstorm Sandy on Fire Island was significant. The
barrier beach was battered on both the ocean and the bay sides by
storm surges and high tides which eroded protective beaches and
dunes. A study conducted by the United States Geological Survey
(USGS) after Superstorm Sandy found that "beaches and dunes lost
more than half of their pre‐storm volume… leaving the area more
vulnerable to future storms.” In several places, floodwaters washed
Executive Summary

completely over the island. The overwash scoured the primary travel
route westward, towards Robert Moses Causeway, residential
walkways and critical infrastructure. And, in one place, a new inlet
was created, thereby preventing the evacuation of vehicles and
pedestrians eastward, toward William Floyd Parkway.
Waterfront infrastructure such as freight and recreational docks, and
bulkheads were destroyed. A helipad was damaged. Low‐lying
infrastructure, especially the electrical components of drinking water
pump stations, the sewage treatment plant in Ocean Beach, and
communication facilities, was damaged. Approximately 1,600 homes
were damaged. And, some commercial areas were so severely
damaged they required emergency rebuilding in time for the next
peak season. In total, over 62,000 cubic yards of material were
removed from the island, enough to cover a football field three
stories high.
Fire Island faces unique challenges in its efforts to recover and
rebuild after Superstorm Sandy. The FINS is one of the treasures of
the New York Metropolitan region, as well as one of the most unique
sites within the United States National Park System. The U.S.
National Park Service’s stewardship has helped preserve and protect
Fire Island’s unique ecosystem. This barrier island is also home to 17
distinct communities. These communities range in size, structure,
and composition, with many experiencing large influxes of part‐time
residents and visitors during the summer season. Despite this
fluctuating seasonal population, recovery efforts have been
collaborative in nature, in which residents have chosen to focus on
critical, Island‐wide issues ahead of individual needs.
Page | ES‐2

The constructive dialogue now taking place among Island
communities has been one of the most beneficial outcomes
stemming from the NYRCR process.
NYRCR Program: A Community‐Driven Process
The NYRCR Fire Island Committee expressed concern for a variety of
resiliency issues relating both to protecting the life and safety of
Community members in the face of storm events and fostering
stewardship of the unique barrier island landscape. Some of the
most significant and widespread issues included:
•

•
•
•
•

•

Creating a mechanism for enhanced communication,
collaboration and regional planning among the many Fire
Island interests and the Long Island mainland;
Sustaining commercial, recreational and tourism assets and
functions;
Developing a comprehensive island‐wide ocean and bay
shoreline management strategy;
Maintaining safe access to all communities;
Ensuring that municipalities and first responders, including
fire departments, have the necessary resources to prepare
for and protect the public, property and the natural
environment during and after disasters; and
Mitigating repetitive flooding

The NYRCR Fire Island Planning Committee (Committee) spent
significant time and effort in developing a vision for their
community’s resilient future. This final vision was informed by public
input from community members. The Community Vision Statement
represents a consensus assessment of the direction this Community
wishes to move towards, and is as follows:

As an integral component of the Fire Island National
Seashore, the communities of Fire Island are united
in their determination to strengthen and preserve
this unique, dynamic barrier island for future
generations.
We recognize Fire Island’s critical importance to the
entire region – as Long Island’s first line of defense
against destructive storm surges, a precious natural
resource and ecosystem, and an engine for the Long
Island and New York State economy.
Working collaboratively, we will partner with
governmental agencies on every level to ensure the
island’s resiliency and sustainability, and to secure
Fire Island’s future.

These critical issues inform every aspect of the plan.

Executive Summary

Page | ES‐3

All strategies and projects identified were measured against the
Community Vision Statement to ensure that recommended actions
would help the community achieve its desired goals.
The Public Engagement Process did not end with the development of
the Community Vision Statement. In keeping with Governor Cuomo’s
emphasis on bottom‐up planning, members of the Community were
involved in each step of the NYRCR Program. The NYRCR Committee
was composed of residents who could speak directly from
experience of the character of the community, its needs, and
strengths in good times and bad. Five Committee meetings have
been held. All Committee meetings were open to the public, with
meeting dates and times posted on the NYRCR website
(www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr).
The Community at‐large was invited to take part in the NYRCR
Program through a variety of methods. Their feedback was reviewed
by the Committee and incorporated into the decision‐making that
informed the development of this Plan.
Engagement activities included in‐person and web‐based
opportunities for participation. Three open‐house style events were
held during the development of the plan and a fourth will present
this final document.

Community as possible, Online Public Meetings were held in
conjunction with the initial three public engagement events to allow
anyone to provide feedback on the process through the internet. The
overall format for the online events provided a digital open house
which could be attended at any time 24 hours a day, seven days a
week for a ten‐day timeframe. The Online Public Meeting provided
identical stations to the in‐person meeting and resulted in thousands
of comments from hundreds of people which were summarized for
the Committee’s review and consideration in the planning process.
Younger members of the community were invited to participate in a
web‐based “Next Generation” survey to gather feedback on
proposed projects that would likely affect their futures in the
Community. The NYRCR Fire Island website
(http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr/community/fire‐island) served as
a repository for downloadable versions of all public information and
event notifications. E‐mail comments and requests for information
could be sent to the State and comment forms were available at
Committee meetings and public engagement events to provide an
opportunity for the public to contribute their feedback.

The Fire Island Community is unique in that many of the residents
and employees and virtually all of the visitors are not on Fire Island in
the winter and are dispersed throughout the metropolitan region.
Therefore in order to reach as broad a segment of the Fire Island
Executive Summary

Page | ES‐4

NYRCR Final Plan: A Blueprint for Resiliency







An asset inventory was conducted for the Community to identify
assets, both built and natural, which are critical to the safety,
resiliency, and character of the Community. The identified assets
were evaluated in detail to understand their value to the community,
and the level of risk or potential for damage, during future storm
events. Identification of risks to critical assets provided the
framework within which resiliency strategies were developed.
Strategies are general approaches to types of projects, programs,
policies, or other actions that specifically address an identifiable
need or leverage an existing opportunity within the Community.
Potential strategies were developed to address these needs and
opportunities.
Projects were developed in order to respond to the identified needs
and opportunities and execute the strategies in order to increase the
Community’s resiliency. Three tiers of projects were identified.

Executive Summary

Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding through
the NYRCR Fire Island Community’s allocation of up to $3
million of CDBG‐DR funding.
Featured Projects are projects and actions that the Planning
Committee has identified as important resiliency
recommendations and has analyzed in depth, but has not
proposed for funding through the NYRCR Program.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations are projects and
actions that the Planning Committee would like to highlight
and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects or
Featured Projects.

It is important to note that there is no priority order or ranking of
projects aside from the project tier.
The need to maintain safe access to all communities is addressed by
a strategy to ensure safe and reliable evacuation routes for both
emergency personnel and the general public. A Proposed Project was
developed to repair and increase resiliency of the island’s primary
vehicular east‐west emergency access route. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations that also support this strategy include repairs and
improvements to walks in several communities.
The need to protect the shoreline and reduce flooding is addressed
by a strategy to develop a comprehensive island‐wide shoreline
management program. Two Proposed and one Featured Project
would approach bayside shoreline problems and solutions in a more
comprehensive fashion, reduce future vulnerability, mitigate
repetitive flooding and improve the natural functioning of storm
Page | ES‐5

protective wetlands, dunes and beaches. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations in individual communities were also developed to
support this strategy.
The Committee realized that many issues related to resiliency cannot
be solved on an individual Village or hamlet level. Shoreline
protection has to be looked at comprehensively so one community’s
improvements do not jeopardize neighboring shorelines. Water
systems need to be interconnected so damage in one area can be
addressed by another undamaged source. Emergency response
needs to be coordinated so that neighboring forces can lend aid and
equipment. The strategy to create a mechanism for enhanced
communication, collaboration, and regional planning will address
these types of issues and provide better coordination of essential
services, and increased public awareness regarding resiliency and
emergency preparedness.
The Proposed Project to implement this strategy is the development
of a Fire Island Planning Forum to bring all voices to the table and
address Fire Island‐wide issues in a comprehensive way. This forum
would be an ongoing entity that could seamlessly address issues as
they arise, and before they grow into larger concerns.
An Additional Resiliency Recommendation associated with this
strategy is an Education Campaign for homeowners, renters and
visitors on stewardship and emergency response procedures.
The following table presents all Proposed and Featured Projects by
Strategy:

Executive Summary

Page | ES‐6

NYRCR Fire Island Resiliency Projects
Strategy
Create a mechanism for enhanced communication,
collaboration and regional planning among the many Fire
Island interests and the Long Island mainland
Preserve local home values by minimizing risk of storm
damage and flood insurance rates
Enable municipalities to track structures, damage to
structures, permits, etc.
Enhance communications to improve the ability to
communicate vital information not only on the beach but
to the off‐island agencies that may be assisting
Support businesses before and after an event
Ensure Fire Department personnel have proper access,
rescue and fire suppression equipment for rescue
operations and addressing other hazards (hazardous
materials, restricted access, etc.).
Keep emergency access route passable for emergency
vehicles
Develop a comprehensive island‐wide shoreline
management strategy that includes natural restoration
and engineered stabilization techniques

Identify bayside assets and redundancy for resource and
emergency access

Executive Summary

Project Name

Project
Category

Fire Island Planning Forum

Proposed

Employ Local Disaster Recovery Manager (LDRM)

Proposed

Implement an Enhanced GIS Emergency Management
System

Proposed

Emergency Communication Systems

Proposed

Enhance Revive FI Campaign
Air Compressor – Kismet Fire Department

Proposed
Proposed

Back‐up Power Generation for Critical Facilities

Proposed

Emergency Access Route

Proposed

Engineering and design study for bayside shoreline
management with regulatory coordination and pilot
projects (Phase 1)
Bayside Shoreline Management Implementation (Phase 2)
Bayside Shoreline Management Implementation (Phase 2)
Make Docks More Resilient ‐ Freight and passenger dock
repairs and improvements (Phase 1 – Design)
Make Docks More Resilient ‐ Freight and passenger dock
repairs and improvements (Phase 2 – Construction)
Make Docks More Resilient ‐ Freight and passenger dock
repairs and improvements (Phase 3 – Construction)

Proposed
Proposed
Featured
Proposed
Proposed
Featured

Page | ES‐7

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 1: Community Overview

Fire Island Pines Pavilion
Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 1

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
and Superstorm Sandy
routed hundreds of
thousands of people from
their mainland homes and
businesses and stranded
many for weeks without
power and other services.
Coming hard on the heels of
Hurricane Irene and Tropical
Storm Lee, we knew the
impact was not just
financially draining; it was
deeply emotional.
Dune damage
The people of Fire Island live in a far‐flung collection of small, sandy
places with poetic names and magnetic appeal. We are separated
from the mainland of Long Island by a 30‐minute ferry ride across the
Great South Bay – an island off an island; an impossibly narrow barrier
beach less than 1300 feet in width, a place of sandy beaches, dunes,
sunken forests and back bay coves that beguiles us with its laid back
charm and breathtaking natural splendor. Fire Islanders had company
when Superstorm Sandy struck Long Island with a singular ferocity
that savaged utilities, sewage treatment plants, mass transit systems
and other massive public works. We knew that despite the heroic
efforts of first responders and officials at all levels of government,
working together in ways rarely seen in these fragmented suburbs,
Section 1: Community Overview

But Fire Islanders
experienced the storm in a
significantly different way
than “mainlanders” living in
denser, more accessible
neighborhoods. As the “first
line of defense,” Fire Island
absorbed a direct and
unimpeded hit on our homes,
businesses, docks, bulkheads,
walkways, emergency routes,
and every public service. The
storm surge and winds left
swaths of destruction and

Young and old, owners and renters,
these are the voices of our Fire
Island:
We know how important Fire
Island is to the rest of Long Island
as a barrier beach. We know we
are stewards for more than an
antique lighthouse and rare flora
and fauna…
Fire Island provides a unique
opportunity to escape the hustle
and bustle of everyday life by
bringing us closer to nature and
returning to a simpler way of
living…
We as children were brought up on
frightening stories of the 1938
hurricane that devastated Saltaire.
I remember people saying, “When
the big one comes, I hope the
house floats in one piece!”
It was sad to see how many homes
were badly hurt by Superstorm
Sandy. Rebuilding in a resilient
manner should be encouraged!

Page | 2

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
decimated our protective sand dunes. Very few structures survived
unscathed. The ocean shoreline shifted northward up to 190 feet. In
three places, the surge cut breaches between ocean and bay.

of people did not have to be
removed from harm’s way.
But it also created difficulties
in communicating with
thousands of owners whose
primary residences were
elsewhere.

“Without the natural habitat we
have nothing…”
“The loss of so many trees is
reducing habitat for birds. Fire
Island is a key flyover refuge for
migrating birds. The numbers and
species seem to be much less
now…”

Home damage

Since November 2012, the
effects of Superstorm Sandy
“Restoring and maintaining the
on Fire Island have been well
island’s natural resources are most
documented in news reports,
important…”
video, still photography,
--Posted on virtual town hall
social media, narrative,
meeting
scientific study, and civic
debate. The effects of
Superstorm Sandy have certainly highlighted at once both the fragility
and resilience of the barrier island. To fully understand the effects of
the storm on Fire Island it is vital to look at the connections between
its people, its communities, and its unique natural environment.

While Fire Island residents were spared serious injury, year-rounders
and summer residents alike had to wait for agonizing days to gain
entry onto the island to find out if their home had been swept into the
ocean or damaged beyond repair. A magnet for tourists and
vacationers, reachable most of the year only by ferry, our 17
communities were temporarily more isolated than ever and
inaccessible even to many emergency vehicles. That the storm struck
after the summer season had ended was fortuitous in that thousands

The dynamic nature of Fire Island’s shorelines (both on the ocean and
bay side), coupled with the desire of residents and visitors alike to use
and enjoy these shorelines, presents unique challenges for rebuilding
and recovery after Superstorm Sandy. The Fire Island National
Seashore (FINS) is one of the treasures of the New York region, as well
as one of the most unique sites within the United States National Park
System. The stewardship provided by the U.S. National Park Service
has helped to preserve Fire Island’s unique natural environment and

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 3

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ensure its protection for the future. Yet Fire Island is also home to a
collection of 17 distinct communities. These communities range in
size, structure, and composition, with many communities experiencing
large influxes of part-time residents and visitors during the summer
season. Despite this fluctuating seasonal population, an interesting
aspect of Fire Island’s recovery efforts has been the collaborative work
of these communities and residents to focus on critical, Island-wide
issues ahead of individual needs. The opportunity for dialogue among
Island communities has been one of the most beneficial outcomes
stemming from the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
process.
The work of the NYRCR Fire Island Planning Committee (Committee)
and the hundreds of people who participated in the community-driven
planning set in motion by New York Governor Andrew M. Cuomo, as
well as local and Federal officials, was important to our Community.
With the assistance of our State planners and State-provided
Consultant Team (Jacobs and Cameron Engineering), the process
produced what we believe to be sound plans for recovery and
resiliency. Perhaps more importantly for the long haul, it also offered
us a planning forum that recognized and respected our experiences,
expertise, and preferences. It was a process, from traditional on-site
meetings to “virtual town halls” that empowered people and
promoted constructive dialogue. The long hours and sound,
constructive ideas contributed by hundreds of Fire Islanders paid a
relatively quick dividend, driven by the same energy and can-do
attitude that saw us open for business in the 2013 summer season.
This collective planning and rebuilding push is emblematic of our
Section 1: Community Overview

intense commitment to
recover from Sandy and
prepare for the next
disaster. As Governor
Cuomo has said on
numerous occasions, “It is
not a matter of whether
but when, and we need to
be prepared.”
Fire Islanders believe this
plan and the projects
within it represent the best
ideas and professional
practices developed by our
communities and the
Consultant Team. The
NYRCR Fire Island
Committee and our
neighbors that participated
in the planning process are
not surprised by the risk
assessment findings that
put most of our slender
island at the most
vulnerable levels. We are
confident that we have
correctly identified the

Fire Island has been a source of food,
shelter, and jobs/recreation for
centuries. Within the last century it
saw the greatest development as
people migrated to Fire Island to
escape the pressure and chaos of the
world headquarters of almost
everything 50 miles to the west of
Fire Island. That was a great time limited or no electric, no phones, and
basic water systems utilizing hand
pumps; sunny warm days with Bay
and Ocean playgrounds; and lots of
boats to sail and fish from. Those of
us fortunate enough to have been
there in the middle of the last century
watched our Island change as the
girls of summer Carol, Donna, Agnes,
Belle, Gloria, and recently Irene and
Sandy changed our paradise forever.
We always return, repair, and
rebuild.
We can’t escape; it is in our blood.
--John Lund, NYRCR Committee
Member

Page | 4

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
needs and opportunities. But before we describe these projects, as
well as talk more about our island, we want to be clear about a few
more things. We understand that recovery remains an ongoing task
that will require continued Federal, State, and local collaboration. We
also recognize that we will not get everything we want, certainly not
right away. But we are prepared to work together to refine our
priorities and do everything we can to get what we need. When we
are confronted by these and other challenges – such as balancing
infrastructure planning and environmental protection – we know that
the spirit of our collaborative Community remains as strong as it was
in the face of Sandy.
Most of the challenges faced in recovering from Superstorm Sandy, as
well as complex issues involving development, transportation,
emergency services, and others, are rooted in our geography, geology,
governance, and history. Fire Island is a 31-mile long barrier island,
which varies in width from 500 to 1,300 feet, and encompasses 9.6
square miles of land. The Fire Island National Seashore (FINS),
established in 1964 and governed by the U.S. National Park Service,
stretches across 26 miles of the barrier island and includes 17
communities. The FINS enabling legislation recognized the existence of
these communities and pre-existing commercial uses but stipulated
that any future development should be consistent with specific zoning
standards. These standards and building code regulations are
administered by the incorporated Villages of Ocean Beach and
Saltaire, by the Town of Islip, which has jurisdiction over nine
unincorporated hamlets, and by the Town of Brookhaven, which has
jurisdiction over six unincorporated hamlets. Jurisdiction is further
Section 1: Community Overview

complicated by additional regional
oversight vested with State and
Federal agencies, such as the Federal
Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE), NY State Department of
State (NYS DOS), and NY State
Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYS DEC).
The Fire Island “neighborhoods” are
distinct and discrete Villages and
hamlets totaling 4,000 homes in all,
from Kismet on the west end to Davis
Park on the east. Each Village or
hamlet averages less than 1% of Fire
Island’s total land area. All the rest of
this special island – more than 80% –
consists of spectacular beaches,
dunes, and undeveloped parkland
and visitor facilities. FINS contains
the Otis Pike Wilderness area that is
larger than all of the developed Fire
Island hamlets combined. FINS also
offers a unique “Sunken Forest,” a
historic lighthouse, recreational
facilities including nature trails and
waterfront access for canoeing,

I have heard it said that,
"from every tragedy comes
something good."
A highlight in the
aftermath of Sandy was
and is the comradeship it
has fostered among the
members of our brand new
business group, ReviveFI.
We share a common bond
which was the Herculean
struggle to put our lives
back in place, under
remarkably difficult and
stressful conditions.
We survived together.
We helped each other.
We lifted each other.
Now we grow together.
---Scott Hirsch, NYRCR
Committee Member

Page | 5

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
boating and fishing, campgrounds and the marinas at Watch Hill and
Sailors Haven. Residents and visitors alike get to the island by ferry
across the Great South Bay. There are no paved roads on this island,
although there is an emergency access route through the sand for
essential service and emergency vehicles.
Fire Island has a rich maritime history that predates the European
colonization of Long Island. Much of this history is celebrated at the
museum at the base of the Fire Island Lighthouse, located on the
western end of the island, which suffered extensive damage and has
not been fully repaired. Native Americans hunted and fished in the
We know about storms like Sandy…In March 1962 a monster, slowmoving, nor’easter crawled along the coastline, ripping out pieces of
some communities and causing some developers to start promoting
a four-lane highway-dike down the island, with heavy development
potential. Luckily, those few thousand who lived on the island, and
their friends, got together and focused on getting most of the island
designated a National Seashore by Congress in 1964…. It’s now a
park monument as to what citizens can do when they love a unique
and eternal spot on this planet.
Those that now live on Fire Island will continue the heritage of caring
enough to protect the natural wild-beach feeling. This feeling
surrounds the neighborhood-communities that were allowed to
cohabitate the island with the terns, piping plovers, ducks, whitetailed deer and other wildlife.
This is the natural essence of Fire Island.

vicinity long before Colonists established settlements and expanded
salt hay harvesting, waterfowl hunting and shell fishing as their
primary industries. The booming growth of New York Harbor after the
Civil War also saw the development of the U.S. Life Saving Service
(USLSS), the pre-cursor of the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), which
maintains a base at the western end of the island at Robert Moses
State Park. Manned USLSS facilities scattered along the beach enabled
emergency evacuation of vessels that ran aground on their way to
New York Harbor.
Today, land use on Fire Island consists mostly of residences with some
institutional and Community facilities and small commercial
businesses. Other than two bridges which terminate at parking areas
at the western (Robert Moses Causeway to Robert Moses State Park)
and the eastern ends (William Floyd Parkway to Smith Point County
Park), Fire Island is only accessible by boat.
New York State recently allocated $23,000,000 in Federal funds to
begin beach stabilization and infrastructure protection at Robert
Moses State Park. Funds will be used to nourish park beaches and
strengthen the shoreline buffers protecting the Robert Moses traffic
circle and Ocean Parkway from future storms. 1 Another State project
will replace the Robert Moses Causeway bridge over Fire Island Inlet. 2
For those without private boats, several water taxis and ferry routes
serve Fire Island from Patchogue, Sayville, and Bay Shore on the
mainland. Transportation on the island is generally by foot, bicycle, or
water taxi, as vehicles (other than emergency and service vehicles) are

---Bob Spencer, Davis Park resident

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 6

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
prohibited on Fire Island during the summer. Year-round residents can
access the Island in the off-season with vehicle permits.
Fire Island offers all types of recreational activities such as boating,
sailing, tennis, biking, clamming, swimming, surfing, fishing, hiking,
bird watching, and camping at Watch Hill. Sunken Forest, a maritime
forest with wooden boardwalks winding through more than 40 acres
of unusual tree formations, is popular with educational tours, hikers,
and bird watchers. Fire Island Lighthouse, which is owned by FINS, but
restored and managed by the Fire Island Light House Preservation
Society, is open to the public and offers panoramic vistas and
museums. Fire Island’s commercial areas offer dining, entertainment
and unique shops. Several of the communities have small grocery
stores, delis, and ice cream shops.
Before we move on to the section on Geographic Scope, we would like
to introduce each of our Island communities. These short profiles give
a sense of the size, character, variety and history of Fire Island places,
all of which contributes to the appeal and challenges for owners,
renters, and visitors. The profiles are based upon a National Park
Service report: Ethnographic Overview and Assessment – Fire Island
National Seashore (July 2006). The communities are listed from west
to east, in the order they are located.
With the exception of the bayside access to Point O’ Woods and a few
private marinas, each of the communities, the ocean beaches, the
walks, and the wilderness areas are open to the public.

Section 1: Community Overview

Stairs crossing the dunes

Kismet
Kismet is the westernmost of all Fire Island communities. The “Long
Island Express” Hurricane of 1938 destroyed 90% of building in three
neighborhoods that were rebuilt and consolidated as one hamlet of the
Town of Islip. The hamlet began to grow rapidly in the ‘60s and ‘70s.
Since 2007, when new concrete sidewalks were constructed throughout
the Community, upscale new homes have been added. There are about
225 houses and two small condominiums. At the bay front, a small
commercial district serves as the Community center, including two
restaurants, a pizzeria, a general store, and Fire House located close to
the ferry terminal. There are two tennis courts and a children’s
playground adjacent to the area.
Page | 7

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Village of Saltaire
The Fire Island Beach Development Company purchased the land that
would become Saltaire and seven years later residents grouped
together to form the incorporated Village. Although some structures
were lost in the 1938 “Long Island Express” Hurricane, enough
survived to give Saltaire a distinct appearance. The Community has a
grid layout similar to most other Fire Island communities, with
concrete walks running east and west and diagonally planked wooden
walks running north and south. A 1965 zoning amendment by the
Village government doubled the number of lots needed to construct a
new home limiting the maximum residential density. Saltaire has its
own drinking water system.

“Yes, Fire Island is enjoyed by thousands of people each summer.
But many beach lovers do not understand how crucially important
this fragile barrier island is to the Long Island mainland and the
regional economy. In the coming age of rising sea level and more
frequent storm events, Fire Island will become ever more important
as Long Island's first line of defense.”
--Susan Barbash, Co-Chair of the NYRCR Fire Island Committee

Fair Harbor
Fair Harbor is the third community on the western end of Fire Island.
With about 350 homes within its 13 walkways, Fair Harbor has
everything anyone might want with a few stores, a restaurant and a
pizza shop, giving it old-style charm with the security of a state-of-theart Fire Department and EMS. Known for singles and its "share"
houses in the '70s and '80s, Fair Harbor turned into a small community
of families, as those people met at the dock at sunset, married, had
children, and bought houses. It's now a favorite summer vacation
destination.

Dunewood

Saltaire Fire Department
Section 1: Community Overview

Dunewood was the last community to be developed on Fire Island,
beginning in 1958 and ending in 1980. It has wide, concrete walks that
contribute to the open and quiet atmosphere of this family oriented
community which has two tennis courts and runs a popular sailing and
swimming program for children and adults. There are no restaurants
or stores.
Page | 8

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Lonelyville
Off the beaten path, Lonelyville is one of the oldest communities on
Fire Island. Like the adjoining community of Dunewood, Lonelyville
does not have a commercial district, and its walks do not form a
complete grid.

Atlantique
Atlantique saw little real estate development until 1965. It lacks a
bayside commercial district and consists of only 16 widely dispersed
houses. The Atlantique Beach and Marina is a Town of Islip marina and
recreational facility situated on an 875-foot-wide Town park that
extends across the width of the barrier island, from the bay to ocean.
The park offers lifeguard-protected beaches, a snack bar, and
approximately 150 marina boat slips 3.

Robbins Rest
Robbins Rest is among the smallest communities on Fire Island,
consisting of 40 privately owned homes. It is separated from other
communities by two large, undeveloped tracts of land owned by FINS
and has no commercial district or visitor services. Within the
community are two bay-to-ocean pathways, one constructed of
concrete and the other of sand.

Corneille Estates and Summer Club

School bus on sand access route
Summer Club is a small residential community located just west of the
Village of Ocean Beach and between the communities of Corneille
Estates and Robbins Rest. Within the community are two bay-to-ocean
walks. Summer Club is a condominium association with its own
clubhouse, which is used by the residents of its community. There are
no commercial district or visitor services within the community.

Corneille Estates is two blocks wide and includes the Woodhull School
which serves all of Fire Island. The community has one bay-to-ocean
walk, known locally as Clipper Walk, which is unique to other walks
across Fire Island in that its elevation follows the ground topography.
Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 9

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The Village is well equipped to serve both residents and visitors with
full time police, volunteer emergency services, and a Village-owned
water system.

Seaview
Seaview’s first community supported a fish processing business area in
the late 19th century. Today, there are approximately 360 houses
serviced by a market, a liquor store, and a nursery. The Seaview
Association owns and maintains the sidewalks, marina, beaches, water
system, children’s playground and wading pool, tennis courts, ball
field, and other common areas.
Ocean Beach commercial area

Village of Ocean Beach
In 1921, Ocean Beach and a neighboring community formerly known
as Stay-a-While Estates merged to form Fire Island’s largest
community and the closest thing to a commercial hub. An
incorporated Village, Ocean Beach has a ball field, courthouse, post
office, police station, fire hall, ferry terminal, and Village offices. A
wide variety of shops, restaurants, bars, and service facilities are
located in the central commercial district which mainly adjoins the
Village Green. During the summer, local groups sponsor parades, free
concerts and art shows around the Village. Located within easy
walking distance of both the Great South Bay and the Atlantic Ocean,
the Village offers numerous water-related recreational opportunities
at its life guarded beaches.
Section 1: Community Overview

People on the beach

Page | 10

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Ocean Bay Park
Ocean Bay Park has evolved into a family community with second and
third generations settling there to share their youthful experiences of
sand castle building, fishing, swimming, trips to the local grocery store
and endless games. Renters and visitors alike realize what an oasis
they have discovered and set up their own roots to revel in these
same activities and to enjoy dining in our two bay-front restaurants.
Ocean Bay Park also houses one of the premiere Fire Departments on
Fire Island providing mainland quality of safety and emergency
services.

Point O’ Woods
Originally founded as part of the Chautauqua movement in the late
1880s, Point O’ Woods is a membership community where
homebuyers retain the title to the house, with all land owned by the
Point O’ Woods Association. The community is also unique as there is
common ownership of the landward dune by the Point O’ Woods
Association, which makes it easier to coordinate and fund dune
replenishment projects. The area is not laid out in a grid like the other
communities on Fire Island.

Section 1: Community Overview

Point O’ Woods church

Page | 11

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Oakleyville
Oakleyville consists of 11 small houses on winding lanes in brushy
woods within the Sunken Forest. There are no docks or ferry terminals
and residents must arrive by private vessel, creating a very secluded
atmosphere.

Cherry Grove
Cherry Grove is supposedly the oldest inhabited resort on Fire Island.
By 1920, Cherry Grove had many small cottages along a single walk. In
the late 1920s, the area attracted theater people from Ocean Beach,
who enjoyed the informal atmosphere and thus beginning Cherry
Grove’s affiliation with the gay community. Today there are nearly 300
homes and a commercial area with stores, hotels, bars, and
restaurants. In 2013 Cherry Grove’s Community House and Theater
was added to the National and New York State Registers of Historic
Places.

Cherry Grove commercial area

Cherry’s On the Bay
Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 12

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Fire Island Pines

Davis Park

Fire Island Pines has approximately 620 homes, making it the secondlargest community on the island after Ocean Beach. While The Pines
started as rustic campsites in the 1930s, it became a favorite
destination of artists, writers, boaters, and families in the 1950s, and
today it boasts many notable modernist homes. In addition to a
recently built beachside community house, the bayside harbor area
includes a ferry dock and marina, grocery and other stores, bars and
restaurants. The Pines has consistently been a leader in the planning
and financing of dune and beach re-nourishment projects.

Davis Park began as two separate communities: Davis Park to the west
and Ocean Ridge to the east. The area currently has about 250 homes,
and is home to the easternmost ferry stop before the Otis Pike
Wilderness Area, with service from Patchogue. The Town of
Brookhaven-owned marina in the hamlet of Davis Park offers
approximately 200 slips. The commercial area includes the Casino
bar/restaurant with ocean views and a commercial area with stores
and a small boatel by the marina.

Water Island/Blue Point Beach
Located east of the Talisman/Barrett Beach area, Water Island and
Blue Point Beach are quiet, family-oriented communities without any
public services. Water Island is a collection of 40 homes, while Blue
Point Beach has 11 homes. The area rarely receives casual visitors
from the mainland.

Casino Café in Davis Park

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 13

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
A. GEOGRAPHIC SCOPE
The maps below are essential to understanding the complexities of the
NYRCR Fire Island Community, which includes the western tip of
Robert Moses State Park eastward approximately 30 miles to the
municipal Town boundary of Brookhaven and Southampton, including
the Cupsogue Beach County Park on the east side of Moriches Inlet.
With the exception of a number of bay islands within the Towns of
Islip and Brookhaven and the three large public parks (Robert Moses
State Park at the west end of Fire Island and Smith Point County Park
and Cupsogue Beach County Park at the east end of the Fire Island),
the bulk of the NYRCR Fire Island Community lies within the boundary
and jurisdiction of the FINS. Within this area is all of the Community
“in-holdings” or privately-owned real estate within the outer beach
portions of the Towns of Islip and Brookhaven.
Getting things done on Fire Island can be complicated. For purposes of
implementing the plan, projects within the NYRCR Fire Island
Community will take into account, depending on the project, Suffolk
County requirements and the building and zoning codes of two Towns
(Islip, Brookhaven) and two incorporated Villages (Ocean Beach and
Saltaire), both of which are within the Town of Islip and. All zoning and
building codes of these four municipalities have been somewhat
standardized to the requirements of the FINS. The maps on the
following pages show the geographic scope and jurisdictional
boundaries of the NYRCR Fire Island Community.

Section 1: Community Overview

Damage at the junction of a bulkhead and natural shoreline

Page | 14

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 1: Geographic Scope

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 15

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 2: Geographic Scope and Land Ownership, Map 1 of 3

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 16

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 3: Geographic Scope and Land Ownership, Map 2 of 3

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 17

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 4: Geographic Scope and Land Ownership, Map 3 of 3

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 18

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 5: Jurisdiction Map4

Figure Source: Chris Soller, Superintendent, Fire Island National Seashore

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 19

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Demographic Overview
Geographic Area and Data
The demographic data depicted below is taken from the US Census
Bureau’s (Census) American FactFinder website at the Census
Designated Place (CDP) level, and reflects data from the most recent
American Community Survey (ACS) that provided complete coverage
for the CDP. For most data sets, this was the 2005-2009 ACS data.

459 housing units, including 444 seasonal homes. The median
household income is $113,889 in Fire Island CDP, $41,875 in the
Village of Ocean Beach, and $112,917 in the Village of Saltaire. The
median value of owner-occupied housing units is $469,200 in the Fire
Island CDP, $823,300 in the Village of Ocean Beach, and over
$1,000,000 in the Village of Saltaire.

The CDP/Village level of data aggregation was selected because the
availability, detail, and geography of other data aggregation levels
(e.g., Census Tracts, Groups, and Blocks) are subject to variation across
the decennial censuses. The CDP/Village level provides a uniform level
of data aggregation and reporting period. While the NYRCR
Community extends slightly beyond the Fire Island CDP and Village
boundaries, it is noted that the Census data’s intended use in this
report is to provide an overview of the composition and general habits
of the Community.

Fire Island General Demographics 5
The NYRCR Fire Island Community comprises the Fire Island CDP and
the Villages of Ocean Beach and Saltaire. Based on the 2010 U.S.
Census, the Fire Island CDP had a population of 408 year-round
residents and 4,461 housing units, of which 4,262 are seasonal homes.
The Village of Ocean Beach had a population of 79 year-round
residents and 607 housing units, which includes 562 seasonal homes.
The Village of Saltaire had a population of 37 year-round residents and
Section 1: Community Overview

Disembarking in Ocean Beach
Almost half of the full-time population in the NYRCR Fire Island
Community is between 35 and 54 years old. About 30% are less than
35 years old, and 20% are more than 55 years old.
Ninety-four percent (94%) of the year-round population of Fire Island
is White, with 3% Black or African American, 2% classified as other,
Page | 20

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
and 1% classified as two or more races. Six percent of the population is
Hispanic or Latino, and the residents report that the majority in the
Community either speak English as the only language at home or rate
their English proficiency as “very good.”

Income and Poverty
The NYRCR Fire Island Community includes a range of individual wage
earnings skewed toward the higher end. Almost half of the individuals
earn less than $35,000 but more than 25% earn $75,000 or more.
Fewer than 10% earn less than $10,000; similarly, less than 10% of the
population is under 150% of the poverty level. It is probable that the
population reporting individual income under $10,000 is primarily
composed of retirees and individuals in similar circumstances instead
of individuals or families who represent an economically
disadvantaged population.

Employment and Journey to Work

Freight boat for delivery of materials and supplies

Understanding the general character of the NYRCR Fire Island
Community’s workforce helps identify needs and opportunities to
restore, maintain and enhance the economic vitality of the
Community. Almost 70% of the year-round residents of Fire Island
work within Suffolk County, and all of the remaining year-round
residents work somewhere else within New York. While workers
residing in the Community support a diverse array of industries,
educational, and professional services (e.g., scientific, management,
and administration) dominate.

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 21

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Housing
According to the Census, the majority of housing units on Fire Island
are owner-occupied, but less than 5% of the units are occupied year
round. The majority of the homes are used by owners (or rented out)
during the spring, summer and fall seasons.

Guidance and Insight from Demographic Analysis

“As a grateful Cherry Grove homeowner, I hope everyone
acknowledges why we were as successful as we were in surviving
Sandy. It is the decades of dedicated maintenance and nurturing of
our strong dunes…”
“We can only be a strong barrier if we building strong and
sustainable dunes and continue to add sand retaining plants…”
--Posted during a virtual town hall meeting

The demographic analysis indicated a few important trends and
characteristics that shaped the identification of needs, opportunities,
and projects for the NYRCR Fire Island Community. One is the seasonal
nature of housing stock on Fire Island. Housing type and occupancy
rates revealed that the majority of the housing stock is used
seasonally, whether by owners, vacationers, or summer renters. This
indicates that the majority of homes that may be at risk in the next
storm are secondary residences and the owners may not need to find
temporary housing.
These Census findings were incorporated into the dialogue with the
NYRCR Fire Island Committee and reflected in our work as we
identified projects to help ensure Community resiliency.

Ferry arriving at Ocean Beach

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 22

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
B. DESCRIPTION OF STORM DAMAGE
The impact of Superstorm Sandy was significant across the entire barrier
island. Storm surge and high tides resulted in erosion of protective
beaches and dunes, damage to waterfront infrastructure (e.g., docks
and bulkheads) and helipads, and numerous overwashes, leaving
walkways and travel ways impassable when the overwash scoured and
eroded the walkways and left debris. Low-lying infrastructure, especially
the electrical components of drinking water pump stations, the sewage
treatment plant in Ocean Beach, and communication facilities, was
damaged. Concentrations of commercial areas were severely damaged
requiring emergency rebuilding in time for the next peak season.
Damage from gap in bulkhead at end of walkway
Since November 2012, the effects to Fire Island from Superstorm
Sandy have been well documented in news reports, video, still
photography, social media, narrative, scientific study and civic debate.
The Fire Island to Montauk Point Reformulation Study includes this
description of the damage:

Damage to dunes and fencing

Section 1: Community Overview

“The impacts to the island were extensive. The majority of oceanfront
homes in the communities within Fire Island National Seashore were
damaged or destroyed. Enormous volumes of sand were carried from
the beach and dunes to the central portion of the island, forming large
overwash deposits, and the island was breached in multiple locations.
With few exceptions, lower-relief dunes were overwashed and flattened.

Page | 23

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
High dunes, which are more commonly found within undeveloped
portions of the island, experienced severe erosion and overwash. The
elevation of the beach was lowered and the dunes form vertical scarps
where they survived.” 6
It is important to characterize the effects of the storm on the land, the
people, and the economy for the purpose of understanding the
context for strategies and projects formulated in this plan.
The effects of Superstorm Sandy can be loosely categorized into three
broad perspectives:
1. The line of defense - As the first line of defense during severe
weather, Fire Island functions naturally as a barrier to high energy
ocean waves and strong winds to reduce the impact on the Great
South Bay and the “mainland” coastal communities of Long Island.

Home damage

2. The developed communities - For well over a century, there have
been seasonal and year-round settlements on Fire Island that have a
long history of being battered by storms.
3. The visitor destination - Fire Island’s proximity to the NY Metro
area, coupled with its vibrant mix of public and private recreation and
accommodations make it important to Long Island’s
economic/tourism base.

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 24

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The Line of Defense
The visible impact of Superstorm Sandy highlighted both the fragility
and resilience of the barrier island. The energy absorbing
characteristics of the natural and developed areas were put to the test
with the storm, which exhibited wind and wave action and a sharp
turn to the west, unlike the more common coastal hurricane
pathways. Superstorm Sandy’s strong winds and waves impacted Fire
Island from both the ocean and bay side forcing floodwaters to
completely overwash several locations. A study by the United States
Geological Survey (USGS) after Sandy found that "beaches and dunes
lost more than half of their pre-storm volume during Hurricane Sandy,
leaving the area more vulnerable to future storms."
Further, the study found that the "dunes experienced overwash along
46.6% of the island, dramatically changing the island's shape." Field
surveys immediately after the storm indicated that most of the sand
from the beaches and dunes was swept out to sea, but that 14% of the
material was deposited inland. Follow-up studies during the winter
months after Sandy, indicated that the shoreline position shifted as
much as 190 feet inland. Later in the spring of 2013, further
measurements on the beach indicated that only 18% of the material
washed out to sea had returned. Sandy created three new inlets on
Fire Island; the Cupsogue County Park breach and Smith Point County
Park breach were closed in November and December 2013,
respectively, and the third breach, which occurred in the FINS’s
Wilderness Area, remains open pending continuous monitoring by the
U.S. National Park Service, SUNY Stony Brook University’s School of
Atmospheric and Marine Sciences, and NY Sea Grant.
Section 1: Community Overview

This awesome power and energy was mitigated in some areas by
dunes, natural vegetation, and occasionally man-made structures. The
Committee’s perception is that generally the areas with healthy dunes
fared the best in their ability to absorb the shock, the velocity, and the
energy of the wind and wave action. The dynamic nature of Fire
Island’s ocean and bayside shorelines, coupled with the desire of
residents and visitors alike to use and enjoy these shorelines, presents
unique challenges for sustainable rebuilding and recovery after
Superstorm Sandy. The United States Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) massive dune rebuilding effort, known as the Fire Island Inlet
to Montauk Point (FIMP) Reformulation Study, which includes beach
nourishment, dune reconstruction, property/easement acquisition
and potentially elevating thousands of homes, has been ongoing since
1960 and was recently revived with $700,000,000 in disaster funding
appropriations and a far greater sense of urgency 7. In March 2014, the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Department of Interior
agreed on the details of the project, allowing it to move forward. 8 This
major construction project will protect natural resources and
significantly increase the resiliency of Fire Island.
We have learned many lessons about building construction, water
quality, storm drainage and the ability of nature to bounce back and
heal itself. A greater appreciation has been gained of just how
important Fire Island is to the mainland as a storm protection barrier
between Long Island’s South Shore communities and the Atlantic
Ocean.

Page | 25

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The Developed Communities
The destruction or displacement of homes, boardwalks, bulkheads,
infrastructure, fences, decks, and whatever else was not tied down,
left no doubt about the powerful forces of wind and water. The
“fixed” world of boundary lines, survey and property monuments,
fences, and borders was swept away, reminding us of the challenges
of living and working on a barrier island in the Atlantic Ocean.

Point O’Woods commemorative plaque
Community rebuilding
The logistics posed by the geographical isolation of the island, its
limited transportation infrastructure, its seasonal economy, and its
low year-round population were complicated by the fact that its land
mass is regulated by two Towns, two Villages, the County, the State,
and the National Park Service. In spite of these unique logistical and
geographic issues, the residents of Fire Island banded together with
Suffolk County and the Towns of Islip and Brookhaven to coordinate
recovery activities. The National Park Service was part of this working
partnership.
Section 1: Community Overview

Because of the spring time restrictions on beach driving in order to
protect piping plover nesting areas, debris removal had to be carried
out around the clock from late Fall 2012 to March 2013. Debris was
collected, transferred to barges for day and nighttime removal, or
trucks for daytime removal along the beach, under a contract
overseen by the NY Recovery Field Office of USACE, at a cost of over
$10,000,000. The contract also required separation of different types
of debris in a safe and environmentally sound manner. After March
15, 2013, all collection and removal operations were transferred
inland along the walkways, streets, boardwalks and the "Burma Road"
to Robert Moses State Park. Approximately 1,600 homes damaged by
Page | 26

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
the storm were eligible for debris removal and over 62,000 cubic yards
of material were removed from the area, enough to cover a football
field three stories high.
Superstorm Sandy showed the people of Fire Island’s communities
that they could be resilient, that they could bounce back, and that
they could work together. They found support and strength in their
connections with each other. The storm and its aftermath have given
the Fire Island communities an opportunity to rebuild and plan for the
future with understanding, insight, and intelligent forethought.

The Visitor Destination
That the devastation came during the “off-season” did not diminish
the sense of urgency on Fire Island. The media and emergency services
spotlight may have shone most brightly on mainland communities as
they raced to get their roads, power systems, transportation, and
temporarily homeless populations back into their homes. But Fire
Island’s residents and the leadership of the County, the Towns, and
the FINS became a team almost immediately. They worked together to
find ways to communicate and to overcome obstacles to
reconstruction and to seek opportunities for change and
improvement. All affected parties knew that the isolation of Fire Island
would slow down reconstruction and present logistical difficulties to
preparations for the 2013 summer season. Many of the developed
communities rely on visitors and renters as does the National Park
Service to fulfill its mission to highlight for park visitors the
preservation and understanding of Fire Island as a natural resource.
Tourism is a key element of the Fire Island economy, which makes it
important to Long Island’s economy, particularly its tourism and
recreation sectors.

Members of the community at a public engagement event

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 27

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The Fire Island Lighthouse, located near the western end of Fire Island,
is a high-profile visitor destination. It experienced basement flooding
and damage to its museum exhibits and gift shop inventory. The
boardwalk leading from the lighthouse to the beach was destroyed, as
was a boardwalk leading from the Fresnel Lens building to the gravel
road and the boardwalk connecting these buildings to the bayside
dock. The dune between the lighthouse and the Atlantic Ocean was
flattened. Access from the Lighthouse and annex was disrupted with
the destruction of the boardwalk connecting these buildings to the
bayside dock. The dock was completely destroyed except for the
pilings. Because this lighthouse enterprise is run by a not-for-profit
organization, repairs have been a difficult to get started. The dock
itself and the associated walkways leading to and from it have not yet
been repaired while the boardwalk from the Lighthouse to the beach
may not be replaced at all. But repair of the visitor pedestrian
"lifeline" boardwalk and pathway from Robert Moses Field 5 to the
Lens Building is nearing completions. The lighthouse location typified
both the Ocean and bay-side devastation from the storm and the
difficulties of recovery, but also the cooperative nature of the
response to reclaim, restore, and rebuild.
Elsewhere in the FINS properties, 6,000 linear feet of boardwalk
required complete replacement. Repairs also were necessary to
damaged Ocean access walks and staircases at multiple locations,
areas at Sailors Haven Marina and Watch Hill Marina, housing and
shop areas in multiple locations. The helipad at Sailors Haven required
replacement. The Old Inlet dock was so damaged it had to be
demolished. (See Figure 3 for the locations of these assets within
Section 1: Community Overview

FINS.) Damaged vehicles, equipment, fuel systems, and park travel
ways, and storm debris in parklands necessitated cleanup and
removal.

Fire Island Lighthouse

Page | 28

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Fire Island is getting back on its feet. The fast-track response by
islanders after the storm produced a successful 2013 summer season,
and gave both a psychological and fiscal boost to the people and the
economy. But the experiences also triggered a critical discussion of
how to use the storm aftermath as an opportunity for building
increased resiliency. These new ideas can range from large scale dune
rebuilding projects to bay side flood mitigation projects, from regional
improvements in communication systems to elevation of local
Community centers above anticipated storm water levels.
Fire Island is a place in which parks, open lands, and people coexist,
without paved highways and within close proximity to one of the
largest urban centers in the world. Superstorm Sandy underscored the
urgent need for the County, Towns, National Park Service, and the
developed communities to cooperate for a common purpose to
protect Fire Island’s environmental quality, economic vitality and the
health and well-being of its residents and visitors.

National Parks information sign

View of the dunes and beach
Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 29

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
C. CRITICAL ISSUES
The NYRCR Fire Island Committee expressed concern for a variety of
resiliency issues relating both to protecting the life and safety of
Community members in the face of storm events and fostering
stewardship of the unique barrier island landscape. Some of the most
significant and widespread issues included:
•

•
•
•
•

•

Creating a mechanism for enhanced communication,
collaboration and regional planning among the many Fire
Island interests and the Long Island mainland;
Sustaining commercial, recreational and tourism assets and
functions;
Developing a comprehensive island-wide ocean and bay
shoreline management strategy;
Maintaining safe access to all communities;
Ensuring that municipalities and first responders, including fire
departments, have the necessary resources to prepare for and
protect the public, property and the natural environment
during and after disasters; and
Mitigating repetitive flooding.

Home elevation construction

These critical issues inform every aspect of the plan and are discussed
in more detail in later sections.

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 30

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
D. COMMUNITY VISION
The Committee developed the following vision statement to guide the
entire planning process and to ensure that the recommended actions
included in the Final Plan address the critical issues identified by the
Committee.

Community Vision Statement:
As an integral component of the Fire Island National
Seashore, the communities of Fire Island are united in
their determination to strengthen and preserve this
unique, dynamic barrier island for future generations.
We recognize Fire Island’s critical importance to the
entire region – as Long Island’s first line of defense
against destructive storm surges, a precious natural
resource and ecosystem, and an engine for the Long
Island and New York State economy.

View of the dunes and beach

Working collaboratively, we will partner with
governmental agencies on every level to ensure the
island’s resiliency and sustainability, and to secure
Fire Island’s future.

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 31

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
E. RELATIONSHIP TO REGIONAL PLANS
One of the major outcomes following Superstorm Sandy was a
collective realization that many of the significant issues affecting Long
Island communities must be addressed at the regional level. Due to
the geography of Long Island, many of the municipalities, comprising
Towns, Villages, and Counties, share similar challenges as well as
opportunities relative to the natural environment, physical
infrastructure, and other built systems. Additionally, it is important to
understand the cause and effect relationship that occurs between the
barrier beach islands and the mainland. Potential regional issues are
expanded upon below.

Potential Regional Issues and Concerns
Natural Environment: Long Island has 1,180 miles of shoreline
fronting the Atlantic Ocean, the Long Island Sound, and a number of
lakes, bays, inlets, and canals including over 75 miles of shoreline on
Fire Island. Approximately one-fifth of Long Island’s land and much of
Fire Island is protected from development by Federal, State, County,
or municipal entities. About half of this land represents over 800
public parks on Long Island ranging from small community
playgrounds to larger parks like the FINS and Bethpage State Park. The
Pine Barrens contain wetlands and dry upland areas that are inhabited
by an array of wildlife species, many of which are endangered or
threatened. The continued protection of Long Island’s water supply
from sole source aquifers is also a significant regional issue.

Section 1: Community Overview

Developable Land Supply: Almost two-thirds of Long Island’s land
surface is urbanized, i.e., developed with buildings, pavement, and
other manmade structures. This condition in combination with the
large amount of protected/preserved land, results in a constrained
supply of available vacant land to accommodate new housing or
economic development activities.
Water Quality: Long Island’s aquifers receive their fresh water from
precipitation which percolates into the ground and is recharged into
the groundwater system. The greatest threat to the quality of this
water is development (residential/commercial/industrial) in sensitive
areas that would add pollutants and impede the absorption of
precipitation. As water is drawn for use in coastal areas, and barrier
islands in particular, less groundwater is available to be discharged
into the estuaries. The subsequent loss of water and pressure allows
saltwater from the ocean to flow into the aquifer, causing the
groundwater to become saline and undrinkable. This is known as
“saltwater intrusion” and is a threat to drinking supply on Fire Island
and the mainland as well.
Other threats to water quality include non-point source pollution and
storm water runoff, which are County-wide concerns. Non-point
sources typically include fertilizer and pesticides, oil and other
automobile fluid, as well as animal and pet waste. While Fire Island
has limited vehicle activity, and less volume of fertilizers and
pesticides, some degree of these non-point sources exist. This type of
pollution has the potential to seep into ground water and impact
surface waters such as the Great South Bay.

Page | 32

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
While the Great South Bay is a surface water body, it is also a significant
habitat comprised of features such as barrier beaches and islands,
wetlands and marsh islands. Additionally, the bay is a key component of
the local economy which relies on the health and stability of the bay
ecology. As a result, the bay is in many ways a regional resource.
Degradation of water quality as a result of non-point source runoff is of
rising concern relative to the bay.
Non-point source releases into the bay can result in increased bacteria
levels which in turn can lead to the closure of large areas of the bay to
economic activities like fishing as well as recreational marine-dependent
uses. The continued discharge to ground and surface waters in addition to
increased runoff from roadways and septic systems have been adversely
impacting water quality and vegetation in the vicinity of the Great South
Bay. These water quality concerns also have the potential to impact
spawning habitats as well as many marine species that are dependent on
these systems.

The Smarter Grid Research, Innovation, Development, Demonstration
& Deployment (SGRID3) initiative is a collaboration between Stony
Brook University and Brookhaven National Laboratory that initially
focused on the development and deployment of new smart grid
technologies as a mechanism to reduce energy and associated costs to
consumers. However, this objective changed in the wake of
Superstorm Sandy with the focus shifting to autonomous control
capabilities that when employed would make Long Island’s grid more
resilient during weather events and able to recover more quickly in
the aftermath. On Fire Island, there is no natural gas service which
creates the need to transport propane tanks to Fire Island. The
reliability of telephone and data communication is also of concern.

Utilities: Electricity and the susceptibility of the power grid are both
national and regional issues of concern. Long Island’s Regional Economic
Development Council (REDC) Strategic Economic Development Plan
August 2012 Progress Report update (in its “Vital Projects” section and its
Infrastructure strategy) similarly stressed the importance of addressing
utility vulnerabilities which currently exist across the Island. More
specifically, one of the longest-lasting impacts of Superstorm Sandy was
the vulnerability of Long Island’s electric power grid.
Utility room in Ocean Beach

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 33

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Sea Level Rise: As a coastal area, Long Island is susceptible to rising
sea levels, especially as it relates to storm surges. According to a
report prepared by Columbia University, the City University of New
York, and Cornell University, coastal flooding associated with rising sea
levels will very likely increase in intensity, frequency, and duration 9.
Sea level is anticipated to increase by 2 to 5 inches in the New York
City and Long Island region by the 2020s and by 12 to 23 inches by
2080. Should polar icecaps melt rapidly, climate models project that
sea levels will rise even more. As a result, low-lying coastal
communities on Long Island and New York City could experience
greater flooding from high-tides and storm events, with consequent
property damage. Fire Island plays an extremely important role as a
barrier island in slowing down and absorbing storm surge as it
approaches the mainland of Long Island, and as such, strengthening of
its oceanfront and bay front shorelines is critical.
Other issues that are pertinent on a regional level include those
related to public health and economic equity. These include projects
designed to improve the quality of life for the Island’s impoverished,
underinsured, or at-risk populations. Emergency preparedness
projects are also important to improve the overall safety of the
Island’s population. These include: maintaining evacuation route
access; improving the communication capability for a multijurisdictional response during emergency events; and emergency
access to healthcare services.

Section 1: Community Overview

Review of Existing Plans and Studies
Plans and studies have been prepared at the regional, County, and
local levels that encompass the communities of Fire Island. At the
regional level, broad findings and strategies are made that do not
specifically address the Fire Island communities but whose policies
and actions can affect the lives of all residents of the region. At the
local level, specific plans can have a more direct effect on the day-today lives of residents.
The following is a list and summary of regional plans and studies
identified to date that may be relevant to the NYRCR Fire Island Plan.
“Our docks have to be repaired because almost everything comes
and goes by water…”
“I would not like to see roadways that would change the
character of the community…”
“We need access so that emergency vehicles can always get
through…”
-

Posted on virtual town hall meeting

Page | 34

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Regional
Long Island’s Future Economy- Long Island Regional Economic
Development Council (2011) - This plan was initiated by New York
State as a means of reviving the regional economy. The plan contains
six major strategies that cover a broad spectrum of economic and
quality of life issues. The Executive Summary of the Plan describes the
strategies as follows:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Create a cohesive education and workforce training strategy;
Develop innovation and industry clusters in transformative
locations;
Enhance and develop multi-faceted, interdisciplinary facilities
for commercialization of innovative products;
Reinvigorate Long Island’s manufacturing sector;
Produce a new generation of sustainable, good-paying jobs; and
Rebuild and expand infrastructure.

The 2012 Progress Report added strategies in these areas:
•
•

•

Innovation and Industry Clusters
Infrastructure Strategies
• Revitalize Downtowns, Blighted Areas and Commercial
Centers;
• Repair and Upgrade Aging Infrastructure;
• Create New Housing Opportunities; and
• Promote New Government Policies to Foster Economic
Growth.
Natural Assets Strategies
• Improve Sustainable Agriculture Enterprises;

Section 1: Community Overview

•

•

•

Improve the Economic Potential and Employment
Opportunities of Fisheries and Aquaculture; and
• Enhancing Ecotourism and Cultural Tourism Activities.
Workforce and Education Strategies
• Strategies for Growth Sectors;
• Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM);
• Advanced manufacturing / information technology;
• Healthcare/Life Sciences; and
• Green technologies.
General Strategies
• Provide support services, incubators, and skills
development for new businesses;
• Create partnerships between sectors to improve
educational outcomes;
• Encourage collaborative relationships to provide quality,
affordable childhood education; and
• Promote arts organizations, artists, and programs.

The Five-Year Strategic Economic Development Plan for Nassau and
Suffolk Counties (September 2013 Update) adds two new strategies:
•
•

Protect Long Island from the perils of climate change; and
Revitalize Long Island’s poorest places.

Page | 35

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
While many of these strategies do not apply to Fire Island, these
studies highlight a few of the regional concerns important to the
NYRCR Fire Island Community, such as rebuilding infrastructure, and
enhancing ecotourism and cultural tourism activities. In particular,
partnerships between local Island-based businesses which heretofore
came together after the storm as "Revive Fire Island 10" are now
reformulating the joint marketing of businesses and responsible
visitorship in the communities. The future economic development
planning is critical in the reconstruction of community and recreation
facilities within the beach communities, and the Fire Island National
Seashore facilities all linked to a sustainable visitor economy. Critical
transportation links are being recognized as important regional
components, including transportation enhancement of the rail to ferry
link in Bay Shore from the LIRR station to the Fire Island ferry dock,
and the links to FINS facilities from Sayville and Patchogue.
Regional Comprehensive Sustainability Plan- Long Island Regional
Planning Council (2010) - The plan noted the inability of Long Island to
sustain itself fiscally, environmentally and socially based on current
governance methods and policies. The plan put forward that
fundamental change would be necessary to alter the course of the
future by noting the following, “Despite these challenges, Long Island
has a tremendous opportunity to redefine what it means to live in a
sustainable 21st century suburban Community, recognizing it is
possible for Long Island to be affordable and prosperous, bringing a
return to economic growth and strength. Our ability to act today – and
leave behind the status quo -will have a tremendous impact on the
future of the region.”
Section 1: Community Overview

The aftermath of the Superstorm Sandy highlighted the critical
importance of the FINS, USACE, FEMA, and other Federal agencies
working with various State agencies, two Towns, two incorporated
Villages, and 17 communities to coordinate reconstruction and
rebuilding. The effort is leading to a call for a more sustainable
relationship between these entities, such as a recurrent Fire Island
Planning Forum.

Ferry dock and marina

Page | 36

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Truck utilizing the beach as a travel way
Fire Island Inlet to Montauk Point (FIMP) Reformulation Study (in
progress) - U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) - According to a
summary of the planning process prepared by the USACE, the purpose
of the study is to identify, evaluate and recommend long- term
solutions for hurricane and storm damage reduction for homes and
businesses within the floodplain along the ocean and bay shoreline
from Fire island Inlet to Montauk Point. The planning area extends
northward to Sunrise Highway on the mainland.

Section 1: Community Overview

The study is expected to be completed in the near future. Upon
approval, funding will become available to complete projects
recommended in the study. It is expected that this will include
increasing the height and width of the primary dune on the ocean side
of Fire Island in selected, vulnerable locations, and raising,
demolishing or relocating homes away from the planned primary dune
line. The Fire Island to Montauk Point Reformulation Study Update
was prepared to account for the impacts of Superstorm Sandy and to
coordinate several ongoing interim projects. The overall purpose of
the study is “to evaluate a range of possible alternatives to address
storm damage risk, including the screening of various Storm Damage
Reduction (SDR) alternatives and their designs, analysis of potential
impacts associated with various designs, design optimization, and
selection of a recommended plan for the Project area.” The issues and
needs described in the study pertaining to long shore sediment
transport, cross-shore sediment transport, dune growth and
evolution, bayside shoreline processes, and circulation and water
quality, are vital issues for Fire Island. The study treats the beaches,
dunes, sediments, and marshes as one system that must be managed
in order to increase resiliency. Likewise, the NYRCR Committee may
approach their landscape as a similar system in which all components
must be strengthened to truly reduce risk and achieve resiliency.

Page | 37

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The USACE New York District website on the FIMP Reformulation
study 11 was last updated on March 17, 2014 to reflect the following
information on the status of the study:
•

The Draft Hurricane Sandy Limited Re-evaluation Report
(HSLRR) is complete. The HSLRR identifies the area’s
vulnerability, discusses existing/future conditions with vs.
without FIMP-related restoration, provides an overall
construction schedule (currently anticipated as September
2014 through August 2015) and acquisition maps, and an
overall cost estimate for the project of $161,514,000 based on
October 2013 price levels. The HSLRR includes stabilization
layouts throughout the project extents, including contours and
grading and berm heights.

•

The project’s Draft Environmental Assessment (DEA) is
available online for public review and comment. Comments
provided by April 2, 2014 will be considered going forward,
and included in the project record.

•

The DEA includes prior engineering and design efforts,
surveys, and environmental compliance analysis. Topics
include economics, transportation, and natural resources, all
compared to the “No Action” condition. It identifies a
Tentatively Selected Plan (TSP) with maps, plans, and
volumetric calculations, based on analyzing multiple
alternatives, many of which were found to be cost-effective.
Multiple measures are necessary because no single alternative
can address every storm risk management problem.

Section 1: Community Overview

Recommended features thus far include Inlet Bypassing Plans;
Breach Response Plans; Non-Structural Plans (6-year and 10year levels of risk management); and beachfill with new 13-15
foot tall dunes. The DEA analyzes the beachfill feature
combined with incremental levels of the other features (storm
management, dunes, and structural alternatives).
Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve Comprehensive Management
Plan (SSER CMP) - Long Island South Shore Reserve Council, NYS DOS
(2001) - The South Shore Estuary Reserve (SSER) stretches 70 miles
from the western border of Nassau County to the center of Suffolk
County encompassing all the Bays (Hempstead, South Oyster, Great
South, Moriches, and Shinnecock) between Fire Island and Jones
Beach Island and mainland Long Island. The SSER CMP takes a holistic
approach managing the South Shore Estuary for both human and
environmental needs. It makes recommendations to improve and
maintain the SSER’s water quality, to protect and restore living
resources, to expand public use, and to sustain and improve related
economies. The goals of the SSER CMP are in consonance with the
efforts of the FINS and the NYRCR Committee on Fire Island.

Page | 38

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
County Plans and Studies
Suffolk Country Comprehensive Plan 2035 (2011), Suffolk County
Planning Commission - This report was issued as the first volume of a
series that will cover all aspects of the Suffolk County environment,
economy, sustainability and resource protection. Volume One began
the process by presenting updated information on demographics and
socio-economic information, development trends, as well as a
summary of prior regional and local plans. Fire Island will be an
important aspect of environmental recommendations in the resultant
plan with respect to the protective aspect of the barrier island and
back bay estuary, and the importance of the recreational / tourism
economy.

View of the shoreline along Great South Bay

Section 1: Community Overview

Suffolk Country Demographic, Economic, and Development Trends,
Suffolk County Department of Planning (2008, updated 2013) - This
report provides information on demographic, socioeconomic, and
development trends for Suffolk County, and in some cases for Nassau
County as well. The report is updated on a regular basis with the most
recent update occurring in August 2013. The 2013 report found a
slight growth in jobs in the bi-county area (+ 19,400, an increase of
1.54%, compared to June 2012). Of note is the finding that the number
of businesses increased 1.7% in the five years between 2006 and 2011.
Also of note, the report specifically discusses the importance of
tourism and recreation, in that Eastern Suffolk County (including Fire
Island) is “a large tourist market…a major tourist and second-home
destination, with one of the largest concentrations of second homes of
any county in the United States.” According to the report, there are
“approximately 37,000 second homes in eastern Suffolk” – and the
±4,500 homes in Fire Island comprise a significant percentage of this
number. Suffolk County’s approximately 150,000 part-time residents
are likewise comprised in large part of the part-time residents of Fire
Island.
Comprehensive Water Resources Management Plan (in progress),
Suffolk County Department of Health - This is a very significant study
that is being conducted by Suffolk County. It is for the purpose of
updating a similar study that was done in 1987, the antecedent of
which was the Long Island 208 Study (1978). The study has involved
the collection and testing of extensive groundwater samples as well as
the mapping of land uses and build-out projection. The purpose of the

Page | 39

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
study is to ascertain if the County is meeting water quality standards
that are necessary to ensure a safe drinking water supply.
Since Suffolk County’s 1,500,000 residents rely on groundwater as
their sole source of drinking water, the quality and quantity of
groundwater water is critical. There are no surface water supplies in
the County, e.g., reservoirs. The study has produced some important
reports but is not yet final. Plan recommendations will impact Fire
Island with respect to existing sanitary waste disposal systems,
requirements for future sanitary waste disposal systems associated
with new development, drinking water standards, and
sampling/testing procedures for drinking water distribution systems.
Smart Growth Policy Plan for Suffolk County, Suffolk County
Department of Planning (2000) – This report describes the Smart
Growth planning process and also discusses eight Smart growth
principles and how they can be implanted in the County.
Land Available for Development and Population Analysis Western
Suffolk County, Suffolk County Planning Department (2009) - This study
was done as a component of the County’s Comprehensive Water
Resources Management Plan. Its purpose was to determine the
potential for population growth and the subsequent potential demand
for ground water.
In the Town of Brookhaven, there are 56 acres zoned residential (≥
6,000 square feet) and one (1) acre of vacant commercially zoned
property available for potential development, for a total of 57 acres.
However, per discussions with Suffolk County, this land is primarily
wetlands and is therefore not available for development.
Section 1: Community Overview

In the Town of Islip, there are 14 acres zoned residential (≥ 6,000
square feet) and one (1) acre of vacant commercially zoned property
available for potential development, for a total of 15 acres.
This report also singles out Fire Island as having “significant numbers
of seasonal or second homes.” The County report tabulates 2000
Census data that reflects those Suffolk County communities with more
than 100 seasonal homes, and finds that, “mostly on Fire Island,” the
seasonal population increases the populations of the entire Towns of
Brookhaven and Islip by respective percentages of 2.6% and 2.8%. In
Islip, the seasonal population increases the population density by a
factor of 23.4. In Brookhaven the increase is a factor of 51.9.

Local Plans
The barrier beach system of offshore islands stretching from
Southampton, NY to New York Harbor was formed after the retreat of
glaciers from Long Island 10,000 years ago. An eddy current of the Gulf
Stream running from east to west began the process of erosion at
Montauk Point - providing long shore transport (or littoral drift) and
subsequent deposition to create a barrier island and back-bay system
typical of glaciated outwash coastal areas seen from Cape Cod in
Massachusetts to the Outer Banks of North Carolina.
As these coastal areas became important for commerce, tourism,
recreation, and development, the government roles of protecting
public health, safety, and welfare grew in importance. For Fire Island,
its post-colonial role grew in prominence with the growth of transAtlantic shipping in and out of New York Harbor.
Page | 40

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Its importance for navigation began the development and settlement
of places along the beach to house the U.S. Life Saving Service (USLSS)
that became the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG). From that mid-19th century
era, development on Fire Island has continued to the present day and
numerous studies have been conducted and programs developed
addressing the management challenges of Fire Island. Following is an
abbreviated timeline of activities/ milestones/ publications concerning
Fire Island.
1960 – Congress authorizes the USACE to examine the coastline and
find solutions to coastal erosion from Fire Island Inlet to Montauk
Point.
1964 – Congress authorizes the creation of the Fire Island National
Seashore (FINS) and shortly thereafter the National Park Service (NPS)
begins to formulate plans for park management in both developed
and undeveloped areas of FINS.
1977 – The FINS publishes its first General Management Plan (GMP),
which includes regulations as to how the NPS will interact with local
municipalities who regulate zoning and building controls within the
FINS.
1982 – The National Flood Insurance Program, begun in 1968 and
amended in 1973 is amended again, deepening the connection
between national floodplain property protection policy and locally
conformed building ordinances.
1984 – Hurricane Damage Mitigation Plan published by the Long
Island Regional Planning Board focuses on policies that let nature run
its course.
Section 1: Community Overview

Fire Island National Seashore information sign
1994 – Coastal Science and Engineering, Inc. publishes Report for New
York Coastal Partnership and the Governor’s Coastal Erosion Task
Force also publishes their findings, both regarding Fire Island public
policy and cost estimates associated with various engineering
responses.

Page | 41

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
1995- Economic Analysis: Fire Island Reach, Lee Koppelman, New York
Coastal Partnership, undertakes a Benefit/Cost analysis of Fire Island
and concludes “that proper attention to beach stabilization yields a
public net gain” including but not limited to real estate and income tax
revenue that benefit the Townships of Islip and Brookhaven and
Suffolk County.
1998 – USACE publishes an Alternative Screening Report Atlantic Coast
of Long Island, Fire Island Inlet to Montauk Point with an overview of
various storm protection alternatives.
2003 – The Budget Review Office of the Suffolk County Legislature
produces a report titled Impact of the Atlantic Ocean Beaches to the
Economy of Suffolk County. The report details the positive economic
value of the Fire Island beaches to the Suffolk County economy.
2007 –The FINS begins a new GMP process and update.
2007 – Jay Tanski of the NY Sea Grant Extension Program produces
Long Island's Dynamic South Shore: A Primer on the Forces and Trends
Shaping our Coast. The report explores the issues underlying decisions
that balance conservation of the natural environment with the
significant demand to use a prime recreational and tourism resource.
2008 – SUNY Press publishes The Fire Island National Seashore – A
History, containing an extensive look at public policy, publications
bibliography, studies, and activities to date.

Section 1: Community Overview

C. Soller, Fire Island National Seashore Superintendent
with Watch Hill visitor information sign

Page | 42

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Post-Superstorm Sandy:
2013 – In response to Superstorm Sandy, USGS published #2013-1231
Coastal Change from Hurricane Sandy and 2012-13 Winter Storms, Fire
Island, NY, which assesses the morphological impacts to the beach and
dune system at Fire Island, New York.
2013 – As indicated above, the Fire Island to Montauk Point
Reformulation Study Update was prepared to account for the impacts
of Superstorm Sandy and to coordinate several ongoing interim
projects. In March 2014, the USACE and the U.S. Department of
Interior agreed on the details of the project, allowing it to move
forward.

3.
4.
5.
6.

Submerged Marine Resources;
Climate Change and Sea Level Rise;
Roadless Island; and
Public Information, Orientation, and Wayfinding.

These six concepts have helped to inform the discussion, influence the
Community vision statement, and have had a major impact on the
formulation of the NYRCR Fire Island planning effort.

From an appreciation of the formation and natural functioning of the
barrier island to an understanding of the regulatory aspects associated
with the creation of the FINS, a key “local plan" is actually a Federal
plan: the proposed revision of the General Management Plan of FINS,
which is a work in progress (see 2007 above).
This new plan formulation has engaged the communities and the local
planning and zoning jurisdictions and it draws on a body of knowledge
springing from the many plans, publications and efforts cited above
from 1960 to the present day. The FINS GMP Newsletter 2, April 2010,
described "Action Alternative Commonalities" or critical themes,
regardless of the chosen implementation activities, which include the
concepts of:

View of dunes and homes

1. Cooperative Stewardship;
2. Educational Outreach;
Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 43

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Fire Island Lighthouse

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Page | 44

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
A. DESCRIPTION OF COMMUNITY ASSETS AND
ASSESSMENT OF RISK
One goal of the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Plan is
to ensure that the social, economic, and natural resource assets and
systems that were affected by Superstorm Sandy are made more
resilient against future storms. Toward that end, assets potentially at
risk from storm events were identified and then evaluated in more
detail. This risk assessment yielded information that aided in the
development of specific projects and actions to reduce risk and
sustain Community functions.

Description of Community Assets
Assets are places or entities where economic, environmental, and
social functions of the NYRCR Fire Island Community occur. Examples
of assets include public facilities such as schools, medical facilities;
emergency and public safety services including fire and police
protection; as well as natural, cultural, and recreational resources
such as wetlands, beaches, and parks. Assets also include critical
infrastructure such as transportation roadways, utility networks, and
storm water systems required to support those essential public
facilities.

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

The purpose of the inventory is to create a comprehensive
description of the assets within or outside of the Community whose
loss or impairment due to flood events would compromise essential
functions or critical facilities of the Community. The inventory
documents both landscape features and vulnerable elements of the
asset itself that contribute to flood risk.
Assets were identified in three geographic areas at risk to storm
inundation and sea level rise. The three risk areas, described below,
help identify which assets have likely been affected by coastal
hazards, or could be affected in the future:
•

•

•

Extreme Risk Area: Assets located in the extreme risk area
are currently at risk of frequent inundation, vulnerable to
erosion in the next 40 years, or likely to be inundated in the
future due to sea level rise.
High Risk Area: Assets upland of the Extreme risk area that
are currently at occasional risk of inundation or at future risk
from sea level rise.
Moderate Risk Area: Assets upland of the High Risk Area that
are currently at infrequent risk of inundation or at risk in the
future from sea level rise.

The data and methods to create the three risk areas are available on
the NYRCR website. 12

Page | 45

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 6: Risk Area and Hurricane Inundation, Map 1 of 4

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Page | 46

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 7: Risk Area and Hurricane Inundation, Map 2 of 4

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Page | 47

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 8: Risk Area and Hurricane Inundation, Map 3 of 4

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Page | 48

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 9: Risk Area and Hurricane Inundation, Map 4 of 4

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Page | 49

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The complete asset inventory, found in Section 5, Part D, provides
detailed information on each identified asset, such as its classification
as a critical or non-critical facility, whether the asset serves a
vulnerable population, and the relative value, or importance, of the
asset to the Community. The NYRCR Fire Island Planning Committee
(Committee) identified the assets’ value as high, medium, or low.

shorelines lacking the protective features of wide beaches, healthy
dunes, and stable, indigenous vegetation are at increased risk of
flooding. Specific features of the asset that are at risk (e.g.,
mechanical equipment below flooding elevation) are also recorded in
the inventory. These important observations will help guide the
selection of appropriate strategies and projects for risk reduction.

Low: Assets(s) that play a role in the functioning of a community’s day
to day life, but whose loss could be managed and overcome with in a
community without substantial impact to that community’s
functioning. Can be started, replaced, or temporarily duplicated in a
short-term time frame with limited burden to a community’s longterm health.

Below is an overview of Community assets, including the risk area in
which they are located and identification of community value.

Medium: Asset(s) that are important to the functioning of that
community’s day to day life and that the loss of that asset or
extended lack of functioning would cause hardship to the
community’s well-being but whose function could be replaced or
duplicated in a mid-term time frame without significant burden to a
community’s long-term health.
High: Asset(s) that are so significant in the support of that
community’s day to day function that the loss of that asset or
extended lack of functioning would create severe impacts to the
community’s long-term health and well-being or result in the loss of
life or injury to residents employees or visitors.
As part of the complete inventory contributing landscape attributes
and physical features of the asset that contributed to the severity of
storm impacts were noted. For example, assets located near
Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Economic
All of the commercial properties within the NYRCR Fire Island
Community are located within or adjacent to a risk area. Of the 126
at-risk commercial properties within the NYRCR Fire Island
Community, 94 and 31 are located in Extreme and High Risk Areas,
respectively. One commercial property is located in a Moderate Risk
Area.
Therefore, most of the stores, restaurants, and other businesses that
support these communities and tourism can be damaged in one
major storm, making it difficult for the communities to function and
for tourism to recover until these assets are again operable.
Table 2: Economic Resources
Asset

Risk Area

Community Value

94 commercial properties

Extreme

Medium

31 commercial properties

High

Medium

1 commercial property

Moderate

Medium
Page | 50

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Health and Social Services: Life Safety
Health and Social Services: Life Safety includes fire protection, police
services, hospitals, and emergency operations facilities. There are five
Emergency Operations Facilities in Suffolk County. These facilities
would coordinate emergency services during an emergency. Two of
these facilities are along the South Shore of Long Island: the Babylon
Town Civil Defense facility is located directly north of the NYRCR
Village of Lindenhurst Community and the Islip Public Safety facility is
located between the NYRCR West Islip and the Oakdale/West Sayville
Communities. As none of these Emergency Operations Facilities are
located on Fire Island, communication between these facilities and
Fire Island emergency responders is a critical issue.
The NYRCR Fire Island Community has one police station, the Ocean
Beach Police Department. The Police Station is located in the extreme
risk area. In addition, there are four Suffolk County Police booths
located on Fire Island – all of which are operated seasonally and
located in the extreme risk area. With all of the police facilities
located in extreme risk areas, they could all become inoperable
and/or inaccessible in a major storm, requiring alternate facilities to
be located.

issue. Additionally, backup power is necessary to keep these facilities
operational during and after storms.
There are a few doctors’ offices but no hospitals located within the
NYRCR Fire Island Community. The closest hospital, Good Samaritan
Hospital Medical Center, is located in West Islip. Therefore it is
important that helicopter pads, docks, and emergency access routes
for air, water, and land transport to mainland hospitals are
maintained.
Table 3: Police Stations
Asset
Ocean Beach Police
Department
Suffolk County Police Booth:
Ocean Bay Park
Suffolk County Police Booth:
Fire Island Pines
Suffolk County Police Booth:
Kismet
Suffolk County Police Booth:
Atlantique

Risk Area
Extreme

Community Value
High

Extreme

High

Extreme

High

Extreme

High

Extreme

High

The NYRCR Fire Island Community has nine Fire Stations within it.
Seven fire stations are located in the extreme risk area. Davis Park
Fire Station and the Cherry Grove Fire Station are located in the high
risk area. As with the police facilities these facilities are also located in
extreme and high risk areas. Some of these facilities flood regularly
and improvements to shoreline defenses are required to resolve this
Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Page | 51

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 4: Fire Stations
Asset
Risk Area
Fair Harbor Fire Station
Extreme
Ocean Beach Fire Station
Extreme
Ocean Bay Park Fire Station
Extreme
Kismet Fire Station
Extreme
Point O Woods Fire Station
Extreme
Saltaire Fire Station
Extreme
Davis Park Fire Station
High
Cherry Grove Fire Station
High
Fire Island Pines Fire Station Extreme

Community Value
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High

Health and Social Services: Administration and Education
Community assets related to Health and Social Services:
Administration and Education serve a variety of public functions, from
health treatment facilities to general purpose shelters in public
schools, and post offices to town halls. During a storm event, these
facilities may potentially serve as critical disaster response and
recovery centers, the identification of which is essential to future
disaster management and preparedness.
There is a U.S. Coast Guard Station located in the NYRCR Fire Island
Community but outside of the risk areas.
Table 5: Federal Non-Recreation Area

The Woodhull School is located at Surf Road and Midway Walk in a
moderate to high risk area of Ocean Beach. This school serves the
year-round population and was not damaged during Superstorm
Sandy due to its location on slightly higher ground.
Table 6: Schools
Risk Area

Asset
Woodhull School

Moderate and
High

Low

One State-owned building is located within a moderate risk area near
the entrance of the Robert Moses State Park.

Asset

Table 7: State-owned Buildings and Properties
Risk Area
Community Value

Main Office Parks &
Recreation

Moderate

Medium

The NYRCR Fire Island Community is served by two Village halls,
located in Saltaire and Ocean Beach. Both are located along the
northern Fire Island shoreline inside moderate to extreme risk areas.

Asset

Table 8: Town/Village/City Hall
Risk Area
Community Value

Asset

Risk Area

Community Value

Village of Ocean Beach

U.S. Coast Guard Station

None

High

Village of Saltaire

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Community Value

Moderate, High,
and Extreme
Moderate, High,
and Extreme

Low
Low

Page | 52

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 9: Housing Resources

Housing
From the early 1970s to the present day, the National Flood
Insurance Program has been a major asset in bolstering real estate
values of private property in the NYRCR Fire Island Community. The
past four decades have seen the construction of large modern homes
in some communities that co-exist with the simple beach shacks built
on the island prior to that time. Many of these newer homes have
been retrofitted with heating and air conditioning systems, which
have required upgrading of the electrical cabling going from the
mainland to the beach.
There are approximately 3,963 single-family, 18 two-to-three-family,
and 165 multi-family structures that are at-risk in the NYRCR Fire
Island Community. The remaining structures which are not within a
risk area are typically directly adjacent to one. In addition, singlefamily homes comprise 96% of all residential structures within the
NYRCR Fire Island Community. It is important to note that there are
approximately 165 at-risk multi-family residential structures in the
NYRCR Fire Island Community.
With so many homes in risk areas, assistance to elevate homes or to
perform other hardening would make the Community safer. In
addition, as these homes are closely spaced, maintaining adequate
fire protection facilities at all times – but especially after storms – is
important to contain fires to a single building.

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Asset

Risk Area

Community Value

2,369 single-family, 9 twothree-family, 117 multi-family
structures
1,453 single-family, 7 twothree-family, 46 multi-family
structures
141 single-family, 2 multifamily units

Extreme

High

High

High

Moderate

High

Infrastructure: Transportation
Assets in this category include transportation infrastructure as well as
transportation-related facilities, which in the NYRCR Fire Island
Community includes water-borne modes of transit including ferries
and water taxis as well as helipads for emergency air transport.
Seasonal ferry service serving Fire Island emanates from Bay Shore,
Sayville, and Patchogue. The walkable distance between the Bay
Shore train station and the ferries going to most of the developed
communities on the beach, make Fourth Avenue/Maple Avenue in
Bay Shore seasonally one of the busiest pedestrian corridors in all of
Suffolk County. In Sayville, part of the ferry infrastructure includes an
extensive livery service from the train station to the ferry docks on
Brown’s River because the distance is not very walkable. In
Patchogue, one train-ferry connection of a mere 100-yard distance
from the LIRR station to the National Park Service terminal, makes
this connection the most popular for visitors and campers heading for
the FINS Watch Hill facility. Ferry landing points are indicated below.
Page | 53

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Ferry docks, by their function, must be in extreme risk areas. As they
are so critical to evacuation and important at all times for transport of
people and materials, the dock facilities need to be strong enough to
withstand major storms.
Table 10: Ferry Terminals
Asset
Ocean Bay Park
Ocean Beach
Seaview
Cherry Grove
Point O Woods
Saltaire
Kismet
Davis Park
Atlantique
Fair Harbor
Dunewood
Fire Island Pines
Sunken Forest

Risk Area
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Community Value
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High

There are three helipads on Fire Island, with ball fields and State and
County parking fields used as well for emergency air transport.
Table 11: Helipads
Asset
Davis Park
Fire Island Pines
Sailor’s Haven

Risk Area
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Community Value
High
High
High

There are no roads listed, as Fire Island by design does not have
roadways. However, many of the walkways used by pedestrians and
emergency vehicles, and the unpaved access route for emergency
vehicles, are located in high and extreme risk areas and were
damaged by Superstorm Sandy. In fact, part of the emergency access
route is still inoperable as of March 2014 due to the breach at Old
Inlet. Maintenance of these walkways and routes is essential to
support the communities.
The State data review indicated that the following bridges were
designated as in poor condition. 13 As previously noted, New York
State recently allocated $23,000,000 in Federal funds to begin beach
stabilization and infrastructure protection at Robert Moses State Park
to nourish park beaches and strengthen the shoreline buffers
protecting the Robert Moses traffic circle and Ocean Parkway from
future storms. Another State project will replace the Robert Moses
Causeway Bridge over Fire Island Inlet.
Table 12: Bridges in Poor Condition
Asset
Risk Area
Community Value
William Floyd Parkway Ext.
Extreme
High
crossing Narrow Bay (BIN #
3300770)
Robert Moses Causeway
Extreme
High
(908J) at Fire Island Inlet
(BIN # 1058770)

Page | 54

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Infrastructure: Utilities
The utilities in the NYRCR Fire Island Community comprise water
supply facilities – for drinking water pumping and treatment – and
communications towers. Almost all of these water supply facilities are
situated in extreme and high risk areas. Back-up power for wells and
treatment facilities, and interconnections between systems, can help
to ensure continuity of water supply. Water and electrical power lines
and telephone infrastructure, though extant throughout the
developed portions of the NYRCR Fire Island Community, have not
been mapped and quantified here. It has been noted that the
telephone infrastructure on Fire Island was severely damaged during
Sandy and according to Verizon, will be replaced with a fiber optic
network on the western portion of the Island.
Table 13: Infrastructure Resources
Asset
Risk Area Community Value
14 utility properties (including 1
Extreme
High
sewage treatment plant, 6
drinking water plants, 17 drinking
water wells, 1 microwave tower)
17 utility properties (including 8
High
High
drinking water plants, 17 drinking
water wells)
1 utility property (including 1
Moderate High
drinking water plant, 2 drinking
water wells)

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Dock and water tower

Page | 55

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Natural and Cultural Resources
Natural and Cultural Resources include natural habitats, wetlands and
marshes, recreation facilities, parks, open space, religious
establishments, libraries, museums, historic landmarks, and
performing arts venues.
There are numerous regional natural and recreational assets
beginning with the parks facilities scattered along the beach, but
concentrated at the ends and in the middle. The Robert Moses State
Park and Smith Point County Park are accessible by vehicle unlike the
rest of the NYRCR Fire Island Community. Off-road vehicle use east of
Robert Moses and both east and west from Smith Point County Park
bring into conflict the recreational aspect of off-roading with potential
impacts to portions of the natural beachfront, fore-dune and middleof-the-island areas and the fragile plants that hold the sand in place in
these areas. However, the vehicle control points of the FINS at Fire
Island Lighthouse and the entrance to the Otis Pike Wilderness area
near Smith Point are considered Community assets for their ability to
screen unauthorized vehicle traffic. Taken as a whole, Fire Island
barrier beach and its ability to shield the mainland from extensive
flooding and wave damage constitute a regional asset for these
mainland communities. An unusual asset for the western developed
beach communities from Kismet to Point O’ Woods would include the
large hard-surface parking lot expanse of “Field Five” of Robert Moses
State Park, which has doubled as a staging area for supplies,
emergency electrical generation, construction equipment, etc.

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Other important recreational assets for Fire Island include sheltered
marinas and boat basins on the Great South Bay. Winter and early
spring ice melt after especially cold winter freezes, combined with
northeast winds, can and does send floating ice chunks crashing into
exposed marine facilities on the bayside of the beach in locations
where no back bay wetlands or natural shoreline exist.
Many of the recreational and natural resources on Fire Island are
located in the extreme risk area and are at risk of frequent inundation
or are vulnerable to erosion. Improvements to wetland systems and
other shoreline defenses, docks, and marinas are needed to address
these concerns.
Table 14: Parkland Resources
Asset

Risk Area

Community Value

Robert Moses State Park

Moderate, High,
and Extreme
Moderate, High,
and Extreme
Moderate, High,
and Extreme
High and
Extreme

Medium

Fire Island National
Seashore
Smith Point County Park
Cupsogue County Park

Medium
Medium
Medium

Regional natural/cultural/historic sites which are identified as assets
in the NYRCR Fire Island Community include the Sunken Forest and
the Flight 800 memorial.

Page | 56

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 15: Natural Resources
Asset
Risk Area
Inland Freshwater Wetlands Moderate, High,
and Extreme
Great South Bay Underwater Extreme and
Lands (Bluepoints)
None
Webster Preserve (within
Extreme
FINS)
Libutti Preserve (within
Extreme
FINS)
Natural Heritage
Extreme
Communities: Maritime
Beach (length of island) and
Maritime Dunes (western
end of island)
Flight 800 Memorial (within Extreme
Smith Point County Park)
Sunken Forest (within FINS)
Moderate and
Extreme

Community Value
Medium
High
Medium
Medium
High

Low
Medium

Two National Register-Listed resources are located in the NYRCR Fire
Island Community. The Fire Island Light Station lighthouse is located
within the FINS and was damaged during Superstorm Sandy.
Table 16: National Register Listed Historic Resources
Community Value
Asset
Risk Area
Low
Fire Island Light Station
High
Cherry Grove Community High
Low
House and Theater

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Fire Island Lighthouse

Page | 57

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
capacity of an asset to return to service after a storm. If an asset
recovers quickly with limited interruption in service it has low
vulnerability. An asset with extended service loss or permanently
reduced capacity would be considered to be significantly
vulnerable.

Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems
Risk is the chance that an asset will be damaged or destroyed.
Assessing the risk to Community assets and systems helped the
Committee identify projects and understand measures that would
help to restore and protect assets at the greatest flood risk while also
ensuring appropriate long-term economic growth. The three factors
that contribute to the measure of overall risk for each asset are:
•

•

•

Hazard: The likelihood and magnitude of future storm events.
Examples of the most common hazard risks include coastal
flooding, flooding in a 100-year floodplain, sea level rise, or
hurricanes. Typically, an asset located in an Extreme risk area
experiences hazards with greater frequency and intensity that
assets in a High or Moderate risk area. This risk assessment uses
the “100-year” flood event, which has a 1% annual chance of
occurrence, as the baseline event.
Exposure: The variability of topographic and shoreline features
which tend to increase or decrease storm effects on assets. If
assets are more exposed (e.g., situated on low-lying floodplains,
directly exposed to a probable storm surge, or otherwise
unprotected), they are more likely to suffer storm effects than
similar assets located at a higher elevation or on a rocky shoreline
protected by dunes. Similarly, landscape features and vegetation
are more important for an asset proximate to a flood source than
an asset further inland.
Vulnerability: The level of impairment or consequences that
assets may experience from a storm event, expressed as the
Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

The NYRCR Consultant team used a standardized Risk Assessment
Tool to assist the Committee in estimating the risk to their assets and,
later, to test whether various projects and management measures
will reduce the risk to those assets. The Risk Assessment Tool is
available at http://www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr.
The asset inventory provided a baseline to identify the most critical
assets in the Community to be advanced through the Risk Assessment
Tool for further analysis. The assets selected from the inventory for
input into the Risk Assessment Tool include:
•
•
•
•
•

Assets situated in extreme and high risk areas,
Critical Assets (FEMA-critical) in moderate risk areas,
Locally-significant Community identified (High Community Value)
in moderate risk areas,
Assets with high community value in non-risk areas, and
Assets providing critical life safety services

In addition, similar assets were grouped as a single asset to the
maximum extent possible because these assets would likely
experience the same effects from storm events and have similar risk
scores. For example, residential neighborhoods with similar
construction were combined by risk area.
Page | 58

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
For each asset input into the Risk Assessment Tool, the three factors
that contribute to risk are scored and multiplied to produce a final
risk score. The information collected during the Asset Inventory is
automatically entered into the Risk Assessment Tool to calculate the
Risk Score. The formula to calculate risk is:
Hazard x Exposure x Vulnerability = Risk 14
The final risk scores will provide the community with a general sense
of which assets are at greatest risk and where projects and
management measures are needed to adapt assets to future storms
and environmental changes. The complete list of assets advanced
through the Risk Assessment Tool, and their corresponding risk
scores, are provided in Section 5 Additional Materials.

NYRCR Fire Island Risk Assessment Results
The inventory catalogued over 150 assets gathered from NYS
databases and Committee and Community knowledge of the area.
These were carried through for analysis in the Risk Assessment Tool.
These assets ranged from residential housing, located primarily within
the extreme and high risk areas to the small commercial districts
located along the bay front and primarily within the extreme risk
area. Similarly, the majority of the natural and cultural resources on
Fire Island are located within the extreme risk area. These assets
include parks (both Community parks and the larger, State, and
Federal parks), Community centers, historical structures, and
Community-owned marinas and docks. Other asset categories
included infrastructure facilities (encompassing both utilities and
Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

transportation facilities), health and social services, and sociallyvulnerable populations. Notably, both the Community and
Committee identified many high value resources within the
infrastructure category.
The assets input into the Risk Assessment Tool received a final risk
determination of severe, high, moderate, or residual, as illustrated in
Table 17 and Figure 10 to Figure 13. The identification number on the
table corresponds to the ID number shown on the map. The table is
also color coded by risk level, as follows:
Severe Risk assets are shown in red in the table and map. Assets at
severe risk have both very high exposure and very high vulnerability
to storm effects, which could represent that the asset is in a
dangerous situation or location.
High Risk assets are shown in orange. Assets at high risk have either
very high exposure or very high vulnerability to storm effects, which
could lead to significant negative outcomes from a storm event.
Moderate Risk assets are shown in yellow. Storm events pose
moderate to serious consequences on these assets, but adaptation
may be of lower priority due to one factor, either the exposure or
vulnerability, remaining relatively low.
Residual Risk assets are shown in green. Both the exposure and
vulnerability of these assets are relatively low. This situation suggests
floods would pose a minor threat or infrequent consequences.

Page | 59

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 17: Asset Key
ID#
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

Name
Belvedere Hotel, Cherry Grove
Cherry Grove Commercial District
Grocery, Seaview
Market, Saltaire
Ocean Beach Commercial District
Davis Park Commercial Buildings
Fire Island Pines Commercial District
Kismet Commercial District
US Post Office, Ocean Beach
Fair Harbor Commercial District
Ocean Bay Park Commercial District
Point O' Woods Commercial District
Fire Island Hotel, Ocean Bay Park
Cherry Grove Post Office
Fire Island Pines Community Health Center - Seasonal Doctor Office
Cherry Grove Fire Station
Doctor's House, Seaview
Ocean Beach Fire Department
Ocean Beach Union Free Church
Our Lady of the Magnificat Church, Ocean Beach
Police Station, Ocean Beach
Saltaire Volunteer Fire Company
St. Andrews Church, Saltaire
Village of Ocean Beach Community House
Village Office, Ocean Beach
Community Owned Tennis Courts, Dunewood
Doctor's Office, Davis Park
Fair Harbor Fire Department Station
Fire Island Pines Police Station
Fire Island Synagogue, Seaview
Ocean Bay Park Volunteer Fire Department
Post Office/Library, Saltaire
Public Restrooms, Davis Park
Village of Saltaire City Hall
Our Lady Star of the Sea Church, Saltaire
Church, Davis Park
Davis Park Fire House
Helipad, Davis Park
Rectory, Davis Park
Water Co. Police, Davis Park

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76

Church, Point O' Woods
Kismet Fire Department
Kismet Fire House
Point O' Woods Fire Department Station
Point O' Woods Post Office
Suffolk County Police Booth, Ocean Bay Park
U.S Coast Guard Station
Cherry Grove Police Station
Doctor's Office, Ocean Beach
Doctor's House / Healthcare Office, Cherry Grove
Fire Island Pines Fire Station
Public Restrooms, Fair Harbor
Woodhull School, Corneille Estates
Suffolk County Police Helipad, Fire Island Pines
Fire Island Residential Housing - Extreme Risk Area
Fire Island Residential Housing - High Risk Area
Fire Island Residential Housing - Moderate Risk Area
Helipad - destroyed in Sandy, Cherry Grove
Water Island Fire Wells
Atlantique Ferry Dock
Dune X-ing, Coast Guard Walk
Dune X-ing, Davis Park, 200' east of Trustees walk
Dune X-ing, east end of Fire Island Blvd thru FINS
Dune X-ing, east end Traffic Ave, 240' east of Seneca
Dune X-ing, Sth of Center Walk, 200' east of Trustees
Emergency Access Route
Ocean Beach Ferry Dock
Point O Woods Ferry Dock
Island-wide Roads/Walkways - Extreme Risk Area
Saltaire Water Drinking Water Treatment and Well
SCWA Drinking Water Treatment & Well, Fire Island Pines
SCWA Harbor Walk Water Treatment Plant, Fire Island Pines
Cherry Grove Ferry Dock
Davis Park Ferry Dock
Davis Park Marina
Dunewood Ferry Dock

COLOR KEY:

Extreme Risk Area
High Risk Area
Moderate Risk Area
Residual Risk Area

Page | 60

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ID#
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117

Table 17 (cont’d)

Name
Kismet Ferry Dock
Microwave Tower, Davis Park
Microwave Tower, Ocean Beach
Ocean Bay Park Ferry Dock
Saltaire Ferry Dock
SCWA - Bayview Walk Drinking Water Treatment, Cherry Grove
SCWA Drinking Water Treatment & Well, Dunewood
SCWA Drinking Water Well, Davis Park 1
Seaview Ferry Dock
Water Island Community Dock (seasonal)
SCWA Harbor Walk Water Well, Fire Island Pines
SCWA Wells - Inground Storage, Ocean Bay Park
Electric Power Center, Fire Island Pines
Robert Moses Water Tower
Roads/Walkways - High Risk Area
SCWA Drinking Water Treatment, Davis Park
SCWA Drinking Water Well, Davis Park 2
Transfer Station, Saltaire
Fair Harbor Ferry Dock
Ocean Beach Water District - drinking water wells
Point O' Woods Marina
Sailors Haven Ferry Dock
SCWA - Drinking Water Treatment, Corneille Estates
SCWA building, Lonelyville
SCWA, Lonelyville
Sunken Forest Ferry Dock
Village of Ocean Beach - water treatment
Village of Ocean Beach Sewage
Watch Hill Ferry Dock
Roads/Walkways - Moderate Risk Area
Point O' Woods SCWA Water Treatment Plant and Well
Water interconnect, Border of Ocean Beach & Corneille Estates
Fire Island Pines Ferry Dock
Fire Island Pines Freight Dock
NY Telephone Co., Ocean Beach
SCWA Drinking Water Treatment, Fair Harbor
SCWA Well, Fair Harbor
Seaview/Ocean Bay Park Garbage Transfer Station
Village of Ocean Beach - water tower
Water Interconnect, Border of Seaview & Ocean Beach
SCWA - Well, Kismet

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154

SCWA Drinking Water Treatment, Kismet
Seaview Water Company
Talisman Beach Drinking Water Well
Water Interconnect, Border of Seaview & Ocean Bay Park
Verizon vehicle storage, Fire Island Pines
Bay beach, Fair Harbor
Community-owned dock #1, Lonelyville
Community-owned dock #2, Lonelyville
Youth Group "Windswept", Ocean Beach
Atlantique Beach and Marina
Baseball Diamond, Saltaire
Brodkin Park, Saltaire
Cherry Grove Community House - Historical Landmark
Community-Owned Dock, Atlantique
Dunes
Nature Preserve, Saltaire
Robert Moses State Park
Saltaire Camp & Recreation
Saltaire Yacht Club, Inc.
Seaview Community Marina
Yacht Club Dock & Pier, Fair Harbor
Kismet Marina
Saltaire Marina
Seaview Community Center
Atlantique Park
Robert Moses State Park Field Houses
Fire Island Lighthouse
Fire Island National Seashore West District Ranger Station
Dock owned by FI Ferries, Dunewood
Fire Island National Seashore
Ocean Bay Park Tennis Courts
Park, Ocean Bay Park
Two boat slip clubs off of Seabay Walk
Watch Hill Visitor Center and Marina
Yacht Club, Point O' Woods
Summer Club House, Corneille Estates
Kismet Tennis Courts

COLOR KEY:

Extreme Risk Area
High Risk Area
Moderate Risk Area
Residual Risk Area

Page | 61

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 10: Assets at Risk, Map 1 of 4

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Page | 62

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 11: Assets at Risk, Map 2 of 4

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Page | 63

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 12: Assets at Risk, Map 3 of 4

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Page | 64

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 13: Assets at Risk, Map 4 of 4

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Page | 65

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Overall risk score classifications ranged from Moderate Risk at
facilities like the Suffolk County Police Department helicopter pad in
Fire Island Pines to Severe Risk at the Windswept Youth Center in
Ocean Beach. Resources located along the bay front generally scored
in the Severe Risk range with some High Risk assets interspersed.
Nearly all of the marinas, Community docks, and ferry docks were
classified as assets subject to Severe Risk. It is significant to note that
forty-eight assets or systems identified by the Risk Assessment Tool
(out of 154) were classified as being at severe flood risk and an
additional 78 were classified as being at high flood risk. These results
are indicative of the extremely vulnerable situation that many of the
Fire Island communities face in regards to confronting future storm
events.
The following assets received the highest risk score among the
inventoried assets: the Youth Group "Windswept" in Ocean Beach;
the Fire Island Pines Community Health Center and Seasonal Doctor
Office; the Cherry Grove Helipad destroyed in Superstorm Sandy; the
Water Island Fire Wells; two Community-owned docks in Lonelyville;
and Bay beach in Fair Harbor. These assets received such a high risk
score because many of these assets have experienced a permanent
loss of service or had a service interruption of six months or more.
Two of these assets, the Water Island Fire Wells and the Cherry Grove
helipad, are considered critical facilities that are necessary for the
effective deployment of emergency services and operations within
these Fire Island communities.

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Damaged dune crossing stairs 15
Additionally, emergency facilities, beaches and dunes, and marinas
(docks) were all rated as high value Community assets by the
Committee; which further supports the need to protect and
strengthen the resiliency of these assets.
The scoring of these assets helped to inform, focus, and provide
context for types of projects considered by the NYRCR Committee. As
will be described later in this report, many of these critical assets are
addressed in the proposed, features or additional resiliency projects.
Improvements to passenger and ferry docks are included in the
proposed and featured projects. Repair of the Windswept Facility and
a new water supply service for Water Island are Additional Resiliency
Recommendations.
Page | 66

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
B. ASSESSMENT OF NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES
The NYRCR Fire Island Committee initially identified needs and
opportunities based on the Community’s reconstruction and
economic growth goals, existing plans and studies, and the
Community’s overall vision for its future.

The post-disaster environment also presents opportunities to rebuild in
such a way to create a Community that is stronger and more resilient to
future storms. Resilient communities tend to have redundant
infrastructure and communication systems, diverse and flexible
adaptation strategies, and collaborative public and private partnerships.

The term “need” is used here to illustrate infrastructure and services
that were damaged or rendered inoperable by Superstorm Sandy as
well as methods and operations that failed to work during the storm
event or experienced insufficient capacity to respond effectively.
During a disaster, many things can go wrong, from communications
breakdowns, equipment failure, infrastructure damage and more.
Thinking through what took place during the storm event, as well as
what was damaged, provided the Committee with insights as to the
inherent resiliency of those structures, procedures, and operations.
This assessment process led to a frank discussion of Community
needs and includes recognition of changing climate patterns and the
economic and practical necessity of factoring resiliency and adaptive
capacity into recovery actions.
Opportunities are based on the idea that additional resiliency
benefits, whether economic, environmental, social, or cultural, may
be achieved through the integration of new methods, procedures,
and materials into the normal course of rebuilding.

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Elevated homes
Throughout this plan, strategies and projects are categorized and
discussed in terms of their Recovery Support Function (RSF). An RSF is an
operational or coordinating structure first introduced by FEMA in 2011 in
the “National Disaster Recovery Framework” 16. The purpose of the RSF
method is to support local governments by facilitating problem solving,
improving access to resources, and fostering coordination among State
and Federal agencies, nongovernmental partners, and stakeholders.

Page | 67

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
There are six RSFs, which are listed and defined below.
•

Community Planning and Capacity Building (CPCB): The
Community’s ability both to implement storm recovery
activities and to plan to mitigate the effects of future storms;

•

Economic Development: Returning economic and business
activities to a state of health and developing new economic
opportunities that result in a stronger, more resilient
Community;

•

Health and Social Services (HSS): The restoration, and
potential expansion of public health programs, healthcare
facilities, and essential social services, especially for
vulnerable populations on the island;

•

Housing: An assessment of local housing conditions and
associated risk levels is critical as communities continue to
rebuild;

•

Infrastructure: Investments in infrastructure can be effective
both in rebuilding capabilities lost during the storm and in
reducing future risks to critical assets; and

•

Natural and Cultural Resources (NCR): The rehabilitation,
management, and protection of the natural and cultural
resources that define the Community’s physical and human
character. Natural resources include aspects of a
Community’s underlying ecological habitat such as ground
and surface waters, streams and creeks, woodlands, wetlands
Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

and open marsh, beaches and dunes. Cultural resources may
include historic properties and places that are part of that
Community’s identity and social life.

Community Planning and Capacity Building
Following Superstorm Sandy, the Committee observed that the
emergency response entities did an excellent job but were hampered
by equipment problems, including those having to do with
communications. Also, given the number of communities along Fire
Island and the variation of authority jurisdictions (incorporated
Villages, unincorporated hamlets within Towns, State, and Federal
facilities), the working relationships between communities is
important to maintain and refresh as leadership changes over time.
All of this contributed to an increase in risk, potentially jeopardizing
life and property and prolonging recovery efforts. Due to the
vulnerability of the nature of being located on a barrier island, there
is an overall need to make homes, businesses, as well as public and
privates facilities more resilient. On Fire Island, it is particularly
important to provide information about barrier island issues because
the large influx of seasonal renters and visitors are often unaware of
these risks and unfamiliar with local emergency procedures.

Page | 68

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The NYRCR Fire Island Community includes Federal, State, County,
Town, and Village interests, along with the Fire Island Association,
real estate groups, homeowner associations, property owner
associations, and local business associations scattered throughout the
small communities. As such, projects and strategies developed during
the NYRCR process must take into account this complex jurisdictional
framework. Both the public and Committee agreed that ongoing
communication among the various jurisdictional entities is a critical
requirement for improving island-wide resiliency and disaster
preparedness. Coordination amongst the jurisdictions, especially
those involved in construction, will also benefit homes, businesses,
and Community facilities in rebuilding efforts. Communication
between key agencies on the mainland and Fire Island communities
on a regular basis will ensure a coordinated and efficient rescue and
response effort in the event of an emergency. It would also allow first
responders and emergency personnel an opportunity to
communicate with each other and direct supplemental services into
the Community when necessary. A robust public information program
will provide an opportunity to educate visitors and seasonal renters
regarding evacuation, communication, and preparedness procedures.

Economic Development
Superstorm Sandy caused extensive damage to many homes and
businesses on Fire Island. While the storm occurred at the close of
the busy season, the impacts extended well into the following year.
Part of the impact to Fire Island’s economy was due to the time
required for the rebuilding process. Because of the configuration of
access within communities, storm debris removal was slow and the
Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

shipment of new building materials from the mainland to Fire Island
was also slow. However, the Committee observed that much of the
impact in 2013 was due to a perception that Fire Island remained in a
severely damaged state and thus was not a suitable summer
destination for seasonal rentals or day trips. This perception differed
from reality, but nevertheless, the economic impact was real. The
NYRCR Committee felt that a primary need moving forward is to
sustain the commercial, recreational and tourism assets on Fire Island
in order to maintain a solid tax base. The Committee hopes to
address this need with a publicity and informational campaign.
Fire Island is an economic generator both in the short term and
seasonal housing rental activity within the 17 individual communities
as well as in its role as a regional tourism and recreational destination
typified by visitors to the communities and State and Federal Park
facilities. These activities drive a large seasonal economy associated
with the Fire Island National Seashore along with State, County and
local beaches, parks and marinas. The economy is also fueled by a
large second home and rental market, which demands a wide variety
of goods and services. Consequently, opportunities exist to
strengthen the business ties to the tourists and other visitors. A 2003
Study by Suffolk County on the impact of beaches on the economy
noted 2.2 million annual visits to Fire Island communities, with $50.12
million spent and $66.83 million in total economic activity (in 1999
dollars) with 756 jobs. 17 Targeting economic development programs,
low interest loans, and marketing programs helps to maintain the
base of important taxable assets.

Page | 69

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Ocean Beach shops

Health and Social Services
The threat of vector-borne diseases, such as West Nile virus and Lyme
disease, were identified as a long time public health issue on Fire
Island, particularly for young children and the elderly. The Committee
recognized the need to explore any possible negative connections
between the health issues and storm damage. For example, overwash
or scouring related to moving water has created new areas of
standing water or altered vegetation, possibly becoming new
breeding grounds for mosquitoes or habitat for ticks. The opportunity
presents itself to reduce exposure to potential harmful disease
vectors through well-understood and practiced management
strategies.

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Free roaming deer

Housing
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD),
Office of Policy Development and Research, prepared an Analysis of
Communities Impacted by Hurricane Sandy (January 29, 2013, draft).
It estimated that 99 year-round homes in the Fire Island CDP were
damaged, of which 82 sustained “heavy” damage (>50%) or “strong”
damage (20% to 50%). Ninety-five (95) of the damaged homes (96%)
experienced flooding, primarily in the range of one to four feet of
water. In total, 56% of the entire year-round housing stock in the
Community was damaged.

Page | 70

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Data for seasonal homes is not available at this time, but as the
seasonal homes are interspersed with the year-round homes, similar
types of damage likely occurred.
The Committee and Community took note of the substantial damage
to the housing stock in many of the communities. Almost all of Fire
Island is in the extreme or high risk areas. Thirty-two and a half
percent of the year-round households within the Fire Island CDP were
constructed before 1950, 36.1% between 1950 and 1970, and 31.4%
from 1970 to the present. Many structures pre-date current flood
resistant design standards and were severely damaged. With nearly
70% of year-round households constructed prior to 1970, there may
be significant opportunities to modernize homes to become more
resilient to floods and wind storms. The Committee strongly
supported efforts to encourage flood resistant designs that would
minimize damage from future storms. This would involve such
improvements as the elevation of structures, the relocation of
heating systems and electrical panels above projected flood levels,
upgrading windows, doors, and any other openings, roof strapping,
and overall reinforcing the structural integrity of the homes, all
proven best design practices to address these construction and
location issues.

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Infrastructure
One need specifically identified by the Committee was the protection
of the bay front edge along the north side of the island. The Great
South Bay coastline of Fire Island, principally in the developed
communities, is best described as a patchwork of public and private
land, with a combination of bulkheading, rip-rap, and natural
shoreline features. The complex and discontinuous nature of the bay
shoreline requires a far more comprehensive management approach
than exists today. Like most barrier islands, the bayside is at a lower
elevation than the ocean side, which leaves the many facilities and
structures in this low area highly vulnerable to storm surge, erosion,
and flooding. Committee members reported that the greatest
flooding issues in the Villages and hamlets were/are caused by
bayside shoreline erosion and the lack or loss of protective features.
The Committee is recommending a comprehensive study to identify
steps that can be taken to reverse these problems and provide
greater resiliency against future storms.

Page | 71

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

View of bayside shoreline
The Committee found that Fire Island had extensive challenges to
emergency response. Part of this is due to the physical circumstances
of island geography coupled with 10-units-per-acre densities in the
developed communities and less than 50 -foot separations between
homes. The population can vary from hundreds in winter months to
approximately 20,000 in the summer months, plus day-trippers 18.
Emergency services are provided by volunteers, many of whom may
be on the mainland when needed. It was also noted that access
throughout the island is limited since vehicle use is generally
prohibited. The primary emergency access route, running roughly
midway between the Ocean and the Bay, along Fire Island sustained
considerable damage during Superstorm Sandy, which made
providing timely and efficient emergency services very difficult. With
Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

widespread evacuation of people possible via the ferries with
sufficient forewarning, the closely spaced structures, taxable assets,
Community facilities, inundated or buried switches, valves, pumps,
travel ways, and other infrastructure are the focus of emergency
response and emergency service. Maintaining access routes
(generally east-west) and walkways (generally north-south) is not
only important for emergency service providers during storm events –
it is also vital for daily activities within Fire Island’s communities.
Therefore, the improvement and stabilization of a reliable route for
emergency access and evacuation purposes was viewed as a highly
important improvement throughout the barrier island. The newly
created inlet, near “Old Inlet” (see Figure 14 below) prevents vehicles
and pedestrians from evacuating the island to the east toward
William Floyd Parkway. This new breach especially affects the easterly
communities of Cherry Grove, the Pines, and Davis Park.
Figure 14: Breach at Old Inlet Location

Page | 72

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Emergency responders should be well prepared to safely and
effectively assist the needs of the communities that they serve. It is
important to note that Superstorm Sandy occurred after the peak
season and that a similar storm occurring mid-season could create
significantly greater challenges for emergency responders. The
Committee identified many equipment needs for both
communications and emergency response. During and after
Superstorm Sandy, communications were frequently inoperable. Life
safety for those critical public safety personnel who needed to remain
on Fire Island, and property, with the potential for looting and the
quick spread of fire, were at an extreme risk.
In addition to issues of flooding and access (both by land and water),
power outages and inoperable communications equipment during
and after Superstorm Sandy were the strongest themes voiced by
Committee and Community members. Critical infrastructure for Fire
Island includes the east-west emergency access (Burma) route
mentioned previously, as well as key dock facilities located at the
northern ends of a few north-south walkways or in the bayside
business areas. These are critical for evacuation, emergency access
and the delivery of recovery materials. The improvement of the
Burma route as a vital east-west emergency/ evacuation route was
important to the Community. Similarly, the reconstruction of
damaged dock facilities at Davis Park, Cherry Grove, Fire Island Pines,
Ocean Beach, and Atlantique that serve emergency and essential
services (e.g., debris removal, solid waste removal, delivery of
construction materials, etc.) were also viewed as important by the
Committee. Power supply and communications equipment were also
Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

severely affected and disruptions of service continued for many
weeks and months following Superstorm Sandy. Hardening of much
of this infrastructure through examination and identification of “weak
links” will go a long way to reduce future vulnerability.

Freight boat carrying construction materials
The Suffolk County Water Authority (SCWA) provides the majority of
interconnected public water service on Fire Island, with the exception
of Water Island, Blue Point Beach, Seaview, and the Villages of Ocean
Beach and Saltaire. Water Island and Blue Point Beach still rely on
private wells, while Ocean Beach and Saltaire have their own
municipal systems. The Seaview Association operates its own
independent water system.
Rising water tables and storm surges have infiltrated wells on the
Island, requiring pumping out of the wells, or modifications to wells.
Another issue related to water supply is the availability of adequate
water and water pressure for fire response especially in areas which
Page | 73

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
are not close enough to the bay for pumping. Strengthening the
systems can be accomplished with more interconnections and backup facilities to improve pressure, flow, and resiliency. An individual
well can only perform to its maximum design, but when sources are
connected, the flow and pressure can go up significantly.

Natural and Cultural Resources
Fire Island is a narrow, low elevation barrier island with beaches,
dunes, wetlands, and woodlands that are part of the allure of the
Island as a destination and are also a vital part of the geomorphology
and, indeed, the life of the island. Much of Fire Island is within the
Fire Island National Seashore which includes over 5,000 acres of
parkland, open space, recreational areas, and historical sites plus
almost 15,000 acres of aquatic or submerged lands 19. The Fire Island
Lighthouse, visitor facilities at Watch Hill, Sailors Haven, and Talisman
were storm damaged, as were Community cultural facilities in Ocean
Beach, Cherry Grove, and other communities. Protective dunes were
leveled, wetlands over washed with sand, and beaches severely
diminished by Superstorm Sandy.

Section 2: Assessment of Risks and Needs

From an economic perspective, while restoring and enhancing
cultural facilities is vital to the long-term well-being of the Island
economy, the restoration of dunes, wetlands and the South Shore
Estuary are also critical to the viability of popular recreational uses,
including boating, fishing, swimming, surfing, bird-watching, and
other maritime activities.
The importance of the barrier beach as the first line of defense for
the South Shore Estuary is of critical importance to the flood-prone
communities on the north side of the estuary. The acknowledged
ability of the beaches, dunes, and wetlands to absorb energy from
damaging wind and water speaks to the opportunity and importance
of restoring and enhancing these natural features. These assets are
important to both the protection of Fire Island as well as to the
mainland of Long Island.
Table 18 follows and summarizes the Needs and Opportunities
identified through the planning process.
View of a marina and bayside shoreline

Page | 74

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 18: Needs and Opportunities
Community Planning and Capacity Building
Need: Better coordination of essential services, including communication
Opportunity: Improve working relationships among Fire Island communities and the mainland municipalities/agencies
Need: Lack of public awareness regarding resiliency and emergency preparedness
Opportunity: Public education on barrier island issues for resiliency and preparedness
Need: Increase resiliency of homes, businesses and public and private facilities
Opportunity: Examine local codes and ordinances and their relationship to State and Federal programs for improved coordination
Economic Development
Need: Sustain commercial, recreational and tourism assets and functions
Opportunity: Utilize strategies that can build on and improve synergies amongst businesses and tourism.
Need: Protect and maintain taxable assets
Opportunity: Target the facilities important to tax base to determine methods to bolster these assets.
Health and Social Services
Need: Examine health impacts from storm damage, which may have improved conditions for potential disease vectors.
Opportunity: Utilize management strategies to reduce exposure to potentially harmful species such as mosquitoes and ticks
Housing
Need: Encourage resilient housing construction
Opportunity: Survey best practices with location and construction issues for application to housing restorations and reconstructions, as well as
new construction

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 75

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 18: Needs and Opportunities - continued
Infrastructure
Need: Improve bayside shoreline management
Opportunity: Approach bayside shoreline problems and solutions in a more comprehensive fashion.
Need: Strengthen public water supply infrastructure and systems
Opportunity: Examine interconnections between systems, pressure, and backup requirements.
Need: Maintain safe access to all communities
Opportunity: Examine storm damaged problem areas and emergency access/evacuation routes to determine ways to maintain safe access.
Need: Ensure that municipalities and first responders, including fire departments, have the necessary resources to prepare for and protect the
public, property and the natural environment during and after disasters
Opportunity: Explore new methods, new technologies, procedures, and materials needed to improve necessary disaster-related resources.
Need: Hardening of infrastructure to reduce future vulnerability and mitigate repetitive flooding, especially power, communication, and docks
Opportunity: Examine, and record “weak links” to determine priorities for hardening infrastructure
Natural and Cultural Resources
Need: Maintain and improve cultural and recreational facilities damaged by storms
Opportunity: Restoration of public recreational infrastructure for residents and tourists
Need: Improve the natural functioning of storm protective wetlands, dunes and beaches
Opportunity: Restore and enhance wetlands, dunes, and beaches

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 76

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

View of boats docked at a marina

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 77

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The process of identifying the Community’s post-storm needs and
opportunities informed the Committee’s development of strategies to
resolve these needs and realize opportunities. In turn, the strategies
assisted in the conceptualization and design of projects to specifically
address these needs and opportunities. Strategies can be types of
projects, programs, policies, or other actions that specifically address
an identifiable need. Typically, there exist several strategies to address
a given need. For example, communities are most successful when they
blend traditional stabilization and repair actions with a holistic, longrange, forward-looking view of recovery and economic development.
This section presents the strategies developed by the NYRCR Fire Island
Committee for how best to use Community assets, capitalize on
opportunities, and resolve critical issues.
For every need or opportunity, potential strategies were generated
for each resiliency issue from multiple management angles. The list of
strategies spans an array of methodologies and timeframes, from
preparedness to retrofits, from immediate procedural improvements
to long-range capital investment programs. Strategies also include
conservation of natural protective features, regulatory changes and
building code updates, structural defenses, resilient retrofits, market
measures, land use planning, and education and outreach in an effort
to employ multiple, complementary actions rather than relying on a
single means of protection.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Homes being elevated
Careful consideration was given to what is at risk, what resources are
available, and the capacity to implement various management
measures. As general resiliency strategies evolved to specific projects
and actions several factors were considered to begin prioritizing the
most effective and feasible strategies, and thus identify the best use
of recovery funds. These considerations included how each strategy
relates to Superstorm Sandy’s impacts on Fire Island; to what extent
each strategy would reduce current and projected risk; whether it
contributed to protection of vulnerable populations; feasibility of
successful implementation; compliance with existing regulations;
upfront and long-term maintenance costs; direct and indirect
benefits; and public perception.

Page | 78

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
To rebuild a more resilient Community, the Committee developed
reconstruction strategies which were derived from the assets that
were identified as being at risk relative to the Community’s needs; all
of which was discussed in the previous section of this report. Each
reconstruction strategy was designed to take into account the
following considerations:
•
•
•

Whether it reduced the level of risk and met an identified
Community need;
Whether it helped (or improved the resilience of) vulnerable
populations; and
Whether it could be implemented through discrete programs
and/or projects.

The Community’s reconstruction strategies are discussed and then
summarized in Table 19 through Table 27 on the following pages.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 79

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Create a mechanism for enhanced communication, collaboration, and regional planning among the many Fire
Island interests and the various levels of government on the Long Island mainland.
This Community Planning and Capacity Building Recovery Support Function strategy provides the opportunity for the communities of Fire Island
to jointly address the need for better coordination of essential services and improving relationships among Fire Island communities and the main
land through joint problem solving. This strategy addresses several needs identified by the Committee including better coordination of essential
services, and increasing public awareness regarding resiliency and emergency preparedness. By bringing all voices to the table, Fire Island-wide
issues can be addressed in a comprehensive way with everyone working towards an equitable solution for each issue. The strategy will also
provide vulnerable populations the opportunity to have their issues discussed and addressed across the barrier island as the forum would be
open to all residents and would address all issues brought before it.
The Proposed Project to implement this strategy is the development of a Fire Island Planning Forum. This forum would build upon similar efforts
accomplished through prior inter-municipal agreements that have been used to implement major construction projects on Fire Island. Instead of
ending those agreements when a project is complete, this would be an ongoing entity that could seamlessly address issues as they arise. Also, by
having a group that meets on an ongoing basis, issues can be addressed before they grow into larger concerns.
Many issues related to resiliency cannot be solved on an individual Village or hamlet level. Shoreline protection has to be looked at
comprehensively so one community’s improvements do not jeopardize neighboring shorelines. Water systems need to be interconnected so
damage in one area can be addressed by another undamaged source. Emergency response needs to be coordinated so that neighboring forces
can lend aid and equipment. Addressing these types of issues, as well as many others, all add to the resiliency of the entire Fire Island
environment and communities. And finally, establishing an ongoing dialogue with all levels of government and regulatory entities will lead to
better relationships and understanding of the others concerns and viewpoints, allowing the best decisions to be made in the urgency of an
emergency situation. An Additional Resiliency Recommendation associated with this strategy is an Education Campaign for homeowners, renters
and visitors. See Table 28 in Section 5 (Additional Materials) for more information on Additional Resiliency Recommendations.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 80

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 19: Strategy Summary 1
Strategy: Create a mechanism for enhanced communication, collaboration, and regional planning among the many Fire Island interests and
the Long Island mainland.
Project Name
Short Project Description
Estimated Cost
Proposed or
Regional Project
Featured Project
(Y/N)
Fire Island Planning Forum
Convene a planning forum to discuss
$50,000
Proposed
Y
issues and policies affecting all of Fire
Island.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 81

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Preserve local home values by increasing access to
additional hazard mitigation funds to minimize risk of storm
damage and lower flood insurance rates.
Many seasonal and year-round homes were damaged or destroyed. This
Community Planning and Capacity Building Recovery Support Function and
Housing Recovery Support Function strategy is intended to increase the
capacity of Fire Island residents to make homes more resilient by increasing
access to competitive grants to fund resilient retrofits. This strategy also
responds to the need identified by the Committee to encourage resilient
housing construction including best practices for housing restorations and
reconstructions, as well as new construction.
There is one proposed project that was developed to implement this
strategy and that is the employment of a Local Disaster Recovery Manager
(LDRM) who would be responsible for procuring grants and/or low interest
Home being elevated
loans that would offer affordable options to homeowners with insufficient
funds for raising homes above surge and flood hazard areas, thereby reducing vulnerability of those at risk of losing their home and being
homeless. The LDRM project would serve infrastructure strategies as well, as indicated below.
Table 20: Strategy Summary 2
Strategy: Preserve local home values by increasing access to additional hazard mitigation funds to minimize risk of storm damage and lower
flood insurance rates.
Project Name
Short Project Description
Estimated Cost
Project Type
Regional Project
(Y/N)
Employ LDRM
Hire one or more LDRMs to write
$300,000
Proposed
Y
grants and manage Federal/State
grants.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 82

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Support businesses before and after an event.
This Economic Development Recovery Support Function strategy addresses
resiliency issues related to Economic Development. The Committee
identified the need sustain commercial, recreational and tourism assets
and functions and protect and maintain taxable assets including
commercial businesses. After Superstorm Sandy, businesses did their best
to rebuild quickly and be ready for the summer season, but lacked the
funding to let people know that Fire Island was open for business. Fire
Island businesses have faced an uphill battle since Superstorm Sandy to
attract comparable numbers of tourists to the island compared to preSandy, which has led to economic stagnation. This strategy addresses the
opportunities to increase resiliency by improving synergies between
businesses and tourism, and bolster facilities important to the tax base. By
promoting visitorship to Fire Island’s businesses and recreational and
cultural facilities, economic vitality island-wide will be enhanced. The
View of a dock and the water
strategy would improve the opportunities for local employment on Fire
Island, particularly for lower-income Fire Island and mainland residents including students. The Proposed Project for the Enhance Revive FI
Campaign was developed to implement this strategy.
Table 21: Strategy Summary 3
Strategy: Support businesses before and after an event.
Project Name
Short Project Description
Enhance Revive FI Campaign

Provide funding to Revive FI to market
the recreational and economic
opportunities of the entire Island.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated Cost

Project Type

$150,000

Proposed

Regional Project
(Y/N)
Y

Page | 83

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Ensure Fire Department personnel have sufficient equipment for rescue operations, fire suppression, and
response to other hazards.
This Infrastructure Recovery Support Function strategy addresses resiliency issues related to Infrastructure for both equipment and adequate
water systems to fight fires. In terms of equipment, this strategy addresses the needs of the Fire Departments on Fire Island to have the
necessary resources to prepare for and protect the public, property and the natural environment during and after disasters, and takes advantage
of the opportunity to explore new methods, technologies, procedures and materials needed to improve disaster-related resources. In terms of
water system capacity and reliability, the strategy addresses the need to strengthen public water supply infrastructure and systems and the
opportunities to examine interconnections between systems, pressure and backup requirements. It envisions additional equipment necessary to
respond appropriately to major storm events and other disasters, that is, above and beyond response abilities provided by current equipment
limitations. Adequate equipment, supplies and water systems will help ensure that all residents, including vulnerable populations, will receive
necessary aid during disasters and other emergencies. To implement this strategy, the Committee developed three projects: the purchase of an
Air Compressor for the western fire departments to supplement the existing one located at Ocean Beach, the addition of back-up power
generation for critical facilities, and employing a LDRM.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations that also support this strategy include:
•
•
•
•
•
•

the purchase of an emergency medical supply storage trailer;
the establishment of EMS services for Cherry Grove;
the purchase of a mini-pumper for the Village of Saltaire;
the purchase of a new fire truck for the Cherry Grove firehouse;
the winterizing of the Davis Park firehouse; and
water system improvements to improve the redundancy and capacity of the water supply system for firefighting needs including water
main extensions between Fire Island Pines and Davis Park, installation of hydro-pneumatic water tank and building in the Village of
Saltaire, and upgrade of the Lighthouse Promenade water main in the Village of Saltaire.

These additional resiliency recommendations are described in Section 5 (see Table 28).

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 84

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 22: Strategy Summary 4
Strategy: Ensure Fire Department personnel have sufficient equipment for rescue operations, fire suppression, and response to other hazards.
Project Name
Short Project Description
Estimated Cost
Project Type
Regional Project
(Y/N)
Air Compressor
Purchase an Eagle Air Compressor and fill
$42,500
Proposed
Y
station to refill used breathing apparatus
for Firefighters.
Back-up Power Generation for Critical Evaluate needs, purchase, and install
$600,000
Proposed
Y
Facilities
generators.
Employ LDRM
Hire one or more LDRMs to write grants
$300,000
Proposed
Y
and manage Federal/State grants.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 85

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Enable municipalities to track structures, damage to structures, permits, etc.
This Community Planning and Capacity Building Recovery Support Function strategy addresses the need to provide better coordination of
essential services and improve working relationships among Fire Island communities and the mainland towns of Islip and Brookhaven. This
strategy provides local governments with the technical and computer resources to improve and increase effectiveness of their response and
recovery efforts during and following an emergency event. Additionally, on Fire Island, building addresses are not currently located with street
names and numbers, making it difficult for emergency responders to respond. While enhanced GIS capacity is a statewide issue, this particular
project is a local response to a regional need which has been recognized by Islip and Brookhaven towns. The strategy would address risk for both
towns by coordinating emergency management communications and reducing the gaps in information flow and accuracy. It would increase the
efficiency of post-disaster data gathering, hasten response and recovery actions, and reduce the vulnerability of those at risk of becoming
homeless. The Proposed Project for an Enhanced GIS Emergency Management System was developed to implement this strategy.

Table 23: Strategy Summary 5
Strategy: Enable municipalities to track structures, damage to structures, permits, etc.
Project Name
Implement an Enhanced Geographic
Information System (GIS) Emergency
Management System

Short Project Description
Install an enhanced (GIS)-enabled
program for the Town of Islip and Town
of Brookhaven to improve emergency
planning, response and recovery from
severe storm events.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

$50,000

Proposed

Y

Page | 86

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Enhance communications to improve the ability to communicate vital information not only on Fire Island but
to the off-island agencies that may be assisting in an emergency response effort.
This Community Planning and Capacity Building Recovery Support Function strategy addresses the need to provide local governments with a
more reliable and rapid means of communicating with rescue and other service providers during and following an emergency event. As noted
earlier, all of the Emergency Response Facilities are located on the mainland and it is vital for local emergency responders to communicate with
those facilities. While this strategy would address risk for the entirety of Fire Island, it would particularly reduce the risk for persons who are
elderly or persons with a disability who may not be able to evacuate in time and might require emergency services. The project also would
enhance general protection of property. The Proposed Project for an Emergency Communication System was developed to implement this
strategy.
Table 24: Strategy Summary 6
Strategy: Enhance communications to improve the ability to communicate vital information not only on the beach but to the off-island
agencies that may be assisting in an emergency response effort.
Project Name
Short Project Description
Estimated Cost
Project Type
Regional Project
(Y/N)
Emergency Communication Systems
Purchase the Ground Control TOUGHSAT
$200,000
Proposed
Y
system and replace primary and second
radio repeaters.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 87

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Ensure safe and reliable evacuation routes for both emergency personnel and the general public.
This Infrastructure Recovery Support Function strategy addresses the need to maintain safe access to all communities and provides an
opportunity to examine storm damaged problem areas and emergency access/evacuation routes to determine ways to maintain safe access. The
island’s primary vehicular east-west emergency access route was severely damaged by Superstorm Sandy, and temporary repairs are not
adequate to withstand future storms. This strategy would increase resilience by improving the condition of the only emergency access route
between the Lighthouse Checkpoint and Kismet and between Corneille Estates and Robbins Rest by making it more resilient to storm damage.
This strategy will improve response time of emergency vehicles. Similarly to the communications strategy, this strategy would address risk for
the entirety of Fire Island, but would particularly reduce the risk for persons who are elderly or persons with a disability who may not be able to
evacuate in time and might require emergency services. The project also would enhance general protection of property and would reduce
economic damages through improved response time.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations that also support this strategy include:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Central Walk Improvements in the Town of Islip,
Walkway Repairs in Corneille Estates,
Dune Crossings in the Town of Islip,
Dune Crossings in Dunewood,
Lighting on Trustee Walk in Davis Park, and
Boardwalk repairs and brush clearing in Davis Park.

See Table 28 in Section 5 (Additional Materials) for more information on Additional Resiliency Recommendations.
Table 25: Strategy Summary 7
Strategy: Ensure safe and reliable evacuation routes for both emergency personnel and the general public.
Project Name
Emergency Access Route

Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Stabilize the emergency access route so
that resources can be delivered and the
route is available for emergency vehicles
with improved response times.

$610,000

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Proposed or
Featured Project
Proposed

Regional Project
(Y/N)
Y

Page | 88

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Identify bayside transportation assets and create redundancies for resource and emergency access.
This strategy addresses resiliency issues related to Infrastructure. The docks are used for delivery and offloading of critical supplies by water
during an emergency, evacuation of the population prior to storms, transport of firefighters from the mainland when needed to support fire
fighters on Fire Island, removal of debris after storms, and the transport of debris and construction materials. Many of the docks on the island
were damaged by the storm or by the activities related to storm recovery. The strategy ensures that the docks will be functional before, during,
and after a storm to fulfill all the required functions noted above.
This strategy would also help minimize delays in the delivery of resources and supplies to vulnerable populations, particularly those who have
limited mobility. To implement this strategy, the Committee developed two proposed projects and one featured project that aim to repair and
improve resiliency of key freight and passenger docks. An Additional Resiliency Recommendation that also supports this strategy is dock
restoration and improvements in Dunewood. See Table 28 in Section 5 (Additional Materials) for more information on Additional Resiliency
Recommendations.
Table 26: Strategy Summary 8
Strategy: Identify bayside assets and create redundancies for resource and emergency access.
Project Name
Short Project Description
Estimated Cost
Make Docks More Resilient - Freight
and passenger dock repairs and
improvements (Phase 1 – Design)

Design repairs and improvements of
freight and passenger docks at Davis Park,
Cherry Grove, Fire Island Pines, and Ocean
Beach to enhance emergency access and
increase accessibility.

$750,000

Proposed or
Featured Project
Proposed

Make Docks More Resilient - Freight
and passenger dock repairs and
improvements (Phase 2 –
Construction)

Construction of dock repairs and
improvements at one or more of these
facilities: Davis Park, Cherry Grove, Fire
Island Pines, Ocean Beach, and Atlantique.

$1,500,000

Proposed

Y

Make Docks More Resilient - Freight
and passenger dock repairs and
improvements (Phase 3 –
Construction)

Complete construction of dock repairs and
improvements at Davis Park, Cherry Grove,
Fire Island Pines, Ocean Beach, and
Atlantique.

$8,500,000

Featured

Y

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Regional Project
(Y/N)
Y

Page | 89

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Develop a comprehensive island-wide shoreline management program that includes natural restoration and
engineered stabilization techniques.
This Infrastructure Recovery Function strategy aims to address flooding and erosion issues on the bayside shoreline of Fire Island. This strategy
addresses many needs identified by the Committee including improving bayside shoreline management, maintaining safe access to all
communities, hardening of infrastructure to reduce future vulnerability and mitigate repetitive flooding and improving the natural functioning of
storm protective wetlands, dunes and beaches. At the same time it provides opportunities to approach bayside shoreline problems and solutions
in a more comprehensive fashion, examine and record “weak links” to determine priorities for hardening infrastructure, and restore and
enhance wetlands, dunes, and beaches. The strategy includes the integration of natural and engineered approaches to mitigate flooding
associated with regular high tides and extreme storm events. Additionally, the chronic and progressive rise in sea level may exacerbate losses
and increase the risk of inundation. Addressing this concern will require a progressive approach that incorporates structural measures where
necessary in combination with land use planning and natural protective features. As shorelines change with sediment supply from season to
season, this strategy should take into account the natural variations and unique conditions of the bayside.
To implement this strategy, the Committee developed three phased projects (two proposed, one featured) for the development and
implementation of a comprehensive Bayside Shoreline Management Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations that also support this
strategy include:
•
•
•
•

Reconstruct Clam Pond Peninsula in the Village of Saltaire
Ocean Bay Park Drainage Repairs
Seaview Bayside Bulkhead Raising
Bayside Improvements in Dunewood

Additional Resiliency Recommendations that support this strategy on the ocean frontage include dune plantings in Davis Park and the Town of
Islip. See Table 28 in Section 5 (Additional Materials) for more information on Additional Resiliency Recommendations.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 90

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 27: Strategy Summary 9
Strategy: Develop a comprehensive island-wide shoreline management strategy that includes natural restoration and engineered stabilization
techniques.
Project Name
Short Project Description
Estimated Cost Project Type Regional Project
(Y/N)
Engineering and design study for
Engineering and design study to assess the
$1,500,000
Proposed
Y
bayside shoreline management
feasibility of different natural infrastructure, as well
with regulatory coordination and
as hard structure stabilization solutions for the
pilot projects (Phase 1)
unique conditions along the bayside shoreline of
Fire Island’s communities. The project would
include several pilot projects that would address
different types of shoreline deficiencies.
Bayside Shoreline Management
Pilot projects from Phase 1 would be evaluated for
$1,500,000
Proposed
Y
Implementation (Phase 2)
effectiveness and then replicated across the island
where similar conditions exist.
Bayside Shoreline Management
Implementation (Phase 3)

Pilot projects from Phases 1 and 2 would be
evaluated for effectiveness and then replicated
across the island where similar conditions exist.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

$24,000,000

Featured

Y

Page | 91

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Bayside shoreline
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 92

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The NYRCR Program has allocated to the Community up to $3.0
million. The funding is provided through the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community Development
Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program. While
developing projects and actions for inclusion in the NYRCR Plan,
Planning Committees took into account cost estimates, cost-benefit
analyses, the effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to
populations and critical assets, feasibility, and community support.
Planning Committees also considered the potential likelihood that a
project or action would be eligible for CDBG-DR funding.
The projects and actions set forth in the NYRCR Plan are divided into
three categories. The order in which the projects and actions are
listed in the NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the
Community’s prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed
Projects are projects proposed for funding through the Community’s
allocation of CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are projects and
actions that the Planning Committee has identified as important
resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in depth, but has not
proposed for funding through the NYRCR Program. Additional
Resiliency Recommendations (see Section V) are projects and actions
that the Planning Committee would like to highlight and that are not
categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in the NYRCR Plan exceeds the
NYRCR Community’s CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if
some Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to
environmental review, HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other
factors. Implementation of the projects and actions found in the
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State, and local laws
and regulations, including the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
Inclusion of a project or action in the NYRCR Plan does not guarantee
that a particular project or action will be eligible for CDBG‐DR
funding or that it will be implemented.
This section provides a complete Project Profile for each Proposed or
Featured Project identified by the NYRCR Committee and
Community. In addition to providing a detailed description of each
project, the profiles include information on two important elements
used by the Committee to evaluate each project – a Cost-Benefit
Analysis and a Risk Reduction Analysis. Before proceeding to the
projects themselves, it is important to understand these two
analytical elements of the Project Profiles.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
A cost-benefit analysis (CBA) evaluates and compares the benefits
and costs associated with a project. The CBA provides decisionmakers with a framework for comparing different projects (i.e.,
anticipated cost of implementation against total expected benefits),
and determining whether the benefits of a particular project
outweigh the costs. More specifically, the value of the CBA is twofold: (1); to inform the selection of projects for implementation and
(2) to support grant applications for funds.
Because the NYRCR Program is a Community-driven process, the CBA
has focused on identifying project costs and benefits that easily
relate to the communities that the NYRCR Planning Committees
represent. Community and Committee input – informed by a true
Page | 93

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
understanding of local conditions, needs, and Community values –
plays a crucial role in the selection of projects that are implemented.
With this in mind, the CBA has used a mix of both quantitative and
qualitative factors in its analysis.
The CBA cannot evaluate cost or benefits with complete certainty;
rather it provides the Community with a practical understanding of
the potential estimated costs of project implementation and the
potential benefits that will accrue to the Community with the project
in place. The costs and benefits used to evaluate projects through
the CBA are explained further below.

Project Costs

collectively. While these costs are more difficult to quantify, they are
no less important to our analysis, and are therefore addressed
qualitatively. These costs include:
 Extensive, repetitive damage to personal property (vehicles,
residences) and public infrastructure resulting from frequent
recurring flooding and future storm events;
 Economic loss to residents and to local and regional employers
as a result of the inability to work; and
 Hindrance in the provision of life safety and emergency services
resulting in repeated inability to access areas of the Community.

Project Benefits
The types of benefits considered in the CBA include:

Project Profiles include a description of anticipated costs, including
soft costs, contingency costs and the hard “costs” associated with
implementation (labor and materials). Soft costs refer to costs
associated with design, procurement, permitting, or any other “up‐
front” costs associated with project implementation (up to 25% of
construction costs). Contingency costs refer to additional costs that
have been factored into a project (up to 25% of construction costs)
due to the conceptual nature of the projects and the potential for
cost escalations due to unknowns.
The cost of implementing a project is just one aspect of the
justification for funding these Proposed Projects. Conversely, another
important variable is the future costs of not implementing these
projects, which have the potential to negatively impact the long‐term
viability of the Fire Island communities, whether individually or
Section 4: Implementation Profiles







Risk Reduction: The extent to which a project reduces the risk of
damage to a Community asset from a future storm event
(discussed further below under “Risk Reduction Analysis”);
Economic Resiliency: The project’s potential to help minimize
economic costs and reduce the time it takes for the local
economy to rebound from a storm event. Economic data
included, where applicable, an estimate of permanent jobs
secured/added; relationship to, and/or furtherance of, Regional
Economic Development Plan goals; potential for additional
economic activity; and the net effect on local municipal
expenditures;
Health, Social and Public Safety Services: Qualitative information
was provided on the overall population benefits of improved
access to health and social service facilities and public safety
Page | 94

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



services; type and size of socially vulnerable population secured;
and degree to which essential health and social service facilities
are able to provide services to a Community during a future
storm or weather event as a result of the project; and
Environmental Protection: Benefits include the protection of
crucial environmental assets or high‐priority habitat, threatened
and endangered species, migration or habitat connectivity; any
clean‐up resulting from the action; creation of open space or a
new recreational asset.

For this risk reduction analysis, projects were evaluated using a
three‐foot rise in sea level scenario for their potential to reduce an
asset’s level of exposure and/or vulnerability to future storms. This
helps communities and decision‐makers understand the potential
environmental, social, and economic outcomes associated with
implementing the project.
For a more detailed discussion of the methodology and factors used
in the risk reduction analysis, see Section 5, Part D.

Risk Reduction Analysis
A Risk Reduction Analysis estimates the extent to which Proposed
and Featured Projects will reduce flooding risk to specific Community
assets when the project is in place. (The extent to which a project
reduced such risk is also considered as a benefit in the Cost Benefit
Analysis – see “Project Benefits” above.) Risk “reduction” is different
from the risk “assessment” in the previous section in a very
important way – risk assessment looks at storm and flood risks to
Community assets before the project is implemented; risk reduction
looks at anticipated reduced flood risk assuming the project is
implemented.
View of a boardwalk and dock in Ocean Beach

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 95

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Convene Fire Island Planning Forum
Convene Fire Island Planning Forum
Recovery Support Function: Community Planning and Capacity
Building
Cost: $50,000
Assets made more Resilient:
All assets through additional planning
Risk Reduction & Benefits:
Increased collaboration and coordination among Fire Island
communities

Project Description
Fire Island is a unique place in New York State due to the interrelated
communities and governmental jurisdictions from the Village to
Federal level that co-exist on the Island. The NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) process has provided a mechanism for
enhanced communication on a regular basis among these entities
that did not exist before Superstorm Sandy. The NYRCR process has
advanced the dialogue and level of cooperation on important issues
facing the island, which requires balancing human and
environmental concerns.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

The Committee would like to continue this dialogue so that issues
and policies affecting the island can be addressed in a
comprehensive and cohesive manner with all parties’ viewpoints
represented. Most of the potential participants are working together
though the NYRCR process thereby creating an opportunity to
establish a more permanent group. Therefore the Committee
proposes to convene a Fire Island Planning Forum that would meet
regularly, perhaps on a quarterly basis, to include representatives of
Federal, State, County, and Village governments; residents;
businesses; emergency responders; utilities; and all other
appropriate entities.

Page | 96

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Estimated Project Costs

Economic Benefits

The cost for a part time staff person to schedule meetings, take
minutes, prepare correspondence, and perform other administrative
tasks is estimated at $50,000 over a two-year period. The cost would
include salary and benefits, computer, and supplies, with other costs
such as office space provided by the participating communities.

This project would create one part-time position (1.25 FTE over a
two-year period 20). Additionally, if the municipalities participate in
the NFIP Community Rating System as a result of this project,
property owners could reduce their flood insurance rate premiums
by between 5% and 45%, providing economic benefit to residents of
the island. Another economic benefit is improved efficiency of
intergovernmental actions.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency
A Fire Island Planning Forum would provide the Island’s communities
with the opportunity for continued discussion and cooperation on
topics of mutual concern, particularly those which require balancing
the needs of humans (e.g., commerce, safety, recreation, etc.) and
natural ecosystems. One potential project of the Fire Island Planning
Forum could be encouraging Town and Village participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program’s (NFIP) Community Rating
System. Participation in the Community Rating System involves
completing a variety of floodplain management activities that exceed
the NFIP’s minimum requirements. In turn, property owners may
receive discounts on flood insurance premiums that reflect their
reduced flood risk. The other objectives of the planning forum creating a better relationship with the utility companies and
improving the resiliency of communication services through backup
systems and/or expansion of existing services - address the reduction
of risks prior to and following disasters through the hardening of the
power distribution infrastructure and enhancement of the
communications system.
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Environmental Benefits
One of the defining features of Fire Island is the relationship
between the natural environment and developed communities. A
Fire Island Planning Forum would allow local communities to discuss
environmental issues with government and regulatory agency
representatives, thereby enhancing coordination and communication
among these entities for the purpose of implementing the projects
identified in this plan as well as future projects.

Health and Social Benefits
The Fire Island Planning Forum could provide several health and
social benefits to Island residents and visitors by improving the flow
of essential emergency and educational information to residents and
visitors.

Page | 97

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Cost-Benefit Analysis

Jurisdiction

This is a low cost project that would have many co-benefits for all of
the Fire Island communities in the long-term. Benefits include
increased communication and collaboration between each of the 17
communities as well as with two Towns, the County, the State, and
the National Park Service. The Forum would allow the 17
communities to speak with one voice and with all levels of
government to accomplish shared goals and objectives. The Forum
would create a more efficient way to leverage limited resources,
address policies of regional concern, and work together to deliver
services in a cohesive, cost-effective manner.

This project falls under multiple jurisdictions including the Villages of
Ocean Beach and Saltaire, the Town of Islip, the Town of
Brookhaven, Suffolk County, New York State, and the Fire Island
National Seashore (FINS).

Risk Reduction Analysis
The project has the potential to reduce risk to all assets on Fire Island
through better collaboration and communication among the
communities.

General Timeframe for Implementation
It is estimated that, from the time implementation begins, this
Project has potential for immediate implementation (0 to 12
months).

Members of the community sign in at a public engagement event

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
No permits or approvals would be required for implementation of
this project.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 98

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Employ Local Disaster
Recovery Manager (LDRM)

Employ Local Disaster Recovery Manager
Recovery Support Function: Community Planning and Capacity
Building
Cost: $300,000
Assets made more Resilient:
Potentially all assets
Risk Reduction & Benefits:
Increased access to Federal and State funding sources,
particularly for important environmental projects
Increased collaboration and coordination among Fire Island
communities

Project Description

As described by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), the role of the Local Disaster Recovery Manager (LDRM) is to
organize, coordinate, and advance the recovery at the local level.
Their primary role is to manage and coordinate the redevelopment
plans and rebuilding activities within a Community. Another major
role is to collaborate with State, Federal, and other stakeholders and
supporters (such as the business and nonprofit communities) to raise
financial support (including long-term capital investment in local
businesses) for the Community's recovery, leverage the resources
where possible and resolve potential duplication of assistance. 21
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Knowing that there may be many grant opportunities each year,
many with short application time frames, the Committee seeks to set
aside a portion of NYRCR Program funding to hire a LDRM with
experience in funding for public and private mitigation projects,
grant writing, and Federal/State grants management. The LDRM,
who would hold a multi-year position, would increase access to
hazard mitigation and other funding by seeking out and applying for
grants for Village and Hamlet facilities/infrastructure, as well as
manage the grants to ensure State and Federal compliance.
Page | 99

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The Committee adopted a regional approach to the proposed
projects, recognizing that the communities had many more projects
that affected one or a group of communities, with funding needs
running into millions of dollars. The Committee wanted to create a
mechanism whereby these Community level projects could be
funded through other grant opportunities in the future to address
the many assets still at extreme or high risk and in need of resiliency
measures.
There are no anticipated obstacles to implementing this project. It is
anticipated that an Inter-municipal agreement, as has been used
successfully on Fire Island, would be developed between the two
Towns and two Villages. This agreement would establish which
governmental agency would hire the LDRM and how the various
municipalities would share the services of the LDRM in an equitable
manner that would address the needs of all of the seventeen
communities.

Project Estimated Costs

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction & Resiliency
The LDRM will help to reduce risk on Fire Island by increasing access
to hazard mitigation and other funding, and managing grants to
ensure State and Federal compliance. A key benefit of this project is
the anticipated additional funding for Fire Island communities which
would enable them to implement longer-term resiliency/risk
reduction projects. Additionally, the project will help create better
coordination, particularly in regards to emergency management and
preparedness efforts, between the multiple jurisdictional authorities
on Fire Island.

Economic Benefits
One or more full time equivalent positions20 would be created. These
could be either full time employees or part time employees, as
needed. Indirect benefits will occur due to better management, and
the potential for more grant funding.

The cost for a LDRM is estimated at $300,000. This would be either a
multi-year position for a full time employee, or a part-time position
over a longer period. The cost would include salary and benefits,
computer and supplies, with other costs such as office space
provided by the participating communities.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 100

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Environmental Benefits

Risk Reduction Analysis

The LDRM will assist with the procurement and management of
funding opportunities, many of which are awarded through the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC). These
agencies actively seek to fund projects, policies, and initiatives that
protect and enhance the environment. For barrier islands like Fire
Island, the DEC is particularly instrumental in the management of the
shorelines and intertidal wetland areas.

The LDRM would not directly decrease the risk of any particular
assets on Fire Island but it could help secure additional funding to
enhance and repair wetlands, docks, and hard infrastructure across
Fire Island to make residential, commercial, and public assets at less
risk of flooding. Therefore, the position could help decrease risk for
all assets on Fire Island.

Cost Benefit Analysis

It is estimated that, from the time implementation begins, this
Project has potential for immediate implementation (0 to 12
months).

This is a low cost project that will have very substantial benefits to all
communities on Fire Island through increased opportunity to access
grants and other funding sources for needed projects. The potential
amount of funding received because of this LDRM would far
outweigh the cost.

General Timeframe for Implementation

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no anticipated regulatory requirements for
implementation of this project.

Jurisdiction
This project would fall under multiple jurisdictions including the
Town of Islip, the Town of Brookhaven, the Village of Saltaire, and
the Village of Ocean Beach.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 101

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Implement an Enhanced GIS Emergency Management System
Project Description
This project would help to fund the development of an enhanced
Geographic Information System (GIS) for the Town of Islip, and the
portion of Fire Island within the Town of Brookhaven, to improve
storm preparedness planning, as well as response and recovery from
severe storm events.

Implement an Enhanced GIS Emergency
Management System

The Town of Islip experienced a devastating shock to the Emergency
Management Information System during Superstorm Sandy. The call
center was inundated with phone calls from residents who were
reporting damages to their homes, electrical outages, and medical
emergencies. The Town was tasked with recording these reports,
assessing the severity of the incident, and then dispatching the
appropriate resources to the location. To compound the problem,
the electrical power to the Town’s Information Technology (I.T.).
Department was lost and the emergency generators could not
provide adequate power to the computer system. Floodwaters
entered the I.T. department and prevented the use of the network.
Therefore, the existing GIS system could not be used to track the
locations of the incidents nor could the crews be tracked. A
makeshift system was cobbled together at the Town Hall West site
and the information was collected and mapped. This was a herculean
effort that helped with deploying resources to the correct locations.

Cost: $50,000

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Recovery Support Function: Community Planning and Capacity
Building, Health and Social Services

Assets made more Resilient:
All assets through additional planning
Risk Reduction & Benefits:
Increased capacity to track storm damage and deploy necessary
resources
Increased inter-agency and inter-Town collaboration and
coordination
Improved coordination among emergency personnel and first
responders

Page | 102

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 15: GIS Emergency Management Map

However, this emphasized the need to seek out solutions to provide
a more robust GIS system to manage this information and track
damages and document costs associated with storm events. While
both Towns have had GIS systems for many years, the systems are
not adequate to accommodate the needs of the Towns to manage
severe storm events and other disasters.
The GIS system will enable better communication and record keeping
among Town agencies and emergency responders. The system will
track in coming reports of flooding, damages, utility outages and
blocked roads and enable more rapid and efficient deployment of
resources. The system will also allow for better record keeping of
storm response and damage, providing better accountability and
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

reimbursement of eligible costs to FEMA (Federal Emergency
Management Agency), the State, and any other agencies. The project
is technically feasible and involves the use of demonstrated
technology. By way of example, a similar system was implemented
for the State of Vermont and many other communities with proven
success. However, it will require coordination between the Towns of
Islip and Brookhaven.
The system will be based upon a full web GIS infrastructure.
Proposed applications would include:
• E911 Information Application – enabling e911 operators and
responders;
• Road Obstruction Application – tracking fallen trees, power lines
and other road obstructions;
• Damage Assessment Application – provide initial damage
assessment to FEMA as well as organize and track recovery data
essential for FEMA reimbursement; and
• Public Information Application – provide key information to the
public in advance, during and after emergency events.

Estimated Project Costs
The Committee is proposing an allocation of $50,000 towards the
overall project cost. The total capital and soft costs are estimated at
$300,000. The project will be implemented as an Islip Town-wide
asset with coordination from the Town of Brookhaven for Fire Island.
It is expected that other NYRCR Communities in the Towns of Islip
and Brookhaven may provide the balance of funds. The required
funds may also be supplemented with other Town of Islip funds.

Page | 103

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Operation and maintenance costs are estimated at $2,300 per year
for three years. Total life cycle costs are estimated at $57,000.

functional medical needs. Additionally, the project is expected to
help create better coordination among first responders.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction & Resiliency

Cost Benefit Analysis

This project will fund part of the cost of an enhanced GIS-enabled
program for the Town of Islip and the Town of Brookhaven to
improve planning, response and recovery from severe storm events.
The system will be able to track incoming reports of flooding,
damages, utility outages, and medical emergencies and enable rapid
and efficient deployment of resources. The system’s ability to track
costs and resources is projected to enable the Towns to document
and report actual costs to FEMA and the State for quick
reimbursement, thereby minimizing a future storm's impact to the
local government budget and services.

Economic Benefits
The project will improve the efficiency of municipal services
associated with storm preparedness, response, and recovery. It will
enable better utilization of staff resources and cost efficiencies.

Health and Social Benefits
An enhanced GIS program will allow the system to assign a specific
location to each structure in the Community, enabling emergency
responders to locate an address more quickly. This is vital for
accessing and providing services to vulnerable populations in the
Community. The program will also facilitate inter-agency
coordination with the Suffolk County Emergency Preparedness
Registry, which includes a database of people with special and/or
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

The project represents a low investment of capital to provide a more
efficient data management system that would benefit all
communities across Fire Island. The potential benefits of this project
are considered to outweigh the cost of implementation.

Risk Reduction Analysis
While this project does not directly reduce risk for any particular
assets on Fire Island, it does offer the ability to manage information
about asset risks, vulnerability, damage, and repair. By having a
centralized data management system in place, Fire Island
communities could more efficiently prioritize those assets that are at
most risk in the event of future storms for repair or replacement.

General Timeframe for Implementation
It is estimated that, from the time implementation begins, this
Project has potential for immediate implementation (0 to 12
months).

Regulatory Requirements
There are no anticipated regulatory requirements for this project.

Jurisdiction
This project falls under the jurisdiction of the Town of Islip and Town
of Brookhaven.

Page | 104

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Repair and Reconstruction of Emergency Access Route
Repair and Reconstruction of Emergency Access
Route
Recovery Support Functions: Infrastructure, Health and Social
Services
Cost: $600,000
Assets made more Resilient:
Emergency Access Route
Risk Reduction & Benefits:
Improved response time by emergency responders

Superstorm Sandy flooding on emergency access route

22

Project Description
The purpose of the project is to repair and reconstruct sections of
the Emergency Access Route to protect against ocean flooding and
erosion and to allow for emergency access. Before Superstorm
Sandy, the Route spanned almost the entire length of Fire Island (32
miles) from Robert Moses State Parkway in the west to William Floyd
Parkway in the east. A Sandy-caused breach toward the east end of
Fire Island has since cut off emergency access from the east end of
the island.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Improved public access to primary evacuation route off Fire
Island
A majority of the Route consists of hard packed sand covered by a
layer of sand and stone aggregate. The Route faces ocean water
flooding and erosion from regular and extreme storm events that
prohibits access to the route for emergency vehicles. Superstorm
Sandy deteriorated or destroyed previous maintenance work
completed on the access route. The surface condition of the
emergency access route has been compromised in several places,
particularly between the Fire Island National Seashore (FINS)
Checkpoint and Kismet. The emergency access route between
Corneille Estates and Robbins Rest also requires stabilization.
Page | 105

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Superstorm Sandy introduced a thick layer of beach sand on the trail
that has made it difficult to manage and the route is no longer
capable of keeping a stable profile. Reinforcement of the access
route requires a layer of hard packed sand covered by a layer of sand
and stone aggregate. The stone aggregate allows that route to be
shaped and crowned, facilitating rainwater runoff and better
drainage. The stone aggregate is also heavier than beach sand and is
not prone to wind erosion. The emergency access route is a critical
asset to the entire Fire Island Community, as it represents the
primary vehicular evacuation route for the Island. Depending on the
time of year and the severity of the storm year-round residents will
use the route to evacuate their families and belongings. This is
especially important when weather and water conditions make ferry
transportation difficult.
In determining the evacuation process the estimated time of the
road flooding determines when evacuation needs to be completed. If
the high tide cycle floods the route, emergency personnel are stuck
on the beach. Additionally, utility trucks and fire company vehicles
actually evacuate Fire Island. They are the last to leave. Most fire
companies send 50% of their fleet off Fire Island during storm
events. The route needs to be stable enough for them to leave and
re-enter.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Estimated Project Costs
The implementation of this project has been estimated to cost
approximately $600,000 in total and includes $500,000 for materials
for repairs related to damage caused by Superstorm Sandy and
$100,000 in contingency costs. Historically, this work has been
performed with pro bono expertise; therefore the estimated costs of
these improvements are restricted solely to materials. The volunteer
service has always played a strong role in maintaining the road and
they will continue to do so. Year-round resident organizations and
fire service personnel have always stepped up to maintain what the
Community has. As the route exists and is maintained on a regular
basis, there would be no change in operations and maintenance
costs.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency
Since this route is the only vehicular access route on the island, the
project will facilitate greater capacity of services and improved
response during and after events. The project will benefit land, air,
and water rescue operations, since a combination of at least two of
these are sometimes necessary to move someone to a mainland
emergency facility, thereby reducing risk for all communities across
Fire Island.

Page | 106

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 16: Emergency Access Route Repair and Reconstruction Locations

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 107

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Economic Benefits
As the project would be constructed by volunteers, the only jobs
created or maintained would be related to production and delivery
of the materials. If half of the material and delivery cost is related to
labor, 7.5 full time equivalents (FTE) would be created20.

Health and Social Benefits
The health and safety of all residents and visitors on Fire Island
depends on their ability to access very limited evacuation options, of
which this overland route is the sole vehicular route to the west.
Particularly during the summer season when Fire Island’s population
swells with tens of thousands of tourists, many of whom are not
familiar with Fire Island, the ability of emergency responders to
reach people and properties quickly is of utmost importance.

Cost Benefit Analysis
This project represents a medium investment of capital that has
many potential public benefits for the Community as a whole that
outweigh the costs, including risk reduction, enhanced protection of
life and property, enhanced ability to rebuild after a disaster,
economic development, as well as environmental and public health
benefits.

Risk Reduction Analysis
The implementation of this project is anticipated to reduce the
access route’s risk to flooding and degradation. With the proposed
improvements to the access route in place, the risk of a long-term
(i.e., one month) service disruption following future storm events
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

would be diminished. The installation of shore defenses, such as that
proposed by the Fire Island Inlet to Montauk Point study and the
bayside shoreline management plan improvements, would further
reduce the route’s exposure to storm erosion and overwash, thereby
improving the ability of emergency responders to access residents
who may be in dangerous situations.

General Timeframe for Implementation
It is estimated that, from the time implementation begins, this
Project has potential for immediate implementation (0 to 12
months).

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
The emergency access route is within the FINS and requires
agreement with FINS as to the scope of work and permission to
perform the work on their property. There has been expressed
willingness to work towards agreement by a FINS representative to
the Committee. As this work would occur within a Coastal Barrier
Resources System, Federal monies can be spent within the system
for certain exempted activities, after consultation with the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service 23. It is anticipated that this work would fall
within the exceptions for reconstruction and repair (but not
expansion) of publicly-owned or -operated roads.

Jurisdiction
This project falls under the jurisdiction of Villages of Ocean Beach
and Saltaire, the Town of Islip, the Town of Brookhaven, NYSDEC,
and FINS.
Page | 108

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Emergency Communication Systems
Figure 17: TOUGHSAT System

Emergency Communication System
Recovery Support Function: Community Planning and Capacity
Building
Cost: $200,000
Risk Reduction & Benefits:
Increased resiliency of Island-wide communications
Improved first response time and efficiency
Improve cross-agency collaboration and communication

Project Description
This project would fund the purchase of the Ground Control
TOUGHSAT satellite communication system, which will allow first
responders and emergency management personnel to set up a
wireless hotspot in order to use phones, tablets, or laptops during an
emergency when electricity and land-based communication lines
have been compromised. The other component of the project would
be to replace primary and second repeaters and install equipment
for expanded communications and alarm and trouble indications for
the system.
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

During and after Superstorm Sandy, communication problems posed
one of the greatest challenges for emergency responders and getting
Fire Island back up and running again. Immediately following the
storm, the island-wide radio system was temporarily down but even
when running again it was not able to open communications with the
mainland or with Community groups. Cell phone and internet
services were also temporary or basically non-existent after the
Storm. This system is portable. The Fire Chiefs have investigated
various communication systems and believe that this is the best
equipment for their application and that a fixed system would not
meet their needs during a disaster.
Page | 109

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The portable nature of this equipment is critical since all of the Fire
Departments on Fire Island are located in an extreme or high risk
area and are potentially vulnerable to flooding in future storm
events. During an emergency, emergency responders are likely to
have to use the satellite communication system from remote
command trailers and fire chief cars as they respond to events across
the island.
As described by an emergency responder:
The nine fire companies located on the island stretch between 30
linear miles (all with in the national park). There are several concerns
with satellite receivers that will be affixed to the outside of the
firehouse. The receiver is a complicated piece of equipment that will
be exposed to a very harsh environment. The salt air environment
corrodes and destroys outside equipment much more rapidly than the
normal environment. The emergency responders do not believe the
equipment is built well enough to with stand the harsh marine
environment it would be exposed to (especially over the course of
several years) day after day. In addition, we need the equipment
immediately after a large-scale weather event; there is a good
chance that the receiver would not survive such event if attached to
the roof of a firehouse as many roofs did not survive Superstorm
Sandy.
Even more compelling is the story of Ocean Bay Park and Point O’
Woods. The two communities got hit very hard with floodwaters at
the heart of the storm. Both Fire Chiefs and a handful of individuals
decided to stay at the firehouses as opposed to evacuating. When the
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

flood waters came in they realized they had to abandon the
firehouse. We in the mainland command center were trying to
monitor their movements. It was a very dangerous situation. They
eventually set up shelter in a large private residential dwelling that
was on high ground. A similar event occurred in Ocean Beach where
the residents broke in to the school building. We were unable to
communicate well with these groups. Their firehouses were out of
service for a few weeks. The satellite communication system as
presented would allow them to set up in the new location and keep
the mainland agencies updated on their status.
There are no challenges anticipated for implementing this project.
The satellite system and radio components would be specified by the
Fire Island Fire Chiefs Council and purchased and maintained by the
Villages of Ocean Beach and Saltaire.

Estimated Project Costs
The purchase price for the satellite system and improvements to the
radio system, including four years of service for the satellite system,
is estimated at $200,000. After the initial contract, the satellite
system requires an ongoing service contract at an estimated cost of
$15,000 per year for the remaining 16 years of its projected 20-year
life. Total lifecycle costs are thus expected to be $440,000. The cost
for the ongoing service contract would be shared among the
emergency response entities through an inter-municipal agreement.

Page | 110

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Project Benefits

Cost Benefit Analysis

Risk Reduction Benefits

This is a low cost project that could have life-saving ramifications and
benefits during future storm events for the residents and emergency
personnel on Fire Island that outweigh the costs. The project will
benefit the entire Fire Island Community since the communication
system could be deployed across all Fire Departments.

Communication was a major issue during Superstorm Sandy,
particularly for fire personnel and first responders working in
extremely challenging conditions. By making critical upgrades to the
Island’s communication infrastructure, this project is anticipated to
improve inter-agency coordination by creating a platform that
enables improved response time which could mitigate injury and
property loss or damage.

Economic Benefits
There will be reduced losses to property due to improved
communications as to where men and equipment are needed.
Additionally, there will be reduced costs of fire-fighter and police and
other government staff time and energy to communicate essential
information.

Health and Social Benefits
Improved emergency response time during an emergency or disaster
can reduce the risk of injury or death.

Risk Reduction Analysis
While this project does not specifically reduce the flood risk to any
particular asset in Fire Island, it will help enable improved response
time which could mitigate property loss or damage for many assets
across Fire Island.

General Timeframe for Implementation
It is estimated that, from the time implementation begins, this
Project has potential for immediate implementation (0 to 12
months).

Regulatory Requirements
There are no anticipated regulatory requirements for this project.

Jurisdiction
This project falls under the jurisdiction of the Fire Island Fire Chief
Council.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 111

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Air Compressor
Figure 18: Air Compressor 24

Air Compressor – Kismet Fire Department
Recovery Support Function: Community Planning and Capacity
Building, Health and Social Services
Cost: $42,500
Risk Reduction & Benefits:
Will address existing equipment deficiencies
Ensures the health and safety of emergency responders
Enhance capacity of Fire Departments to respond during an
emergency event

Project Description
This project involves the purchase of an Eagle Air Compressor and fill
station. The compressor is used to refill used breathing apparatus
worn by Firefighters during all structural fires. Immediately following
Superstorm Sandy, there was a large residential fire that required the
use of the breathing apparatus worn by Fire Fighters, which then
needed to be refilled with an air compressor.
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Currently, there is only one air compressor on Fire Island in Ocean
Beach, which is difficult to access, especially after a storm. There are
no expected challenges for project implementation. The system
would be specified by the Kismet Fire Department and purchased.
The Kismet Fire Department would own the air compressor and
develop a mutual benefit sharing agreement with the other Fire
Departments on the island.

Estimated Project Costs
The purchase price including installation for the air compressor is
estimated at $42,500. Operations and maintenance costs to the
Community are anticipated to be minimal: $50 per year for annual
Page | 112

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
synthetic oil changes, for twenty years, for a total lifecycle cost of
$43,500. Any additional incidental costs will be absorbed by the local
Fire Departments.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction & Resiliency
This specialized emergency response and disaster recovery
equipment will address an existing equipment deficiency for the Fire
Departments on the West End of Fire Island. This is a critical piece of
equipment that ensures the health and safety of emergency
responders, allowing these responders to deliver optimal emergency
response services.
The Fire Departments played a key role in providing both storm
preparation and recovery functions. During Superstorm Sandy, the
Fire Departments, which comprise volunteer firefighters, put their
lives at risk, working tirelessly despite hazardous environmental
conditions and numerous public health threats. The Fire
Departments are small in size but are required to cover a large
geographic area that has limited transportation options around the
island and to the mainland. By reducing risk to emergency
responders, the Fire Departments would be able to more effectively
respond to Community needs in a disaster situation and deliver
services to residents during and after events.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Economic Benefits
There will be ongoing cost savings related to the avoided costs of
refilling each bottle, as fire departments do today at a cost of
$34.50/bottle. There will also be savings in employee travel time and
expense currently incurred in travel off of Fire Island to refill the
bottles.

Health and Social Service Benefits
The project would enhance the capacity of the Fire Departments to
respond and serve affected areas during emergency events.

Cost Benefit Analysis
This is a low cost project that could provide resiliency as well as
health and social service benefits across the West End portion of Fire
Island, which accounts for the largest proportion of fire fighters on
the island.

Risk Reduction Analysis
This specialized emergency response and disaster recovery
equipment will help make the West End Fire Departments on Fire
Island more resilient but will not directly reduce risk of flooding or
damage to the Fire Departments. However, enhancing the capacity
of the Fire Department to respond to affected areas during an
emergency event could mitigate property loss or damage for many
assets across Fire Island.

Page | 113

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
General Timeframe for Implementation
It is estimated that, from the time implementation begins, this
Project has potential for immediate implementation (0 to 12
months).

Regulatory Requirements
There are no anticipated regulatory requirements for
implementation.

Jurisdiction
This project falls under the jurisdiction of the Kismet Fire Department.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 114

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Back-Up Power Generation for Critical Facilities
Back-up Power Generation for Critical Facilities
Recovery Support Function:
Infrastructure, Health and Social Services
Cost: $610,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Critical facilities in Kismet, Cherry Grove, Fair Harbor, and the
Villages of Saltaire and Ocean Beach
Risk Reduction & Benefits:
Sample generator

Project Description
The project would confirm which facilities need generator
equipment, either as new installations or replacements. Generators
would then be purchased and installed so as to be fixed in place. Due
to its physical location relative to the mainland, Fire Island
communities need reliable back-up power for critical facilities in the
event of a power outage during an emergency. Critical facilities
would include government buildings, fire stations, and drinking water
and wastewater infrastructure. Specific locations of identified critical
facilities in need of generators are shown in the graphic below.
Additional locations may be determined.
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Increase resiliency of key critical infrastructure by ensuring
uninterrupted power
Provides dependable back-up power
The project is considered to be highly feasible since many locations
requiring generators have already been identified and these can be
purchased and installed in a very short period of time. It is
anticipated that a few additional facilities will be identified.

Estimated Project Costs
The total estimated capital and soft costs for project implementation
are $610,000, including $485,000 for equipment, $80,000 in soft
costs, and $45,000 in contingency costs. The purchase price for each
of six 60 KWH generators is estimated at $60,000. The purchase price
Page | 115

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
for the seventh, slightly larger generator for the Saltaire Village Hall
and Fire House is $125,000. Operations and maintenance costs are
anticipated to be $30,000 per year for twenty years, for a total
lifecycle cost of $1,210,000.

outweigh the costs of not having this essential power source in an
emergency. The project provides public benefits for the entire region
since critical facilities receiving back-up generators are located across
the island.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency

Risk Reduction Analysis

The project would increase the resiliency of critical facilities on Fire
Island and allow them to operate at needed capacity if electricity fails
during an emergency.

Economic Benefits

There will be avoided losses of property damage due to back-up
generators being available to run pumps and keep governmental
facilities operating. There will be avoided costs related to locating a
portable generator, bringing it in, setting it up, and manning the
generator.

Health and Social Benefits
Backup power is essential for the provision of key emergency response
and health services, as well as the Island’s critical infrastructure
facilities. Service interruptions to these facilities can be catastrophic,
particularly during emergency events, when these services are most
needed. Given the relative isolation of Fire Island, it is critically
important that the Island has dependable back up power.

Cost Benefit Analysis
Back-up power generation is absolutely critical during an emergency
event to ensue uninterrupted service and response. The potential
benefits of the purchase of back-up generators are believed to
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

The project would increase the resiliency of critical facilities on Fire
Island and allow them to operate at needed capacity if electricity fails
during an emergency. For each asset that gets a generator, the
project is likely to reduce the vulnerability of these assets by
lessening the risk of service interruption. For several critical assets,
such as the Saltaire Volunteer Fire Company, the Saltaire Drinking
Water Treatment and Well, and the Police Station and Village Office
in Ocean Beach, the project is anticipated to reduce the preintervention risk level from severe to a post-intervention risk level of
high. For the remaining facilities the project is anticipated to reduce
the risk level from high to moderate.

General Timeframe for implementation

It is estimated that, from the time implementation begins, this
Project has potential for immediate implementation (0 to 12
months).

Regulatory Requirements

There are no anticipated regulatory requirements for implementation.

Jurisdiction

This project would fall under multiple jurisdictions depending on the
generator location, including the incorporated Villages of Ocean Beach
and Saltaire, and the Towns of Brookhaven and Islip.
Page | 116

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 19: Back-up Power Generation Location Map

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 117

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Engineering and design study for bayside shoreline management
with regulatory coordination and pilot projects (Phase 1)
PROPOSED PROJECT: Bayside Shoreline Management Implementation (Phase 2)
FEATURED PROJECT: Bayside Shoreline Management Implementation (Phase 3)
Project Description
The first phase of the project would include an engineering and
design study to assess the feasibility of natural infrastructure, as well
as hard structure stabilization solutions. Depending on the costs of
the proposed improvements and the available funding, the first
phase would also include initiating several pilot installations
designed to resolve different types of shoreline situations.
The second phase would include additional pilot installations designed
to resolve additional types of shoreline situations and/or replication of
pilot projects. These pilot installations would then be evaluated for
effectiveness and replicated across the island in Phase 3.
One of the biggest concerns of the Committee is protection of the
ocean side and bay side of the barrier island from storm surges and
wave action. The Committee acknowledges the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE) Fire Island Inlet to Montauk Point (FIMP) project is
the appropriate mechanism to provide oceanfront protection, but
believes that the bay side would benefit from a similar protective
strategy, particularly in consideration of rising sea level and more
frequent and powerful storms.
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Bayside Shoreline Management (Phases 1 & 2)
Recovery Support Function: Infrastructure Strategies
Cost: Phase I $1,500,000; Phase 2 $1,500,000, Phase 3
$24,000,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Over 100 assets located in the extreme and high risk zones,
including residences, commercial facilities, docks, and public
buildings
Risk Reduction & Benefits:
Mitigate extreme bayside erosion
Prevent flooding related to high tide and storm events, saving
millions of dollars in restoration
Restore natural shoreline where possible
Protect and enhance existing tidal wetlands

Page | 118

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
One shoreline improvement can have an erosion-inducing impact on
adjacent properties and therefore projects need to be coordinated
and the end conditions evaluated. Therefore the Committee
proposes to develop and implement an island-wide approach to
cohesive shoreline management. This project would require a
coordinated effort among the various jurisdictional authorities on
the island, including the Towns of Islip and Brookhaven, the
Incorporated Villages of Ocean Beach and Saltaire, the NYS
Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC), the NYS
Department of State (DOS), the Fire Island National Seashore (FINS),
and representatives of communities across Fire Island. Another
desired outcome of the project would be expedited permitting of the
pilot and replicated installations.

Project Costs
The engineering and design study for bayside shoreline management
with regulatory coordination and pilot projects (Phase 1) is estimated
at $1,500,000 including $525,000 for the study phase and $975,000
for implementation of the pilot projects. This includes $600,000 for
construction, $225,000 in soft costs including permitting, and
$150,000 in contingency costs. Operations and maintenance costs
are anticipated to be $25,000 per year for twenty years, for a total
lifecycle cost of $2,000,000.
The Proposed implementation Project (Phase 2) is estimated at
$1,500,000 including $925,000 for construction costs, $345,000 in
soft costs including permitting, and $230,000 in contingency costs.
Operations and maintenance costs are anticipated to be $40,000 per
year for twenty years, for a total lifecycle cost of $2,300,000.
The Featured project component with replicate installations (Phase
3) is estimated to be a $24,000,000 project including $15,000,000 for
construction costs, $5,500,000 in soft costs including permitting, and
$3,500,000 in contingency costs. Operations and maintenance costs
are anticipated to be $600,000 per year for twenty years, for a total
lifecycle cost of $36,000,000.

Bay front shoreline

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 119

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Project Benefits

Environmental Benefits

Risk Reduction & Resiliency

The engineering and design study will look at a variety of coastline
management measures. These may include natural shoreline
management techniques, such as adding native coastal wetland
plantings which are resistant to salt spray and inundation. Where
feasible, restoration of the natural shoreline profile could help
reduce erosion, protect and enhance existing tidal wetlands and
allow for the creation of new wetland habitats. Tidal wetlands, are
critically important to the ecological health of Fire Island as well as
the South Shore Estuary Reserve; supporting avian and aquatic
wildlife that draws tourists from across the region.

The proposed project along with the featured project will reduce
future flooding and erosion risk for the 17 communities. This project
will help mitigate the extreme erosion that has occurred on the
bayside of Fire Island, which was worsened by Superstorm Sandy.
This project will also help reduce flooding that occurs at high tide
that is likely to increase as sea level rises. Generally, the overall
exposure of the hundreds of affected assets is expected to be
reduced through the construction of shore defenses that are
anticipated to withstand future storms and sea level rise conditions.
Additionally, for most assets, the project was anticipated to reduce
overall vulnerability of the assets, further reducing the overall risk
score. The amount of risk reduction will be directly related to the
height of the protection put into place.

Economic Benefits
The study phase will create approximately 2 full time equivalent
(FTE) jobs 25. If labor accounts for 50% of the construction costs in
Phase 1 and Phase 2, approximately 12 full time equivalent jobs
would be created in Phase 1, approximately 19 full time equivalent
jobs would be created in Phase 2, and approximately 300 full time
equivalent jobs would be created during Phase 320. The prevention of
flooding damage would alleviate the need to spend millions of
dollars on restoration.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Health and Social Benefits
The proposed bayside management project could greatly reduce
flooding for many communities on Fire Island. Flood events are
particularly dangerous for the vulnerable populations on the Island –
as mobility and access to services can be severely limited.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
The project provides public and private benefits for the entire island.
Although the cost of the project is relatively high, the avoidance of
damage caused by flooding during high tide and extreme storm
events and those associated costs are considered to outweigh the
capital investment of the project.

Page | 120

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Risk Reduction Analysis
The amount of risk reduction will be directly related to the height of
the protection put into place. For the purposes of this analysis, a
protective height to an elevation of four feet above sea level was
analyzed. Approximately one hundred identified assets between the
bay and higher ground are currently at or below four feet in
elevation. As groups of assets such as homes in the high-risk area are
grouped as a single asset, there are many more than 100 individual
structures, facilities, or resources which would be affected. If the
effective height of protection is lower, risk will be reduced for fewer
assets; if the effective height is higher, risk will be reduced for a
greater number of assets. In any event, if the level of sea level rise or
surge for a specific event is higher than the effective height of the
shore defenses, this would reduce effectiveness.

However, permits and approvals would be required by all of the
identified agencies and municipalities before pilot installations could
begin.

Jurisdiction
This project would fall under multiple jurisdictions as previously
indicated but would include the incorporated Village of Ocean Beach
and Saltaire, the Towns of Islip and Brookhaven, NYSDEC, NYSDOS,
USACE and FINS.

General Timeframe for Implementation
It is estimated that, from the time implementation begins, this
proposed project including the initial design phase has potential for
immediate implementation (0 to 12 months). However,
implementation of the pilot projects, evaluation, and replicated
installations would stretch into the mid- and long-term (12 to 36+
months).

Regulatory Requirements

View of a dock and boats

Initial discussion with FINS, USACE, USFWS (U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service), NYS DEC, NYS DOS, both Towns, and both Villages indicate a
willingness to work together on this project.
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 121

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Make Docks More Resilient - Freight and passenger dock repairs and
improvements (Phase 1 – Design/Phase 2 – Construction)
FEATURED PROJECT: Make Docks More Resilient - Freight and passenger dock repairs and
improvements (Phase 3 – Construction)
Make Docks More Resilient (Phases 1 & 2)
Recovery Support Function: Infrastructure Strategies
Cost: Phase 1 $750,000; Phase 2 $1,500,000;
Phase 3 $8,500,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Davis Park, Cherry Grove, Fire Island Pines, Ocean Beach, and
Atlantique docks

Boardwalk damage15

Project Description
This project provides for the repair of freight and passenger docks
located on the bay side of Fire Island. The dock repairs will enhance
emergency access via boat, thereby increasing the accessibility of
residents and visitors to needed resources. Fire Island docks serve as
critical transportation hubs for both people and materials.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Risk Reduction & Benefits:
More reliable access to resources and shorter emergency
response times
Enhanced evacuation opportunities

Page | 122

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The docks are used for evacuation prior to storms, to bring over fire
fighters from the mainland when needed to support fire fighters on
Fire Island, to remove debris after storms, to remove solid waste to
the mainland, and to bring over construction materials. Since there is
very limited vehicular access between Fire Island and the mainland,
these docks are essential to Fire Island. The docks on Fire Island were
substantially damaged by Superstorm Sandy.
The locations and ownership of the docks which are proposed to be
repaired are shown in the graphic (Figure 20 on page 125).

contingency costs. As these are existing docks there would be no
increase in operation and maintenance costs.
The Featured Project of the second phase of construction (Phase 3) is
estimated at $8,500,000 to complete the work including $5,600,000
for construction costs, $1,500,000 in soft costs including permitting,
and $1,400,000 in contingency costs. As these are existing docks
there would be no increase in operation and maintenance costs.

Project Benefits

The dock repairs will facilitate the marine transfer of equipment,
materials and solid waste, which otherwise would have to be
transported overland on the emergency access route, which is not
designed to handle heavy traffic. The overall project is larger than
the allocation from the NYRCR Program so has been split between
design phase of engineering drawings and specifications (proposed
project) and construction (featured project). These are all existing
docks so there should not be any issues in repairs and making them
more resilient.

Risk Reduction & Resiliency

Estimated Project Costs

Economic Benefits

The Proposed Project of the engineering and design study (Phase 1)
for making docks more resilient, including freight dock repairs and
improvements, is estimated at $750,000.

The study phase will create approximately 2.4 full time equivalent
jobs25. If labor accounts for 50% of the construction costs20,
approximately 19 full time equivalent jobs would be created during
Phase 2, and approximately 106 full time equivalent jobs would be
created during Phase 3. The prevention of storm damage to more
resilient docks would alleviate the need to spend millions of dollars
on restoration.

The Proposed Project of the initial construction phase (Phase 2) is
estimated at $1,500,000, including $1,000,000 for construction costs,
$250,000 in soft costs including permitting, and $250,000 in
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

The Community would benefit greatly from more reliable access to
resources and shorter emergency response times. The freight
portions of the docks can also replace some of the daily vehicular
transfer of equipment, materials, and solid waste with marine
transfer, thus reducing road traffic. The passenger portion of the
docks will aid in evacuation when needed, thus reducing risk to
residents and visitors.

Page | 123

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Health and Social Benefits
The docks that serve the various communities of Fire Island are
essential to the health and safety of all Island residents. With very
limited vehicular access on Fire Island, the docks are vital for the
evacuation of residents, transportation of emergency responders
and to deliver essential services and supplies.

Cost Benefit Analysis
Passenger and freight docks represent critical transportation assets
across the entirety of Fire Island. They support multiple functions
including regular ferry service, evacuation routes, movement of
supplies and goods, and emergency response hubs. The cost of the
project is outweighed by the multiple co-benefits that these docks
provide for all the communities on Fire Island.

Risk Reduction Analysis
The Community would benefit greatly from more reliable access to
resources and shorter emergency response times. The freight
portions of the docks can also replace some of the daily vehicular
transfer of equipment, materials, and solid waste with marine
transfer, thus reducing traffic and wear and tear on the emergency
access route. The passenger portion of the docks will aid in
evacuation when needed, thus reducing risk to residents and visitors.
This project is anticipated to reduce the risk for the five identified
ferry docks. The project will provide sufficient shore defenses to
withstand storm surge and sea level rise, thereby reducing the
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

exposure of the assets to future flooding. Additionally, the dock
repairs and improvements are expected to minimize the length of
time the docks would be out of service following future storm
events.

General Timeframe for Implementation
It is estimated that, from the time implementation begins, the
Proposed project (design phase component) has potential for
immediate implementation (0 to 12 months) while the Featured
project component would likely be a long-term (36+ months)
implementation.

Regulatory Requirements
Since the initial phase of the project involves engineering design
drawings and specifications for the identified docks, there are no
anticipated regulatory approvals required. However, collaboration
and communication with the NYS DEC, NYS DOS, the Towns of Islip
and Brookhaven, the Villages of Saltaire and Ocean Beach and
Federal agencies will be a crucial part of the first phase, so that all of
the necessary approvals and appropriate permits will be able to be
secured from these entities for the construction phase.

Jurisdiction
This project will fall under multiple jurisdictions including the Villages
of Saltaire and Ocean Beach, the Town of Islip and the Town of
Brookhaven.

Page | 124

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 20: Dock Design and Dock Repair Locations

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Page | 125

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Enhance Revive FI Campaign
Figure 21: Revive FI Logo

Enhance Revive FI Campaign
Recovery Support Function: Economic Development
Cost: $150,000
Risk Reduction & Benefits:
Enhance economic activity through promotion of tourism

Project Description
This project would provide additional support to Revive FI to increase
the number of communication outlets reached with the advertising
campaign. The Revive FI campaign is an effort by commercial
interests in Fire Island to market the available recreational and
economic opportunities of the entire Island and ensure that the
public in the New York tri-State area are aware that Fire Island is well
on the way to recovery from Superstorm Sandy and is open for
business. Revive FI has already raised funds through private
donations to develop an advertising campaign. Since the campaign
has already been designed, the allocation would be used to pay for
on-air time on radio and TV, and for placement in print media,
billboard type display, and vehicle wraps.

Estimated Project Costs
The Committee has agreed to provide $150,000 to support the
continued advertising efforts of the Revive FI campaign.
Section 4: Implementation Profiles

Ensure sustainable local economy and strong tax base

Project Benefits
Economic Benefits
The businesses on Fire Island rely heavily upon tourism with visitors
coming from all parts of the tri-state area. An enhanced Revive FI
campaign will help stimulate tourism and its associated jobs, which is
one of the primary goals of the Long Island Regional Economic
Development Council, whose Strategic Economic Development Plan
August 2012 Progress Report update’s “Vital Projects,” Vision, and
Economic Strategies include the following: Produce a new generation
of sustainable, well-paying jobs in the legacy sectors of agriculture,
aquaculture, fisheries and tourism by expanding export
opportunities, infrastructure, recreation facilities, research
partnerships and workforce training.
As tourism will be enhanced there will be an anticipated increase in
economic activity on Fire Island. Tourists will patronize the
Page | 126

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
restaurants, bars, store and hotels, rent houses for the season, rent
boat slips, and buy ferry tickets or fuel for personal boats. While the
economic benefit cannot be quantified, it is reasonable to assume
that an increase in tourism and spending would result from a
successful advertising campaign. The campaign will bring revenue to
the local economy and tax revenue to the municipalities on Fire
Island. Tourists will be more likely to visit Fire Island if they are aware
of the business and facilities that are open.

Cost Benefit Analysis
This is a low cost project that could provide public benefits for all of
Fire Island as well as the greater tri-state region. Not only would
business owners benefit from increased tourism, but homeowners
would be able to rent their homes throughout the peak season and
would feel tangible economic benefits from more people visiting the
island.

Risk Reduction Analysis
The project is not anticipated to reduce flood risk to any assets on
Fire Island but will increase the resiliency of commercial assets by
supporting a strong and continued tourism industry. Since tourism is
the primary economic driver on Fire Island, this project is anticipated
to increase the economic resiliency of businesses on Fire Island,
enabling them to recover economically in a timelier manner
following a natural disaster.

Section 4: Implementation Profiles

General Timeframe for Implementation
It is estimated that, from the time implementation begins, this
proposed project has potential for immediate implementation (0 to
12 months).

Regulatory Requirements
There are no anticipated regulatory requirements to implement this
project.

Jurisdiction
This project will fall under
multiple jurisdictions
including the Villages of
Saltaire and Ocean Beach,
the Town of Islip and the
Town of Brookhaven.

View of a marina

Page | 127

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 5: Additional Materials

Ferry dock in Ocean Beach
Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 128

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
A. ADDITIONAL RESILIENCY RECOMMENDATIONS
Table 28: Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Strategy
Develop a committee
to create and distribute
educational booklets
and resources and
provide better
information to the
public prior to
emergencies about the
risk and evacuation
information.
Ensure Fire
Department personnel
have proper access,
rescue and fire
suppression equipment
for rescue operations
and addressing other
hazards (hazardous
materials, restricted
access, etc.).

Identify bayside assets
and redundancy for
resource and
emergency access

Project Name
Education
Campaign

Short Description
Develop and disseminate: (1) A Homeowner and Renter Handbook
addressing “what does it mean to be living on a barrier island
(stewardship) and what are your responsibilities?” and (2) public
outreach campaign and/or booklet with online version for visitors
about sustainable ways to visit and enjoy the region (beach-goer
etiquette)

Estimated Cost
$100,000

Regional (Y/N)
Y

Emergency Storage
Trailer & Supplies

This project would fund the purchase of an emergency medical
supply storage trailer with lighting and back-up power for the
eastern communities that would have supplies available for
whichever emergency responder needed it.
This project would provide the initial start-up funds to establish an
EMS service for Cherry Grove, which currently does not have an
existing EMS.
Purchase a mini-pump for the Village of Saltaire.
Purchase a new fire truck for the Cherry Grove firehouse.

$100,000

N

$60,000

N

$175,000
$150,000

N
N

Winterize firehouse to be better prepared for next emergency.

$50,000

N

$2,000,000

N

EMS - Cherry Grove
Mini-Pumper
Fire Truck - Cherry
Grove
Davis Park Fire
Department
Dock Restoration/
Improvements Dunewood

Section 5: Additional Materials

Reconstruction of L dock and Community owned bulk heading to
improve resilience in the face of rising sea level and increased
storm risk

Page | 129

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 28: Additional Resiliency Recommendations - continued
Strategy
Evaluate and enhance
existing public water
supply infrastructure

Project Name
Water Main
between Fire Island
Pines and Water
Island
Davis Park to Water
Island Water Main

Water Main
Extension - Water
Island
Installation of
Hydro-pneumatic
Water Tank and
Building - Village of
Saltaire
Relocation of
Beacon Walk
Maintenance
Building - Village of
Saltaire
Upgrade Lighthouse
Promenade Water
Main - Village of
Saltaire
Reconstruct Clam
Pond Peninsula Village of Saltaire

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
Construct a water main between Fire Island Pines and Water Island.
This would create redundancy in the system to enhance fire
protection.

Estimated Cost
$1,617,000

Regional (Y/N)
Y

Construct a water main between Water Island and Davis Park. A
connection between these two eastern communities would also
make water available to Blue Point Beach (a Community that
currently has no public water supply) as well as to the FINS facilities
at Talisman and Watch Hill.
Construct a water main extension in Water Island.

$515,000

Y

$1,100,000

Y

Install Hydro-pneumatic water tank and building at Well #2 to serve
as backup to Well #1.

$1,200,000

N

Relocate (reconstruct) key maintenance building at Beacon Walk
Facilities further away from ocean at higher elevation to assure that
the buildings and the vital equipment that they house can
withstand storm water damage.

$2,400,000

N

Upgrade Lighthouse Promenade Water Main to 12 inch diameter
and all other water mains to a minimum of 6 inch size diameter, to
provide adequate water flow during post storm fire events.

$1,600,000

N

Reconstruct Clam Pond Cove

$2,650,000

N

Page | 130

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 28: Additional Resiliency Recommendations - continued
Strategy
Repair existing
drainage systems.

Project Name
Ocean Bay Park
Drainage Repairs

Develop a
comprehensive islandwide shoreline
management strategy
that includes natural
restoration and
engineered
stabilization techniques

Seaview Bayside
Bulkhead Raising

Restore recreational
facilities.

Repair Village of
Ocean Beach Camp
- Windswept

Bayside
Improvements

Repair Cherry
Grove Community
House
Fire Hall Repairs Ocean Beach
Atlantique Beach
and Marina

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
This would be a mitigation project that impacts the entire
Community since flooding occurs on a regular basis, particularly
during high tides. The drainage system needs an extension on
Midway and Seneca to the main drain on Bayview. The main
system on Bayview needs the drain on Ontario and Bayview to be
repaired and relocated to mitigate the flooding from the open lot
on the bayside. The system also should be extended to Bayview
and Superior which also has a flooding issue since the area is lower
than the main walk.
There are 6 contiguous properties along Bay Walk in Seaview,
between the Ocean Beach border and Duneway Street in Seaview,
which have bulkheads that should be raised at least two feet in
order to prevent the disastrous flooding of the Community’s
bayside during Sandy.
Reconstruction of L dock and community-owned bulk heading to
improve resilience in Dunewood

Estimated Cost
$500,000

Regional (Y/N)
N

$500,000

N

$1,000,000

N

This building serves the Ocean Beach Youth Group ages 5 to 16
years. The building was severely damaged and unusable this past
summer. The project would elevate and repair the building to
ensure continued operation.
The Cherry Grove (CG) Community House is a multi-purpose facility
that serves as a town hall, Community center, art gallery and
theater all rolled into one. The building needs to be elevated and
repairs made from Sandy-related damage.
Repair Ocean Beach Fire Hall as needed.

$850,000

N

$565,000

N

$200,000

N

$4,000,000

N

Improvements at Atlantique Beach & Marina – Ferry Dock and
bulkhead improvement

Page | 131

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 28: Additional Resiliency Recommendations - continued
Strategy
Restore recreational
facilities.

Provide safe walkways

Reinforce and maintain
oceanfront dune
system.

Project Name
Fair Harbor Bay
Beach Dredging
Project
Davis Park
Playground
Central Walk
Improvements
Walkway Repairs Corneille Estates
Dune Crossings
Dune Crossings –
Dunewood
Lighting on Trustee
Walk - Davis Park
Boardwalk repairs Davis Park
Brush Clearing Davis Park
Dune Plantings
Dune Planting Davis Park

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description

Estimated Cost
$125,000

Regional (Y/N)
N

$81,000

N

$1,000,000

N

Repair damaged walkways in Corneille Estates as needed to ensure
safe access for residents and emergency vehicles.
Replace damaged dune crossings
Reconstruct to FEMA standards

$300,000

N

$300,000
$50,000

N
N

Install pedestrian scale lighting on Trustee Walk to improve safety.

$130,000

N

$2,800,000

N

Davis Park brush clearing

$11,000

N

Plantings on dunes to reinforce and mitigate erosion.
Plantings on dunes to reinforce and mitigate erosion.

$100,000
$33,000

N
N

Dredge Fair Harbor Bay
Repair and restore damage to playground caused by Sandy.
Central Walk Improvements

Davis Park boardwalk repairs

Page | 132

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
B. MASTER TABLE OF PROJECTS
Table 29: Master Project Table
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Create a mechanism for
enhanced communication,
collaboration and regional
planning among the many
Fire Island interests and
the Long Island mainland
Preserve local home values
by minimizing risk of storm
damage and flood
insurance rates
Enable municipalities to
track structures, damage
to structures, permits, etc.

Fire Island Planning
Forum

Convenes a planning forum that meets regularly
to discuss issues and policies along with
government and Community representatives.

Employ LDRM

Enhance communications
to improve the ability to
communicate vital
information not only on
the beach but to the offisland agencies that may
be assisting

Emergency
Communication Systems

Hire one or more LDRMs with experience in
funding for public and private mitigation
projects, grant writing, and Federal/State grants
management.
The procurement and installation of an
enhanced Geographic Information System (GIS)enabled program for the Town of Islip and Town
of Brookhaven to improve emergency planning,
response and recovery from severe storm
events. Program would enable real-time
transmission of risk and safety information for
rapid deployment of resources.
Purchase the Ground Control TOUGHSAT
system, which allows users to set up a wireless
hotspot in order to use phones, tablets, or
laptops during an emergency when electric and
communication lines have been compromised.
Replace primary and second repeaters; install
equipment for expanded communications and
alarm and trouble indications for the system.

Implement an Enhanced
GIS Emergency
Management System

Section 5: Additional Materials

Project
Category
Proposed

Estimated Cost
$50,000

Regional
(Y/N)
Y

Proposed

$300,000

Y

Proposed

$50,000

Y

Proposed

$200,000

Y

Page | 133

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 29: Master Project Table - continued
Strategy

Project Name

Support businesses before
and after an event

Enhance Revive FI
Campaign

Ensure Fire Department
personnel have proper
access, rescue and fire
suppression equipment for
rescue operations and
addressing other hazards
(hazardous materials,
restricted access, etc.).

Air Compressor – Kismet
Fire Department

Keep emergency access
route passable for
emergency vehicles

Emergency Access Route

Develop a comprehensive
island-wide shoreline
management strategy that
includes natural
restoration and
engineered stabilization
techniques

Engineering and design
study for bayside
shoreline management
with regulatory
coordination and pilot
projects (Phase 1)

Back-up Power
Generation for Critical
Facilities

Bayside Shoreline
Management
Implementation (Phase
2)

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
This project would provide additional support to
Revive FI, an effort by commercial interests in
Fire Island to market the available recreational
and economic opportunities of the entire Island,
for them to increase the number of
communication outlets reached with the
advertising campaign.
Purchase an Eagle Air Compressor and fill
station. The compressor is used to refill used
breathing apparatus worn by Firefighters during
all structural fires. The equipment would be
beneficial to all West End Departments.
The first step would be to evaluate which
facilities need generator equipment, either as
new installations or replacements. Generators
would then be purchased and installed.
Stabilize the emergency access route so that
resources can be delivered and the route is
available for emergency vehicles with improved
response times.
This project would include an engineering and
design study to assess the feasibility of different
natural infrastructure, as well as hard structure
stabilization solutions for the unique conditions
along the bayside shoreline of Fire Island’s
communities. The project would include several
pilot projects that would address different types
of shoreline deficiencies.
Additional pilot projects would be constructed
and/or pilot projects from Phase 1 would be
evaluated for effectiveness and then replicated
across the island where similar conditions exist.

Project
Category
Proposed

Estimated Cost
$150,000

Regional
(Y/N)
Y

Proposed

$42,500

Y

Proposed

$610,000

Y

Proposed

$600,000

Y

Proposed

$1,500,000

Y

Proposed

$1,500,000

Y

Page | 134

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 29: Master Project Table - continued
Strategy
Identify bayside assets and
redundancy for resource
and emergency access

Project Name
Make Docks More
Resilient - Freight and
passenger dock repairs
and improvements
(Phase 1 – Design)

Make Docks More
Resilient - Freight and
passenger dock repairs
and improvements
(Phase 2 – Construction)

Identify bayside assets and
redundancy for resource
and emergency access

Make Docks More
Resilient - Freight and
passenger dock repairs
and improvements
(Phase 3 – Construction)

Develop a comprehensive
island-wide shoreline
management strategy that
includes natural
restoration and
engineered stabilization
techniques

Bayside Shoreline
Management
Implementation (Phase
3)

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
This project would allow for the repair of freight
and passenger docks to enhance emergency
access via boat and increase the accessibility of
residents and visitors to needed resources. The
design phase would involve engineering design
drawings and specifications for the docks at
Davis Park, Cherry Grove, Fire Island Pines, and
Ocean Beach.
This project would allow for the repair of freight
and passenger docks to enhance emergency
access via boat and increase the accessibility of
residents and visitors to needed resources. The
second phase would be for the construction of
dock repairs and improvements at Davis Park,
Cherry Grove, Fire Island Pines, Ocean Beach,
and Atlantique.
This project would allow for the repair of freight
and passenger docks to enhance emergency
access via boat and increase the accessibility of
residents and visitors to needed resources. The
second phase would be for the construction of
dock repairs and improvements at Davis Park,
Cherry Grove, Fire Island Pines, Ocean Beach,
and Atlantique.
Pilot projects from Phases 1 and 2 would be
evaluated for effectiveness and then replicated
across the island where similar conditions exist.

Project
Category
Proposed

Estimated Cost
$750,000

Regional
(Y/N)
Y

Proposed

$1,500,000

Y

Featured

$8,500,000

Y

Featured

$24,000,000

Y

Page | 135

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 29: Master Project Table - continued
Strategy
Ensure Fire Department
personnel have proper
access, rescue and fire
suppression equipment for
rescue operations and
addressing other hazards
(hazardous materials,
restricted access, etc.).

Project Name
Emergency Storage
Trailer & Supplies

EMS - Cherry Grove

Mini-Pumper
Fire Truck - Cherry Grove

Develop a committee to
create and distribute
educational booklets and
resources and provide
better information to the
public prior to
emergencies about the risk
and evacuation
information.

Davis Park Fire
Department
Education Campaign

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
This project would fund the purchase of an
emergency medical supply storage trailer with
lighting and back-up power for the eastern
communities that would have supplies available
for whichever emergency responder needed it.
This project would provide the initial start-up
funds to establish an EMS service for Cherry
Grove, which currently does not have an existing
EMS.
Purchase a mini-pumper for the Village of
Saltaire.
Purchase a new fire truck for the Cherry Grove
fire house.
Winterize firehouse to be better prepared for
next emergency.
Develop and disseminate: (1) A Homeowner and
Renter Handbook addressing “what does it
mean to be living on a barrier island
(stewardship) and what are your
responsibilities?” and (2) public outreach
campaign and/or booklet with online version for
visitors about sustainable ways to visit and enjoy
the region (beach-goer etiquette)

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
$100,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Additional

$60,000

N

Additional

$175,000

N

Additional

$150,000

N

Additional

$50,000

N

Additional

$100,000

Y

Page | 136

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 29: Master Project Table - continued
Strategy
Evaluate and enhance
existing public water
supply infrastructure

Project Name
Water Main between
Fire Island Pines and
Water Island
Davis Park to Water
Island Water Main

Evaluate and enhance
existing public water
supply infrastructure

Water Main Extension Water Island
Installation of Hydropneumatic Water Tank
and Building - Village of
Saltaire
Relocation of Beacon
Walk Maintenance
Building - Village of
Saltaire
Upgrade Lighthouse
Promenade Water Main Village of Saltaire
Reconstruct Clam Pond
Peninsula - Village of
Saltaire

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
$1,617,000

Regional
(Y/N)
Y

Additional

$1,100,000

Y

Additional

$515,000

Y

Install Hydro-pneumatic water tank and building
at Well #2 location to serve as backup to Well #1
location.

Additional

$1,200,000

N

Relocate (reconstruct) key maintenance building
at Beacon Walk Facilities further away from
ocean at higher elevation to assure that the
buildings and the vital equipment that they
house can withstand storm water damage.
Upgrade Lighthouse Promenade Water Main to
12-inch diameter and all other water mains to a
minimum of 6 -inch diameter, to provide
adequate water flow during post storm fire
events.
Reconstruct Clam Pond Cove

Additional

$2,400,000

N

Additional

$1,600,000

N

Additional

$2,650,000

N

Construct a water main between Fire Island
Pines and Water Island. This would create
redundancy in the system to enhance fire
protection.
Construct a water main between Water Island
and Davis Park. A connection between these two
eastern communities would also make water
available to Blue Point Beach (a Community that
currently has no public water supply) as well as
to the FINS facilities at Talisman and Watch Hill.
Contract a water main extension in Water Island.

Page | 137

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 29: Master Project Table - continued
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Repair existing drainage
systems.

Ocean Bay Park Drainage
Repairs

Develop a comprehensive
island-wide shoreline
management strategy that
includes natural
restoration and
engineered stabilization
techniques

Seaview Bayside
Bulkhead Raising

This would be a mitigation project that impacts
the entire Community since flooding occurs on a
regular basis, particularly during high tides. The
drainage system needs an extension on Midway
and Seneca to the main drain on Bayview. The
main system on Bayview needs the drain on
Ontario and Bayview to be repaired and
relocated to mitigate the flooding from the open
lot on the bayside. The system also should be
extended to Bayview and Superior which also
has a flooding issue since the area is lower than
the main walk.
There are 6 contiguous properties along Bay
Walk in Seaview, between the Ocean Beach
border and Duneway Street in Seaview, which
have bulkheads that should be raised at least
two feet in order to prevent the disastrous
flooding of the Community’s bayside during
Sandy.
Reconstruction of L dock and Community owned
bulk heading to improve resilience - Dunewood
This building serves the Ocean Beach Youth
Group ages 5 to 16 years. The building was
severely damaged and unusable this past
summer. The project would elevate and repair
the building to ensure continued operation.
The Cherry Grove (CG) Community House is a
multi-purpose facility that serves as a town hall,
Community center, art gallery and theater all
rolled into one. The building needs to be
elevated and repairs made from Sandy-related
damage.

Bayside Improvements
Restore recreational
facilities.

Repair Village of Ocean
Beach Camp Windswept
Repair Cherry Grove
Community House

Section 5: Additional Materials

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
$500,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Additional

$500,000

N

Additional

$1,000,000

N

Additional

$850,000

N

Additional

$565,000

N

Page | 138

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 29: Master Project Table - continued
Strategy
Restore recreational
facilities.
continued

Project Name
Fire Hall Repairs - Ocean
Beach
Atlantique Beach and
Marina
Walkway Repairs Corneille Estates
Fair Harbor Bay Beach
Dredging Project
Davis Park Playground

Provide safe walkways

Reinforce and maintain
oceanfront dune system

Central Walk
Improvements – Fair
Harbor
Dune Crossings - Islip
Dune Crossings –
Dunewood
Lighting on Trustee Walk
- Davis Park
Boardwalk repairs - Davis
Park
Brush Clearing - Davis
Park
Dune Plantings – Islip
Dune Planting - Davis
Park

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
$200,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Improvements at Atlantique Beach & Marina –
Ferry Dock and bulkhead improvement
Repair damaged walkways in Corneille Estates as
needed to ensure safe access for residents and
emergency vehicles.
Dredge Fair Harbor Bay

Additional

$4,000,000

N

Additional

$300,000

N

Additional

$125,000

N

Repair and restore damage to playground
caused by Sandy.
Central Walk Improvements

Additional

$81,000

N

Additional

$1,000,000

N

Replace damaged dune crossings
Reconstruct to FEMA standards

Additional
Additional

$300,000
$50,000

N
N

Install pedestrian scale lighting on Trustee Walk
to improve safety.
Davis Park boardwalk repairs.

Additional

$130,000

N

Additional

$2,800,000

N

Davis Park brush clearing.

Additional

$11,000

N

Plantings on dunes to stabilize and mitigate
erosion.
Plantings on dunes to stabilize and mitigate
erosion.

Additional

$100,000

N

Additional

$33,000

N

Repair Ocean Beach Fire Hall as needed.

Page | 139

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
C. PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT PROCESS
Governor Cuomo has been a strong proponent of bottom‐up,
Community‐driven planning; in other words, the real “experts” are
the residents of the communities that have been confronted first‐
hand by these natural disasters. A critical component, therefore, of
the NYRCR Program is the exchange of information between the
NYRCR Consultant Team, the Committee, and the public to identify
appropriate projects, strategies, and solutions that are likely to carry
Community support. The public in this case is defined as area
residents, employees, civic groups, neighborhood and homeowner
associations, environmental and other interest groups, business
interests, governmental agencies, educational, medical, religious,
and other institutions, the media, elected/ appointed officials, as
well as other stakeholders who express interest in the process.
The Public Engagement Strategy:
 Established the means to engage and facilitate information‐
sharing with the public throughout the development of the
NYRCR Plan;
 Educated the public and elicited public comments and
suggestions regarding all aspects of the Plan within the NYRCR
Communities;
 Employed outreach techniques that allowed for collection and
coordination of public communication and comments; and
 Reached out to groups that might normally be under‐represented
in a planning study, such as minorities, non‐English speaking
residents, low‐income residents, seniors, youth, and the disabled.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Outreach Techniques for Disseminating and Receiving
Information
The Committee utilized a number of dissemination techniques to
achieve a thorough, responsive, open, and transparent
communication process.

Committee Meetings
All Committee Meetings were open to the public, with meeting dates
and times posted on the NYRCR website
(http://www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr). For each Committee
Meeting, notifications were sent and meeting materials were
prepared. They included agendas, sign‐in sheets, minutes, comment
logs, PowerPoint presentations, graphics/boards, and handouts. The
Public was invited to comment on the work of the Committee by
filling out a comment form available at each Committee Meeting.
The Committee held five meetings.

Public Engagement
While the Committee represents the interests of many, it was
important to provide opportunities for the public to participate in
the development of the Plan. While the primary vehicle was public
engagement events, additional outreach opportunities for comment
were provided at different venues online and through the NYRCR
website.

Page | 140

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Public Engagement Events
Each public engagement event included a presentation of work done
to date and an opportunity for attendees to provide feedback. The
NYRCR Consultant Team provided the following for each event:
public notice (including press releases, announcements, individual
mailings, and other appropriate means), outreach to underserved
communities and displaced stakeholders, information gathering from
those attending, and the collection and inclusion of feedback into the
ongoing planning process. A summary of each public outreach
session is available in hard copy and electronically. Public
engagement events were scheduled to coincide with major
milestones. A good public involvement process educates, or brings
people along, during the development of the Plan, so when it is time
to implement the Plan, the public and the elected decision‐makers
have had an opportunity to participate in the decision‐making
process. Members of the public who were informed and engaged in
the process were more likely to support a recommended course of
action. Event materials were available in English and if requested, in
Spanish.
Presentation materials were developed for each event that
illustrated the key points of the information presented using plain
language, graphics, simulations, etc. These were available following
the event on the NYRCR website for download. An annotated
summary of events was prepared and available for public
distribution.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Community member reviewing plans at public engagement event
The process included a series of four public engagement events:
1. To define the Community Vision and solicit initial input on
the asset inventory and assessment of risk to Community
assets;
2. To solicit input from the public concerning the content of the
Conceptual Plan;
3. To confirm projects and implementation frameworks; and
4. To present the investment and action strategies and the Final
Plan.

Page | 141

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Outreach for public engagement events included: posting on the
State NYRCR webpage and other electronic media; ads in weekly
print media when time and budget allows; flyers and posters at
strategic locations throughout the Community including libraries,
Community centers, and other centers of activity; e-mails and/or
texts to lists available from chambers, civics, school districts,
churches, synagogues, American Legion, VFW, AARP, Hibernians and
other Community leaders. Outreach also included requests to
Community organizations to post information on their websites.
Phone calls were made to: elected officials and other key players in
the local residential and business community and calls to each
Committee member to assist them with their outreach effort (e.g.,
calls/e-mails to their contacts and announcements at their events).
Each event was formatted as an open house that the public could
attend during any part of the allotted two to three hours. Stations
were positioned around the room for the various topics. Committee
members, municipal representatives, State planners and the NYRCR
Consultant Team were present at each station to provide
opportunity for the Community to exchange ideas in a comfortable
setting. This structure provided an opportunity for each attendee to
work within their own schedule and comment on all or some of the
specific aspects of the process in a meaningful way.
As the project progressed, the public was presented with maps, a
geographic scope, Community assets, risk to assets, and a vision
statement, needs and opportunities, strategies and projects that had
been vetted and/or created by the Committee. The desired outcome
Section 5: Additional Materials

of each public engagement event was to obtain the public’s reactions
and feedback to the Committee’s work in order to incorporate their
input.
At the first meeting the public viewed information on the process,
commented on the Vision, contributed to the Word Cloud, identified
Community assets, and indicated their highest needs and
opportunities. At the second meeting the public viewed the
Conceptual plans, reviewed strategies and potential projects, and
indicated the assets which had highest Community value. At the third
meeting the public viewed the risk assessment maps and indicated
their level of support for the proposed projects. The third event was
held in New York City to capture seasonal Fire Islanders.
The following summarizes the total participation for each of the
public, in-person events:
•
•
•
•

Event #1, Saturday, December 7, 2013 – 74 participants;
Event #2, Saturday, January 25, 2014 – 38 participants;
Event #3, Tuesday, February 25, 2014 – 86 participants; and
Event #4, to be held in Spring 2014.

Comments were compiled by the NYRCR Consultant Team and
provided to the Committee in a clear and comprehensive manner at
follow-up Committee meetings. The Committee reviewed the
public’s feedback and incorporated it into the NYRCR Plan. The
fourth public engagement event is planned for after the release of
this NYRCR Plan.

Page | 142

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Online Meetings

Figure 22: View of the Online Public Meeting Website

The Fire Island Community is unique in that many of the residents
and employees and virtually all of the visitors are not on Fire Island in
the winter and are dispersed throughout the metropolitan region.
Therefore in order to reach as broad a segment of the Fire Island
Community as possible, online Public Meetings were in conjunction
with the initial three public engagement events to allow anyone to
provide feedback on the process through the internet. The overall
format for the online events provided a digital open house which
could be attended at any time 24 hours a day, seven days a week for
a ten-day timeframe.
The Online Public Meeting provided identical stations to the inperson meeting. Respondents were asked to identify their
relationship to Fire Island (owner, renter, employee, or visitor) and
were able to view the Planning process and comment on all of the
materials provided. The Online Meetings provided thousands of
comments from hundreds of people which were summarized for the
Committee’s review and consideration in the planning process. The
following summarizes the total participation for each of the online
events:
•
•
•

Event #1 – 567 responses;
Event #2 – 103 responses; and
Event #3 – 143 responses.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Expert Sessions
A Power (Electric/Gas) Resiliency Education Session was held on
Tuesday, December 17, 2013 at the West Islip Community Center on
Higbie Lane. Over 30 members from the various Suffolk County
NYRCR Planning Committees were in attendance. The education
session focused on National Grid/LIPA (now operated by PSEG Long
Island as of January 1, 2014) lessons learned post-Superstorm Sandy
as well as current and future hardening projects/initiatives that are
being undertaken by the utilities within the County. Committee
members who attended stated that the session was valuable in
understanding how hardening infrastructure or raising a road can
impact the utilities below the road.

Page | 143

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Other Committee members indicated that it was valuable to meet
other Suffolk NYRCR Committee Members from adjacent
Communities.
A Flooding & Erosion Protection Education Session was held on
January 21, 2014, at the West Islip Fire Department, 309 Union
Boulevard in West Islip. NY Sea Grant discussed the interplay
between the natural and built environments that converge at the
“living edge” and presented innovative shoreline treatments,
including “living shorelines” which are being implemented in other
states. The presentation also noted that Long Island’s coastline is
home to a dynamic variety of habitats that supports a range of plants
and animals, some of which are endangered and threatened. The
Nature Conservancy provided information about wetlands
restoration and the NYS DEC discussed the permitting requirements
and thresholds for approval for various types of projects being
considered by the Committees.

Other Considerations
Although the public engagement events were advertised as events
for the NYRCR Program, some Community members were more
interested in assistance with individual property concerns. To
accommodate these individuals, at each public engagement event
tables were available in a separate area for State, FEMA, and NGO
staff from the various intake centers to provide individual assistance.
These Community members were subsequently encouraged to
participate in the NYRCR planning process.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Website
The NYRCR website served as a repository for downloadable versions
of all public information, events, and event notifications. Posted
materials included an overview of the planning process, reports,
maps, and documents, summaries of public engagement events,
notices of public engagement events, and contact information. The
website allowed for the inclusion of public comment, as well as a
section for Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs). All materials and
information on the website is kept up to date. The address is:
http://www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr.

Print and Broadcast Media
Study information was also disseminated through selected local,
print, radio, and TV media to keep the community informed and to
respond to media inquiries. A particular effort was made to include
publications, radio, and TV stations that targeted traditionally
underrepresented populations.

Outreach Techniques for Receiving Input
An important component of the outreach program was to
understand public sentiment and to be able to answer questions and
address public concerns. Several methods were provided for the
public to make comments and ask questions.
The NYRCR Committee and Consultant Team used these comments
to enhance and improve the NYRCR plan. The team documented all

Page | 144

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
comments received and added them to the record. Comments were
also reviewed by the Committee.

NYRCR Communication
NYRCR staff is available to directly answer specific questions and
receive comments. The primary contact is the NYRCR Suffolk County
Regional Lead.

E-Mail
E-mail comments and requests for information can be sent to the
State’s e-mail address at: info@stormrecovery.ny.gov. This email
address is prominently displayed on the website so that it is widely
disseminated and available for public use. The NYRCR Consultant
Team incorporated input and/or responded, as appropriate based on
guidance from the State. The team worked with NYS to post
comments or questions (with responses) that appeared repeatedly
to the FAQ page on the State’s website.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Comment Forms
Comment forms were available at Committee meetings and public
engagement events and on the State’s website to provide an
opportunity for the public to contribute their thoughts, which were
then passed along to the Committee and the NYRCR Consultant
Team.

Requests for Information
All requests for information were acknowledged by the NYRCR
Consultant Team within a week with a letter or email accompanied
by the materials requested or by a referral to the State’s website
where the material can be downloaded. If a response to the request
required more than a week, the individual making the request would
be contacted with an estimate of the anticipated delivery date. An
offer was always made to provide further assistance should it be
necessary.

Page | 145

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
D. COMMUNITY ASSET INVENTORY
The NYRCR Consultant Team used the asset inventory compiled as
part of the Conceptual Plan as a baseline in which to identify assets
that may potentially be inputted into the Risk Assessment Tool. The
pre‐screening was designed to advance assets that were either:
•

Situated in Extreme and High Risk Zones,

•

Critical Assets (FEMA‐critical) in Moderate Risk Zones,

•

Locally‐significant Community identified (High Community
Value) in Moderate Risk Zones,

•

Assets with High Community Value in Non Risk Areas, or

•

Life safety services.

The asset inventory included in the Conceptual Plan was based both
on Community identified assets and State identified assets. The
assets catalogued in the Conceptual Plan included basic data such as
Community, asset name and type, asset category, as well as risk area
and asset class. As previously indicated, as an initial data
management step, the NYRCR Consultant Team consolidated all
Community identified assets and State identified assets into one
database.
Assets filtered out include those that fell outside of Extreme, High or
Moderate risk areas or were non‐critical assets located in Moderate

Section 5: Additional Materials

risk areas. As previously mentioned, Committee‐identified or locally
significant high value assets were also included.

Group Like Assets
Similar assets were grouped as a single asset to the maximum extent
possible because these assets would likely experience the same
effects from storm events and have similar vulnerabilities. Examples
included:
•

Walkway network or electric infrastructure with similar
construction and exposure, and

•

Residential neighborhoods or business districts by risk area.

In the event that a building or parcel spanned multiple risk areas, the
“worst‐case or more at‐risk” risk area was used for the purposes of
analysis.

Determining Community Value
The value that a Community places on an asset may differ by
Community and/or region. As a result, NYSDOS has indicated that a
suitable identification methodology for NYRCR Communities should
be determined in consultation between the State and the NYRCR
Consultant Team. Although, the “Community value” field in the Risk
Assessment Tool did not directly impact risk, it was useful in terms of
identifying locally significant assets as determined by each respective
NYRCR Committee and Community.

Page | 146

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Community Value on Fire Island
The NYRCR Consultant Team engaged their respective NYRCR
Committees in preliminary “pilot” Community value identification
exercises throughout the course of the planning process. During a
Committee Meeting held on January 6, 2014, the Committee
participated in a Community Value and Critical Asset pilot exercise.
During this exercise, a Critical Assets Worksheet containing roughly
23 asset classes was distributed to the Committee to complete. The
contents of critical asset classes were developed using a
collaborative approach with the Committee. Similarly, asset classes
were also presented at the second Public/Online Meeting (January
25, 2014) in order to solicit verbal commentary from the public on
the Community value placed on assets and its importance relative to
the resilience of the locality. The various asset classes included a
number of functions ranging from life safety services to residential
housing and infrastructure (see Table 30). The purpose of this
exercise was to get the Committee to think about each asset class
and its importance relative to the resiliency of Fire Island. Committee
members were presented with worksheets with asset value
definitions (see below) and then asked to identify each asset class as
high, medium, or low value.
A High Value Community Asset is determined by the Community to
be so significant in the support of that Community’s day to day
function that the loss of that asset or extended lack of functioning
would create severe impacts to the Community’s long-term health
and well-being or result in the loss of life or injury to residents,
employees, or visitors. High Value Community Assets will also
Section 5: Additional Materials

generally be limited in number within a Community and be difficult
to replace in the short- to mid-term.
A Medium Value Community Asset is an individual asset or grouping
of assets that are determined by a Community to be important to the
functioning of that Community’s day to day life and that the loss of
that asset or extended lack of functioning would cause hardship to
the Community’s well-being but who’s function could be replaced or
duplicated in a mid-term time frame without significant burden to a
Community’s long-term health. Median Value Community Assets are
generally more frequent in occurrence in a Community than a High
Value Asset.
A Low Value Community Asset is an individual asset or grouping of
assets that are determined by a Community to play a role in the
functioning of a Community’s day to day life but whose loss could be
managed and overcome within a Community without substantial
impact to that Community’s functioning. These assets are generally
more frequent in a Community than a High or Medium Value
Community Asset and can be restarted, replaced or temporarily
duplicated in a short-term time frame with limited burden to a
Community’s long-term health.
The NYRCR Consultant Team tabulated Committee responses which
included:
•

Low Value Assets (5): Homes and Facilities for Vulnerable
Populations, Historic Buildings, Cultural/Community
Facilities, Government Buildings, Schools
Page | 147

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
•

•

Medium Value Assets (5): Business Areas, Wetlands, Parks
and Recreation Facilities, Department of Public Works,
Medical Facilities
High Value Assets (10): Great South Bay, Beaches and Dunes,
Fire, Police, Emergency Facilities, Marinas, Residential
Housing, Electric and Gas Infrastructure, Telephone/Cellular
Communications Infrastructure, Walkways, Ferries, Bay Front
Protection

The purpose of this exercise was to get the Committee to identify the
“highest” of the priority assets in order to better inform the risk
assessment process.

Using the Risk Assessment Tool
The dual purpose of the Risk Assessment Tool was: (1) to provide risk
information as a means to identify and prioritize management
measures; and (2) to provide a standardized risk assessment process
for the NYRCR Program.

Hazard Score
The hazard score was automatically populated in the Risk
Assessment Tool based on the likelihood and magnitude of a 100year storm event (1% annual chance). For the purpose of the NYRCR
Plan, the Hazard Score was equal to three (3), which can be
described as a high intensity storm event that is about as likely as not
(possible). The probability of this type of storm to occur within the
planning timeframe is considered to be 33-66%.

Exposure Score
The exposure score was automatically populated in the Risk
Assessment Tool based on landscape attribute information. Grouped
assets based on similar exposure were given the same exposure
score. Data that informed the exposure score included a review of
Coastal Erosion Hazard Area (CEHA) maps, aerial imagery, and site
reconnaissance as well as a reliance on local knowledge and input
from the Project Manager and/or Committee.

Most of the risk assessment tool fields were populated using data
from GIS or collected during the inventory. Three important aspects
to the tool are how to accurately determine the hazard, exposure,
and vulnerability scores.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 148

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Vulnerability Score
The vulnerability score of each asset was determined using the State
guidance (based on Table 3: Vulnerability Based on Impact on Service
or Function of Community Assets contained in Guidance for
Community Reconstruction Zone Plans) as well as local background
knowledge. Vulnerability generally pertains to length of time that a
resource is out of service or a reduction in service capacity. This was
determined through local knowledge of how assets responded in
previous storm events.

Risk Score Range
After populating the Risk Assessment Tool with attribute information
(basic data/hazard area/exposure/vulnerability, etc.) a Risk Score
was automatically generated. The Risk Score relied on past
experience as a predictor of future risk and included some subjective
analysis. For a 100-year event the Risk Score ranges from Residual
(less than 6) to Moderate (6 to 23) to High (24 to 53) to Severe (54 or
greater).

Elevated home

Presented on the following pages is a baseline inventory of assets in
the Fire Island Community. Included in the risk assessment
spreadsheet for each asset is the asset name, risk area, asset class,
critical facility designation, Community value, landscape attributes,
and risk assessment scores.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 149

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30: Asset Inventory Worksheet
Asset Information
Asset Name

Risk
Area

Asset Class

Marina/ Water
Based Business
Government and
Health and Social
Administrative
Services
Services
Natural and
Cultural or Religious
Cultural Resources
Establishments

Saltaire Yacht Club, Inc.

Extreme

Village of Saltaire City Hall
St. Andrews Church,
Saltaire
Kismet Commercial
District

Extreme

Kismet Fire Department

Extreme

Brodkin Park, Saltaire

Extreme

Health and Social
Services
Natural and
Cultural Resources

Kismet Fire House
Fair Harbor Commercial
District

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

Extreme

Economic

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

Extreme

Economic

Extreme

Fair Harbor Fire
Department Station
SCWA Drinking Water
Treatment, Fair Harbor
Saltaire Water Drinking
Water Treatment and
Well

Extreme

SCWA Well, Fair Harbor

Extreme

Extreme

Asset
Subcategory

Economic

Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Landscape Attributes
Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Yes
Yes

Downtown Center
Emergency
Operations/
Response
Parks and
Recreation
Emergency
Operations/
Response

Yes

Downtown Center
Emergency
Operations/
Response

Yes
Yes
Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
Yes, FEMA
No, Locally
Significant

Community Erosion Beach Shore
Dunes
Vegetation
Soils
or Bluffs
Value
Rate Width Defenses

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA
No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Page | 150

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name

Risk
Area

SCWA, Lonelyville

Extreme

SCWA building, Lonelyville
SCWA Drinking Water
Treatment & Well,
Dunewood

Extreme

Summer Club House,
Corneille Estates
SCWA - Drinking Water
Treatment, Corneille
Estates

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Seaview Community
Center

Extreme

Doctor's House, Seaview

Extreme

Grocery, Seaview
Village of Ocean Beach water tower
Ocean Beach Commercial
District
NY Telephone Co., Ocean
Beach
Ocean Beach Union Free
Church

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Asset Class
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Infrastructure
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Health and Social
Services
Economic
Infrastructure
Systems
Economic
Infrastructure
Systems

Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Asset
Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Community
Centers

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Community
Centers
Healthcare
Facilities
Grocery/Food
Suppliers

Yes
Yes
Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Downtown Center
Telecommunications

Yes

Natural and
Cultural or Religious
Cultural Resources
Establishments

Section 5: Additional Materials

Landscape Attributes

Yes
Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Soils

Page | 151

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name

Risk
Area

Police Station, Ocean
Beach

Extreme

Village Office, Ocean
Beach

Extreme

Village of Ocean Beach
Community House
Youth Group
"Windswept", Ocean
Beach
Our Lady of the
Magnificat Church, Ocean
Beach
Ocean Beach Water
District - drinking water
wells
Village of Ocean Beach water treatment

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Fire Island Synagogue,
Seaview

Extreme

Ocean Beach Fire
Department

Extreme

US Post Office, Ocean
Beach

Extreme

Asset Class

Critical
Facility

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Wastewater

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Emergency
Operations/
Response
Government and
Health and Social Administrative
Services
Services
Natural and
Community
Cultural
Centers
Resources
Natural and
Parks and
Cultural
Recreation
Resources
Natural and
Cultural or
Cultural
Religious
Resources
Establishments

Natural and
Cultural or Religious
Cultural Resources
Establishments

Emergency
Health and Social
Operations/
Services
Response
Government and
Health and Social Administrative
Services
Services

Section 5: Additional Materials

Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Asset
Subcategory

Health and Social
Services

Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems

Landscape Attributes
Soils

Page | 152

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name
Village of Ocean Beach
Sewage
Seaview Community
Marina

Risk
Area

Asset Class

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Extreme

Economic

Seaview/Ocean Bay Park
Garbage Transfer Station

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Ocean Bay Park Volunteer
Fire Department

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

Suffolk County Police
Booth, Ocean Bay Park

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

Extreme

Economic

Point O' Woods Post
Office
Yacht Club, Point O'
Woods
Point O' Woods Fire
Department Station

Extreme

Church, Point O' Woods

Extreme

Health and Social
Services
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cherry Grove Police
Station

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

Section 5: Additional Materials

Landscape Attributes

Asset
Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Wastewater
Marina/Water
Based Business
Hazardous
Materials, Solid
Waste, Recycling
Emergency
Operations/
Response
Emergency
Operations/
Response
Government and
Administrative
Services
Marina/Water
Based Business
Emergency
Operations/
Response
Cultural or
Religious
Establishments
Emergency
Operations/
Response

Yes

Critical
Facility

Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Soils

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA
No, Locally
Significant

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Page | 153

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name
SCWA - Bayview Walk
Drinking Water
Treatment, Cherry Grove
Cherry Grove Community
House - Historical
Landmark
Cherry Grove Fire Station
Belvedere Hotel, Cherry
Grove
Fire Island Pines Police
Station
Fire Island Pines
Community Health Center Seasonal Doctor Office
SCWA Drinking Water
Treatment & Well, Fire
Island Pines
Doctor's Office, Davis Park
Public Restrooms, Davis
Park
Watch Hill Visitor Center
and Marina
Doctor's Office, Ocean
Beach

Risk
Area

Asset Class

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Water Supply
Historic
Landmarks and
Facilities
Emergency
Operations/
Response

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Extreme
Extreme

Health and Social
Services

Extreme

Economic

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

Lodging
Emergency
Operations/
Response

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

Healthcare
Facilities

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems
Health and Social
Services
Health and Social
Services
Economic
Health and Social
Services

Section 5: Additional Materials

Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Asset
Subcategory

Infrastructure
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Extreme

Landscape Attributes

Water Supply
Healthcare
Facilities
Public Works
Facilities
Tourism
Destinations
Healthcare
Facilities

Soils

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA
No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Page | 154

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name

Risk
Area

Asset Class

Landscape Attributes
Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Parks and
Recreation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Natural Protective
Features

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Interconnect,
Border of Seaview &
Ocean Beach

Extreme

Park, Ocean Bay Park

Extreme

Dunes

Extreme

Nature Preserve, Saltaire

Extreme

Helipad - destroyed in
Sandy, Cherry Grove

Extreme

Community Owned Tennis
Courts, Dunewood

Extreme

Baseball Diamond,
Saltaire

Extreme

Health and Social
Services
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Extreme

Economic

Parks and
Recreation
Marina/Water
Based Business

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

Yes

Extreme

Economic

Downtown Center

Yes

Davis Park Marina
SCWA Harbor Walk Water
Treatment Plant, Fire
Island Pines
Davis Park Commercial
Buildings

Infrastructure
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Section 5: Additional Materials

Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Asset
Subcategory

Natural Habitats
Emergency
Operations/
Response
Parks and
Recreation

Yes
Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
Yes, FEMA
No, Locally
Significant

Soils

Page | 155

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name
SCWA Drinking Water
Well, Davis Park
Water Island Fire Wells
Fire Island Pines
Commercial District
Fire Island Pines Freight
Dock
Cherry Grove Commercial
District
Point O' Woods
Commercial District
Ocean Bay Park
Commercial District
Ocean Bay Park Tennis
Courts
Community-Owned Dock,
Atlantique
Atlantique Beach and
Marina
Community-owned dock
#1, Lonelyville
Community-owned dock
#2, Lonelyville
Dock owned by FI Ferries,
Dunewood

Landscape Attributes
Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Asset
Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Downtown Center
Marine commerce
facilities

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Extreme

Economic
Infrastructure
Systems

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Extreme

Economic

Downtown Center

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Extreme

Economic

Downtown Center

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Extreme

Economic
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Infrastructure
Systems

Downtown Center

Yes

Yes, FEMA
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Risk
Area

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Asset Class
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems

Economic
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Parks and
Recreation
Marine commerce
facilities
Marina/Water
Based Business
Marine commerce
facilities
Marine commerce
facilities
Marine commerce
facilities

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Soils

Page | 156

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name

Risk
Area

Asset Class

Bay beach, Fair Harbor
Yacht Club Dock & Pier,
Fair Harbor

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Extreme

Economic

Saltaire Marina

Extreme

Economic

Kismet Marina
Two boat slip clubs off of
Seabay Walk

Extreme

Economic

Extreme

Economic
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Saltaire Camp &
Recreation
Point O' Woods Marina
Water Island Community
Dock (seasonal)

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Fire Island Lighthouse
Fire Island National
Seashore West District
Ranger Station
SCWA Drinking Water
Treatment, Kismet

High

SCWA - Well, Kismet

High

High
High

Asset
Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Natural Habitats
Marina/Water
Based Business
Marina/Water
Based Business
Marina/Water
Based Business
Marina/Water
Based Business

Yes

Parks and
Recreation
Marina/Water
Economic
Based Business
Marina/Water
Economic
Based Business
Natural and
Historic
Cultural
Landmarks and
Resources
Facilities
Government and
Health and Social Administrative
Services
Services
Infrastructure
Water Supply
Systems
Infrastructure
Water Supply
Systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Landscape Attributes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Critical
Facility

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Soils

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Page | 157

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name

Risk
Area

Asset Class

Asset
Subcategory
Hazardous
Materials, Solid
Waste, and
Recycling
Cultural or
Religious
Establishments
Public Works
Facilities

Church, Davis Park
Woodhull School,
Corneille Estates

High

Seaview Water Company
Point O' Woods SCWA
Water Treatment Plant
and Well

High

Infrastructure
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Health and Social
Services
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Health and Social
Services
Infrastructure
Systems

High

Infrastructure
Systems

Cherry Grove Post Office
Doctor's House /
Healthcare Office, Cherry
Grove

High

Water Supply
Government and
Health and Social Administrative
Services
Services

High

Health and Social
Services

Transfer Station, Saltaire
Our Lady Star of the Sea
Church, Saltaire
Public Restrooms, Fair
Harbor
Atlantique Park

High
High
High
High

High

Section 5: Additional Materials

Parks and
Recreation
Cultural or
Religious
Establishments

Landscape Attributes
Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Yes

Critical
Facility

No, Locally
Significant

Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Yes

Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Soils

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Low

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Low

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Low

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Low

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Schools

Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Medium

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Healthcare
Facilities

Yes

Page | 158

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name

Risk
Area

Asset Class

Fire Island Pines Fire
Station

High

Health and Social
Services

Davis Park Fire House

High

Health and Social
Services

Police Station, Davis Park
SCWA Drinking Water
Well, Davis Park
SCWA Drinking Water
Treatment, Davis Park

High

Rectory, Davis Park
Water Interconnect,
Border of Seaview &
Ocean Bay Park

High

Kismet Tennis Courts

High

Helipad, Davis Park
Talisman Beach Drinking
Water Well
SCWA Harbor Walk Water
Well, Fire Island Pines

High

High
High

High

High
High

Health and Social
Services
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Infrastructure
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Health and Social
Services
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Landscape Attributes
Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply
Cultural or
Religious
Establishments

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Asset
Subcategory
Emergency
Operations/
Response
Emergency
Operations/
Response
Emergency
Operations/
Response

Parks and
Recreation
Emergency
Operations/
Response

Soils

Page | 159

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name
Fire Island Hotel, Ocean
Bay Park
SCWA Wells - Inground
Storage, Ocean Bay Park
Water interconnect,
Border of Ocean Beach &
Corneille Estates
Robert Moses State Park
Field Houses
U.S Coast Guard Station
Verizon vehicle storage,
Fire Island Pines
Robert Moses Water
Tower

Risk
Area

High
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate

Suffolk County Police
Helipad, Fire Island Pines Moderate
Electric Power Center, Fire
Moderate
Island Pines
Emergency Access Route

Extreme

Dunewood Ferry Dock

Extreme

Fair Harbor Ferry Dock

Extreme

Asset Class

Economic
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Asset
Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Lodging

Yes

Water Supply

Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Water Supply

Yes
Yes

Parks and
Recreation
Government and
Health and Social Administrative
Services
Services
Infrastructure
TeleSystems
communications
Infrastructure
Water Supply
Systems
Emergency
Health and Social
Operations/
Services
Response
Infrastructure
Power Supply
Systems
Infrastructure
Transportation
Systems
Infrastructure
Transportation
Systems
Infrastructure
Transportation
Systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Landscape Attributes
Critical
Facility

Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Soils

Medium

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Low

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes, FEMA
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Page | 160

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name

Risk
Area

Atlantique Ferry Dock

Extreme

Ocean Beach Ferry Dock
Ocean Bay Park Ferry
Dock
Fire Island Pines Ferry
Dock

Extreme

Sunken Forest Ferry Dock

Extreme

Kismet Ferry Dock

Extreme

Saltaire Ferry Dock

Extreme

Seaview Ferry Dock

Extreme

Sailors Haven Ferry Dock

Extreme

Cherry Grove Ferry Dock

Extreme

Davis Park Ferry Dock

Extreme

Watch Hill Ferry Dock

Extreme

Fire Island National
Seashore

Extreme

Extreme
Extreme

Asset Class
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Section 5: Additional Materials

Landscape Attributes

Asset
Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Natural Habitats

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Critical
Facility

Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Soils

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Page | 161

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name
Microwave Tower, Ocean
Beach
Microwave Tower, Davis
Park
Fire Island Residential
Housing - Extreme Risk
Area
Fire Island Residential
Housing - High Risk Area
Fire Island Residential
Housing - Moderate Risk
Area
Roads/Walkways Extreme Risk Area
Roads/Walkways - High
Risk Area
Roads/Walkways Moderate Risk Area
Robert Moses State Park
Dune X-ing, east end
Traffic Ave, 240' east of
Seneca
Dune X-ing, Coast Guard
Walk

Risk
Area

Asset Class

Asset
Subcategory

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems

Telecommunications
Telecommunications

Extreme

Housing

High

Housing

Extreme

Moderate
Extreme
High
Moderate
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Housing
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Single-Family
Residence
Single-Family
Residence

Landscape Attributes
Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Critical
Facility

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Single-Family
Residence

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Parks and
Recreation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Soils

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Page | 162

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 30 (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name
Dune X-ing, east end of
Fire Island Blvd thru FINS
Dune X-ing, Davis Park,
200' east of Trustees walk
Dune X-ing, South of
Center Walk, 200' east of
Trustees walk
Point O' Woods Ferry
Dock

Risk
Area

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Asset Class
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Landscape Attributes

Asset
Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Transportation

Yes

Critical
Facility

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Dunes
Community Erosion Beach Shore
or
Vegetation
Value
Rate Width Defenses
Bluffs

Soils

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Page | 163

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
* The following five Landscape Attributes have the same value (“Yes”) for every asset, and are therefore not included in Table 31:
•
•
•
•
•

Erosion Rate ≥1 foot per year or unknown,
Shore defenses absent, not constructed to anticipated conditions, or deteriorating,
Protective vegetation between asset and flood source absent,
Dunes absent, below BFE, eroding, little vegetation; bluff slope unstable, little vegetation, and
On coastal barrier island or filled wetland
Table 31: Risk Assessment Tool
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Asset
Youth Group "Windswept",
Ocean Beach
Fire Island Pines Community
Health Center - Seasonal
Doctor Office
Helipad - destroyed in Sandy,
Cherry Grove
Water Island Fire Wells
Community-owned dock #1,
Lonelyville
Community-owned dock #2,
Lonelyville

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape
Community
shore defense or Attribute
Value
upland
Score
vegetation

Risk Assessment
VulnerHazard Exposure
Risk
ability
Score
Score
Score
Score

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset Sub-category

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

5

75

Healthcare Facilities
Emergency
Operations/Response
Water Supply
Marine commerce
facilities
Marine commerce
facilities

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

5

75

High
High

Yes
Yes

3
3

3
3

5.00
5.00

5
5

75
75

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

5

75

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

5

75

Natural Habitats
Marina/Water Based
Business
Cultural or Religious
Establishments

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

5

75

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Extreme
Extreme

Health and Social
Services
Health and Social
Services
Infrastructure Systems

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Extreme

Bay beach, Fair Harbor

Extreme

Saltaire Yacht Club, Inc.

Extreme

St. Andrews Church, Saltaire

Extreme

Section 5: Additional Materials

Economic
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Page | 164

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 31 (cont’d)
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Brodkin Park, Saltaire

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Market, Saltaire
Saltaire Volunteer Fire
Company
Saltaire Water Drinking
Water Treatment and Well

Extreme

Doctor's House, Seaview

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems
Health and Social
Services

Grocery, Seaview
Ocean Beach Commercial
District
Ocean Beach Union Free
Church

Extreme

Economic

Extreme

Police Station, Ocean Beach

Extreme

Economic
Natural and Cultural
Resources
Health and Social
Services

Village Office, Ocean Beach
Village of Ocean Beach
Community House
Our Lady of the Magnificat
Church, Ocean Beach

Extreme

Economic
Health and Social
Services

Extreme
Extreme

Extreme

Extreme
Extreme

Section 5: Additional Materials

Health and Social
Services
Natural and Cultural
Resources
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Asset Sub-category

Risk Assessment

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape Hazard Exposure Vulner- Risk
Community
ability
shore defense or Attribute
Value
Score
Score
Score
upland
Score
Score
vegetation

Parks and Recreation
Grocery/Food
Suppliers
Emergency
Operations/Response

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Water Supply

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Healthcare Facilities
Grocery/Food
Suppliers

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Downtown Center
Cultural or Religious
Establishments
Emergency
Operations/Response
Government and
Administrative
Services

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Community Centers
Cultural or Religious
Establishments

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Page | 165

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31 (cont’d)
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Asset
Ocean Beach Fire
Department

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset Sub-category

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

Emergency
Operations/Response
Marina/Water Based
Business
Historic Landmarks
and Facilities
Emergency
Operations/Response

Risk Assessment

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape Hazard Exposure Vulner- Risk
Community
ability
shore defense or Attribute
Value
Score
Score
Score
upland
Score
Score
vegetation

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Seaview Community Marina
Cherry Grove Community
House - Historical Landmark

Extreme

Cherry Grove Fire Station
Belvedere Hotel, Cherry
Grove
SCWA Drinking Water
Treatment & Well, Fire Island
Pines

Extreme

Economic
Natural and Cultural
Resources
Health and Social
Services

Extreme

Economic

Lodging

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Extreme

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Extreme

Water Supply
Natural Protective
Features

High

Dunes

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Nature Preserve, Saltaire

Extreme

Natural Habitats

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Baseball Diamond, Saltaire
SCWA Harbor Walk Water
Treatment Plant, Fire Island
Pines
Cherry Grove Commercial
District
Community-Owned Dock,
Atlantique

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems
Natural and Cultural
Resources
Natural and Cultural
Resources
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Water Supply

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Extreme

Economic

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Downtown Center
Marine commerce
facilities

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Extreme

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 166

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31 (cont’d)
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Atlantique Beach and Marina
Yacht Club Dock & Pier, Fair
Harbor

Extreme

Economic

Extreme

Saltaire Camp & Recreation
Emergency Access Route
Atlantique Ferry Dock
Ocean Beach Ferry Dock
Fire Island Residential
Housing - Extreme Risk Area
Roads/Walkways - Extreme
Risk Area

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Economic
Natural and Cultural
Resources
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems

Extreme

Housing

Extreme

Robert Moses State Park
Dune X-ing, east end Traffic
Ave, 240' east of Seneca
Dune X-ing, Coast Guard
Walk
Dune X-ing, east end of Fire
Island Blvd thru FINS
Dune X-ing, Davis Park, 200'
east of Trustees walk
Dune X-ing, South of Center
Walk, 200' east of Trustees
Point O Woods Ferry Dock

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Extreme

Asset Sub-category
Marina/Water Based
Business
Marina/Water Based
Business

Risk Assessment

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape Hazard Exposure Vulner- Risk
Community
ability
shore defense or Attribute
Value
Score
Score
Score
upland
Score
Score
vegetation

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Parks and Recreation
Transportation
Transportation
Transportation
Single-Family
Residence

Med
High
High
High

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

3
3
3
3

3
3
3
3

5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

4
4
4
4

60
60
60
60

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Transportation

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Parks and Recreation

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Infrastructure Systems

Transportation

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Transportation

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Transportation

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Transportation

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

4

60

Extreme
Extreme

Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems

Transportation
Transportation

High
High

Yes
Yes

3
3

3
3

5.00
5.00

4
4

60
60

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 167

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31 (cont’d)
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Village of Saltaire City Hall
Kismet Commercial District

Extreme
Extreme

Health and Social
Services
Economic

Post Office/Library, Saltaire
Fair Harbor Fire Department
Station
SCWA Drinking Water
Treatment & Well,
Dunewood

Extreme

Seaview Community Center
Fire Island Synagogue,
Seaview

Extreme

US Post Office, Ocean Beach
Ocean Bay Park Volunteer
Fire Department
SCWA - Bayview Walk
Drinking Water Treatment,
Cherry Grove
Fire Island Pines Police
Station

Extreme

Extreme

Yes
Yes

3
3

3
3

5.00
5.00

3
3

45
45

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Water Supply

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Health and Social
Services
Health and Social
Services

Community Centers
Cultural or Religious
Establishments
Government and
Administrative
Services
Emergency
Operations/Response

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Infrastructure Systems
Health and Social
Services

Water Supply
Emergency
Operations/Response

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Health and Social
Services
Health and Social
Services
Infrastructure Systems
Natural and Cultural
Resources
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Government and
Administrative
Services
Downtown Center
Government and
Administrative
Services
Emergency
Operations/Response

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape Hazard Exposure Vulner- Risk
Community
ability
shore defense or Attribute
Value
Score
Score
Score
upland
Score
Score
vegetation

Low
Med

Extreme
Extreme

Asset Sub-category

Risk Assessment

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 168

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31 (cont’d)
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Doctor's Office, Davis Park

Extreme

Public Restrooms, Davis Park
Community Owned Tennis
Courts, Dunewood

Extreme
Extreme

Health and Social
Services
Health and Social
Services
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Davis Park Marina
Davis Park Commercial
Buildings
SCWA Drinking Water Well,
Davis Park
Fire Island Pines Commercial
District

Extreme

Asset Sub-category

Risk Assessment

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape Hazard Exposure Vulner- Risk
Community
ability
shore defense or Attribute
Value
Score
Score
Score
upland
Score
Score
vegetation

Healthcare Facilities

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Public Works Facilities

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Economic

Parks and Recreation
Marina/Water Based
Business

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Extreme

Economic

Downtown Center

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Water Supply

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Extreme

Economic

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Saltaire Marina

Extreme

Economic

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Kismet Marina
Water Island Community
Dock (seasonal)
Dunewood Ferry Dock
Ocean Bay Park Ferry Dock
Kismet Ferry Dock
Saltaire Ferry Dock
Seaview Ferry Dock
Cherry Grove Ferry Dock
Davis Park Ferry Dock

Extreme

Economic

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

3

45

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Economic
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems

Downtown Center
Marina/Water Based
Business
Marina/Water Based
Business
Marina/Water Based
Business
Transportation
Transportation
Transportation
Transportation
Transportation
Transportation
Transportation

High
High
High
High
High
High
High
High

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

45
45
45
45
45
45
45
45

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 169

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31 (cont’d)
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Asset
Microwave Tower, Ocean
Beach
Microwave Tower, Davis Park
Our Lady Star of the Sea
Church, Saltaire
Atlantique Park
SCWA Harbor Walk Water
Well, Fire Island Pines
SCWA Wells - Inground
Storage, Ocean Bay Park
Fire Island Residential
Housing - High Risk Area
Robert Moses State Park
Field Houses
Robert Moses Water Tower
Electric Power Center, Fire
Island Pines
Fire Island Residential
Housing - Moderate Risk Area

Risk Assessment

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape Hazard Exposure Vulner- Risk
Community
ability
shore defense or Attribute
Value
Score
Score
Score
upland
Score
Score
vegetation

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset Sub-category

Extreme
Extreme

Telecommunications
Telecommunications
Cultural or Religious
Establishments

High
High

Yes
Yes

3
3

3
3

5.00
5.00

3
3

45
45

Low

No

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

High

Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems
Natural and Cultural
Resources
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

Med

No

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

High

Infrastructure Systems

Water Supply

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

High

Infrastructure Systems

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

High

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

Moderate
Moderate

Housing
Natural and Cultural
Resources
Infrastructure Systems

Water Supply
Single-Family
Residence
Parks and Recreation
Water Supply

Med
High

No
No

2.5
2.5

3
3

3.00
3.00

4
4

36
36

Moderate

Infrastructure Systems

High

No

2.5

3

3.00

4

36

Moderate

Power Supply
Single-Family
Residence
Historic Landmarks
and Facilities
Government and
Administrative
Services
Hazardous Materials,
Solid Waste, and
Recycling

High

No

2.5

3

3.00

4

36

Low

No

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Med

No

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

High

Fire Island Lighthouse

High

Housing
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Fire Island National Seashore
West District Ranger Station

High

Health and Social
Services

Transfer Station, Saltaire

High

Infrastructure Systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 170

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31 (cont’d)
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Risk Assessment

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape Hazard Exposure Vulner- Risk
Community
ability
shore defense or Attribute
Value
Score
Score
Score
upland
Score
Score
vegetation

Asset Class

Asset Sub-category
Cultural or Religious
Establishments
Emergency
Operations/Response
Emergency
Operations/Response

Low

No

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Church, Davis Park

High

Davis Park Fire House

High

Police Station, Davis Park
SCWA Drinking Water Well,
Davis Park
SCWA Drinking Water
Treatment, Davis Park

High

Natural and Cultural
Resources
Health and Social
Services
Health and Social
Services

High

Infrastructure Systems

Water Supply

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

High

Low

No

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Helipad, Davis Park
Roads/Walkways - High Risk
Area

High

Water Supply
Cultural or Religious
Establishments
Emergency
Operations/Response

High

Rectory, Davis Park

Infrastructure Systems
Natural and Cultural
Resources
Health and Social
Services

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Transportation
Emergency
Operations/Response
Emergency
Operations/Response

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

High

Kismet Fire Department

Extreme

Kismet Fire House
Fair Harbor Commercial
District
SCWA, Lonelyville
SCWA building, Lonelyville
SCWA - Drinking Water
Treatment, Corneille Estates
Ocean Beach Water District drinking water wells

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems
Health and Social
Services
Health and Social
Services

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Economic
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems

Downtown Center
Water Supply
Water Supply

Med
High
High

Yes
Yes
Yes

3
3
3

3
3
3

5.00
5.00
5.00

2
2
2

30
30
30

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Water Supply

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Water Supply

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 171

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31 (cont’d)
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Asset

Risk Assessment

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape Hazard Exposure Vulner- Risk
Community
ability
shore defense or Attribute
Value
Score
Score
Score
upland
Score
Score
vegetation

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset Sub-category

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Wastewater

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Extreme

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Point O' Woods Post Office

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Yacht Club, Point O' Woods
Point O' Woods Fire
Department Station

Extreme

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Church, Point O' Woods
Watch Hill Visitor Center and
Marina

Extreme

Wastewater
Emergency
Operations/Response
Government and
Administrative
Services
Marina/Water Based
Business
Emergency
Operations/Response
Cultural or Religious
Establishments

High

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems
Health and Social
Services

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Park, Ocean Bay Park
Point O' Woods Commercial
District
Ocean Bay Park Commercial
District
Ocean Bay Park Tennis Courts
Dock owned by FI Ferries,
Dunewood

Village of Ocean Beach water treatment
Village of Ocean Beach
Sewage
Suffolk County Police Booth,
Ocean Bay Park

Economic
Health and Social
Services
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Extreme

Tourism Destinations

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Extreme

Economic
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Extreme

Economic

Downtown Center

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Extreme

Downtown Center

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Extreme

Economic
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Parks and Recreation
Marine commerce
facilities

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Extreme

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 172

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31 (cont’d)
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Two boat slip clubs off of
Seabay Walk

Extreme

Economic

Point O' Woods Marina
Fair Harbor Ferry Dock
Sunken Forest Ferry Dock
Sailors Haven Ferry Dock
Watch Hill Ferry Dock

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Fire Island National Seashore
Roads/Walkways - Moderate
Risk Area
Point O' Woods SCWA Water
Treatment Plant and Well
Fire Island Hotel, Ocean Bay
Park
Water interconnect, Border
of Ocean Beach & Corneille
Estates

Extreme

Economic
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Moderate

U.S Coast Guard Station
SCWA Drinking Water
Treatment, Fair Harbor
SCWA Well, Fair Harbor
Summer Club House,
Corneille Estates

Asset Sub-category

Risk Assessment

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape Hazard Exposure Vulner- Risk
Community
ability
shore defense or Attribute
Value
Score
Score
Score
upland
Score
Score
vegetation

Marina/Water Based
Business
Marina/Water Based
Business
Transportation
Transportation
Transportation
Transportation

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

High
High
High
Med
Med

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

3
3
3
3
3

3
3
3
3
3

5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00

2
2
2
2
2

30
30
30
30
30

Natural Habitats

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

2

30

Infrastructure Systems

Transportation

High

No

2.5

3

3.00

3

27

High

Infrastructure Systems

Water Supply

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

2

21

High

Economic

Lodging

Med

No

2.5

3

3.50

2

21

High

Infrastructure Systems

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

2

21

Moderate

Health and Social
Services

Water Supply
Government and
Administrative
Services

High

No

2.5

3

3.00

2

18

Water Supply
Water Supply

High
High

Yes
Yes

3
3

3
3

5.00
5.00

1
1

15
15

Community Centers

Low

Yes

3

3

5.00

1

15

Extreme
Extreme
Extreme

Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 173

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31 (cont’d)
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Asset

Risk Assessment

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape Hazard Exposure Vulner- Risk
Community
ability
shore defense or Attribute
Value
Score
Score
Score
upland
Score
Score
vegetation

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset Sub-category

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Water Supply

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

1

15

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

1

15

Seaview/Ocean Bay Park
Garbage Transfer Station

Extreme

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

1

15

Cherry Grove Police Station

Extreme

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

1

15

Doctor's Office, Ocean Beach
Water Interconnect, Border
of Seaview & Ocean Beach

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems
Health and Social
Services
Health and Social
Services

Telecommunications
Hazardous Materials,
Solid Waste, and
Recycling
Emergency
Operations/Response
Healthcare Facilities

Med

Yes

3

3

5.00

1

15

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

High

Yes

3

3

5.00

1

15

Fire Island Pines Freight Dock
Fire Island Pines Ferry Dock
SCWA Drinking Water
Treatment, Kismet
SCWA - Well, Kismet

Extreme
Extreme

Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure Systems

Water Supply
Marine commerce
facilities
Transportation

High
High

Yes
Yes

3
3

3
3

5.00
5.00

1
1

15
15

High
High

No
No

2.5
2.5

3
3

3.50
3.50

1
1

11
11

Public Restrooms, Fair Harbor
Woodhull School, Corneille
Estates
Seaview Water Company

High

Low

No

2.5

3

3.50

1

11

Low
High

No
No

2.5
2.5

3
3

3.50
3.50

1
1

11
11

Cherry Grove Post Office
Doctor's House / Healthcare
Office, Cherry Grove

High

Low

No

2.5

3

3.50

1

11

Med

No

2.5

3

3.50

1

11

Village of Ocean Beach water tower
NY Telephone Co., Ocean
Beach

High
High

High
High

High

Infrastructure Systems
Water Supply
Infrastructure Systems
Water Supply
Health and Social
Public Works Facilities
Services
Health and Social
Schools
Services
Infrastructure Systems
Water Supply
Health and Social
Government and
Services
Administrative Services
Health and Social
Healthcare Facilities
Services

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 174

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31 (cont’d)
Landscape Attributes (see
note)*

Asset Information

Risk Assessment

Waterline
frequently at
Landscape Hazard Exposure Vulner- Risk
Community
ability
shore defense or Attribute
Value
Score
Score
Score
upland
Score
Score
vegetation

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Asset Sub-category

Fire Island Pines Fire Station
Water Interconnect, Border
of Seaview & Ocean Bay Park

High

Health and Social
Services

Emergency
Operations/Response

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

1

11

Water Supply

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

1

11

Kismet Tennis Courts
Talisman Beach Drinking
Water Well
Verizon vehicle storage, Fire
Island Pines
Suffolk County Police
Helipad, Fire Island Pines

High

Infrastructure Systems
Natural and Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

Med

No

2.5

3

3.50

1

11

High

Infrastructure Systems

Water Supply

High

No

2.5

3

3.50

1

11

Moderate

Infrastructure Systems
Health and Social
Services

Telecommunications
Emergency
Operations/Response

Low

No

2.5

3

3.00

1

9

High

No

2.5

3

3.00

1

9

High

Moderate

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 175

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
E. GLOSSARY
Acronyms
AARP
American Association of Retired Persons
ACS
American Community Survey
CBA
Cost-benefit analysis
CDP
Census Designated Place
EMS
Emergency Medical Services
FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency
FIMP
Fire Island Inlet to Montauk Point
FINS
Fire Island National Seashore
FTE
Full-time equivalent

Section 5: Additional Materials

GIS
Geographic Information Systems
HUD
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
LDRM
Local Disaster Recovery Manager
LIRR
Long Island Rail Road
NGO
Non-governmental organization
NPS
U.S. National Park Service
NYRCR
NY Rising Community Reconstruction
NYS DEC
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
NYS DOS
New York State Department of State
REDC
Regional Economic Development Council

Page | 176

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
RSF
Recovery Support Function
SCWA
Suffolk County Water Authority
SDR
Storm Damage Reduction
SGRID3
Smarter Grid Research, Innovation, Development,
Demonstration, and Deployment
USACE
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
USCG
U.S. Coast Guard
USFWS
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
USGS
U.S. Geological Survey
USLSS
U.S. Life Saving Service
VFW
Veterans of Foreign Wars

Section 5: Additional Materials

Terms
Asset
Places or entities where economic, environmental, and social
functions of the Community occur
Asset Inventory
Completing an inventory of the Community’s social, economic, and
natural resource assets that have been, or will be, affected by coastal
or riverine hazards
Community Vision
The overall goal of the Community throughout the NYRCR planning
process
Conceptual Plan
A snapshot of the current thoughts of the Community and Planning
Committee. The plans will evolve as communities analyze the risk to
their assets, their needs and opportunities, the potential costs and
benefits of projects and actions, and their priorities.
Exposure
Local landscape characteristics that tend to increase or decrease
storm effects
Geographic scope
The community identified by the Community and State guidelines
where assets are most at risk; where future construction or
reconstruction of existing development should be encouraged or
discourage; or where key investment to improve the local economy
can be instituted

Page | 177

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Hazard
The likelihood and magnitude of anticipated hazard events.
Hazus
Hazus is a geographic information system-based natural hazard loss
estimation software package developed & freely distributed by FEMA.
Implementation Schedule
Preparing an implementation schedule of the actions needed to
implement the strategies
Lidar
A remote sensing technology that measures distance by illuminating
a target with a laser and analyzing the reflected light
Need
Infrastructure and services that were damaged or rendered
inoperable by Superstorm Sandy as well as methods and operations
that failed to work during the storm event or experienced insufficient
capacity to respond effectively.
Needs and Opportunities Assessment
Determining needs and opportunities to improve local economic
growth and enhance resilience to future storms.
Opportunity
Additional resiliency benefits, whether economic, environmental,
social, or cultural, that may be achieved through the integration of
new methods, procedures, and materials into the normal course of
rebuilding.
Public Engagement
Offering opportunities for public input and involvement at key
milestones in the planning process
Resilience

Section 5: Additional Materials

The ability of a system to absorb impacts while retaining the same
basic structure and ways of functioning, the capacity for selforganization, and the capacity to adapt
Risk
The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope
with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate variability
and extremes
Risk Area
Geographic areas at risk from coastal hazards according to
differences in the exposure of the landscape
Risk Assessment
Assessing risk to key Community assets based on the three factors
contributing to risk: hazard, exposure, and vulnerability
Risk Assessment Tool
Evaluation of risk based on the formula: Hazard x Exposure x
Vulnerability
Risk Score
The result of the risk assessment tool evaluation
Strategy
A specific way or ways to address the needs and realize opportunities
presented by the Committee
Strategies for Investment and Action
Developing strategies and the projects and actions needed to
implement the strategies; identifying potential costs and benefits of
chosen projects and actions, as well as potential funding sources
Vulnerability
The capacity of an asset to return to service after an event

Page | 178

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
F. END NOTES
Sources

All photographs included in this report were provided by the Consultant Team, except where noted.
1

Governor Cuomo Announces $23 Million in Federal Funds to Strengthen Shoreline Protections at Robert Moses State Park and Traffic Circle,
http://www.governor.ny.gov/press/03072014-shoreline-protections
2
Bridge Replacements – Long Island, http://www.governor.ny.gov/bridge-replacements#longisland
3
Town of Islip Recreation - Atlantique Beach & Marina - Fire Island, http://www.theislips.com/atlantique.php#.Uyjz1MJOWJc
4
Provided by C. Soller, Fire Island National Seashore Superintendent
5
American FactFinder, http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml
6
Fire Island Inlet To Moriches Inlet Fire Island Stabilization Project Hurricane Sandy Limited Reevaluation Report, Appendix A
7
Governor Cuomo Announces Support for $700 Million, Federally Funded Project for Storm Damage Reduction from Fire Island to Montauk Point
http://www.governor.ny.gov/press/06152013cuomo-announces-support-700mil-damage-reduction-fire-island-montauk-point
8
Legislative Gazette - Sandy shows need for protection on Long Island's South Shore, http://www.legislativegazette.com/Articles-Top-Stories-c-2014-03-0387028.113122-Sandy-shows-need-for-protection-on-Long-Islands-South-Shore.html
9
New York State Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) ClimAID Team. (2011). Responding to Climate Change in New York State: The
ClimAID Integrated Assessment for Effective Climate Change Adaptation Final Report. C. Rosenzweig, W. Solecki, A. DeGaetano, M. O’Grady, S. Hassol, P.
Grabhorn, Eds. New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, 17 Columbia Circle, Albany, NY 12203. Retrieved from
http://www.nyserda.ny.gov/climaid
10
Concerned Friends of Fire Island, Inc. dba ReviveFI
11
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers - Fire Island to Montauk Point Reformulation Study,
www.nan.usace.army.mil/Missions/CivilWorks/ProjectsinNewYork/FireIslandtoMontaukPointReformulationStudy.aspx
12
NY Rising Recovery Resources Center, http://www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/resources-0
13
NYS Department of Transportation New York State Highway Bridge Data, https://www.dot.ny.gov/main/bridgedata
14
The hazard score for a 100-year event is 3. (Hazard scores may range from 1 to 5 depending on whether a higher- or lower-magnitude event was chosen for
the baseline risk assessment). The exposure score ranges from 0.5 to 5 depending on whether the asset in question is located in an extreme, high, or
moderate risk area and based on the presence and condition of nearby protective landscape attributes. The vulnerability score ranges from 1 to 5
depending on how well the asset is able to return to service after an event. Multiplied together, the maximum possible risk score is 75.
15
Photo Credit: T. Marquardt, Town of Islip Planning Department
16
FEMA National Disaster Recovery Framework, http://www.fema.gov/national-disaster-recovery-framework
17
Impact of the Atlantic Ocean Beaches to the Economy of Suffolk County, May 13, 2003
18
Fire Island Inlet to Moriches Inlet Fire Island Stabilization Project Draft Environmental Assessment, March 2014
19
Park Statistics, http://www.nps.gov/fiis/parkmgmt/statistics.htm

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 179

Fire Island NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
20

The full time equivalent position is calculated by applying an average of $40,000 per job. The $40,000 salary is based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ May
2012 Metropolitan and Nonmetropolitan Area Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates for Nassau-Suffolk, NY Metropolitan Division for
Construction and Extraction Occupations (http://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes_35004.htm#47-0000).
21
FEMA National Disaster Recovery Framework, http://www.fema.gov/pdf/recoveryframework/local_disaster_recovery_managers.pdf
22
Photo credit: Vern Hendrickson, NYRCR Committee member
23
Fire Island Inlet to Moriches Inlet Fire Island Stabilization Project Draft Environmental Assessment, March 2014
24
Photo Credit: David W. Smith, South Shore Fire & Safety Service Manager
25
The full time equivalent position is calculated by applying an average of $150/hour.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 180

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr

