Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan
March 2014
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Program

NYRCR Freeport Planning Committee
G. Dewey Smalls, Co-Chair
Rob Weltner, Co-Chair
Ken Bellafiore, Committee Member
Rich Cantwell, Committee Member
Paul Eberst, Committee Member
Ed J. Jusino, Committee Member
Ellen Kelly, Committee Member
Cynthia Krieg, Committee Member
Jim Ruocco, Committee Member
Chris Squeri, Committee Member

Municipal Liaisons
Anthony Fiore
Rob Fisenne
Richard Holdener
Joe Madigan

Attributions
This document was developed by the NYRCR Freeport Planning Committee as part of
the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program within the Governor’s Office
of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is supported by NYS Homes and Community
Renewal, NYS Department of State, and NYS Department of Transportation. The document
was prepared by the following consulting firms:
Ove Arup & Partners, P.C.
ASA Analysis & Communications, Inc.
CAS Group LLC
Fine Arts & Sciences, LLC
HealthxDesign LLC
Sasaki Associates, Inc.
Urbanomics Inc.
VJ Associates Inc. of Suffolk

Cover image: The Freeport Nautical Mile (source: www.thenauticalmile.us)

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Foreword
Introduction
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in August 2011, the State of New York experienced three
extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the
lives of New Yorkers and their communities. These tragic disasters signaled that New Yorkers are living in a
new reality defined by rising sea levels and extreme weather events that will occur with increased frequency
and power. They also signaled that we need to rebuild our communities in a way that will mitigate against future
risks and build increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo led the charge to develop an innovative, community-driven planning program on a scale unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program empowers the State’s most impacted communities with the
technical expertise needed to develop thorough and implementable reconstruction plans to build physically,
socially, and economically resilient and sustainable communities.
Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo in April of 2013, is a more than $650 million planning and implementation process established to provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities
severely damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy. Drawing on lessons learned
from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program is a unique combination of bottom-up community participation and State-provided technical expertise. This powerful combination recognizes not only that community
members are best positioned to assess the needs and opportunities of the places where they live and work,
but also that decisions are best made when they are grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by the latest
innovative solutions.
One hundred and two storm-affected localities across the State were originally designated to participate in
the NYRCR Program. The State has allocated each locality between $3 million and $25 million to implement eligible projects identified in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for these projects is provided through the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) program.1
Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising one or more of the 102 localities, were created and led by
a NYRCR Planning Committee composed of local residents, business owners, and civic leaders. Members of
the Planning Committees were identified in consultation with established local leaders, community organizations, and in some cases municipalities. The NYRCR Program sets a new standard for community participation in recovery and resiliency planning, with community members leading the planning process. Across the
State, more than 500 New Yorkers represent their communities by serving on Planning Committees. More
than 400 Planning Committee Meetings have been held, during which Planning Committee members worked
with the State’s NYRCR Program team to develop community reconstruction plans and identify opportunities
to make their communities more resilient. All meetings were open to the public. An additional 125-plus Public
Engagement Events attracted thousands of community members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR
planning process and proposals. The NYRCR Program’s outreach has included communities that are traditionally underrepresented, such as immigrant populations and students. All planning materials are posted
on the NYRCR Program’s website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several ways for community
members and the public to submit feedback on materials in progress.

1. Five of the 102 localities in the program – Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and
Montgomery Counties – are not funding through the CDBG-DR program.

Foreword

i

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were supported by staff from the Governor’s Office of
Storm Recovery (GOSR), planners from New York State (NYS) Department of State (DOS) and NYS Department
of Transportation (DOT), and consultants from world-class planning firms that specialize in engineering, flood
mitigation solutions, green infrastructure, and more.
With the January 2014 announcement of the NYRCR Program’s expansion to include 22 new localities, the
program comprises over 2.7 million New Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent to
14% of the overall State population and 12% of the State’s overall geography.
The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR Plan. Governor Cuomo has allocated over $650 million of
funding to the program for implementing projects identified in the NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Communities are also
eligible for additional funds through the program’s NY Rising to the Top Competition, which evaluates NYRCR
Communities across eight categories, including best use of technology in the planning process, best approach
to resilient economic growth, and best use of green infrastructure to bolster resilience. The winning NYRCR
Community in each category will be allocated an additional $3 million of implementation funding. The NYRCR
Program is also working with both private and public institutions to identify existing funding sources and create
new funding opportunities where none existed before.
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated with State and Federal agencies to help guide the development of feasible projects. The program has leveraged the Regional Economic Development Council’s State
Agency Review Teams (SARTs), comprised of representatives from dozens of State agencies and authorities,
for feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR Communities. The SARTs review projects with an eye toward
regulatory and permitting needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources. The NYRCR
Program is continuing to work with the SARTs to streamline the permitting process and ensure shovels are in
the ground as quickly as possible.

Communities participating in
the NYRCR Program (Note:
map includes those NYRCR
Communities funded through the
CDBG-DR program, including
the NYRCR Communities
announced in January 2014.)

ii

Foreword

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

On the pages that follow, you will see the results of months of thoughtful, diligent work by NYRCR Planning
Committees, passionately committed to realizing brighter, more resilient futures for their communities.
The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more resilient community. Each NYRCR Planning
Committee began the planning process by defining the scope of its planning area, assessing storm damage,
and identifying critical issues. Next, the Planning Committee inventoried critical assets in the community and
assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On the basis of this work, the Planning Committee described recovery
and resiliency needs and identified opportunities. The Planning Committee then developed a series of comprehensive reconstruction and resiliency strategies, and identified projects and implementation actions to help
fulfill those strategies.
The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan are divided into three categories. The order in which
the projects and actions are listed in this NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the NYRCR Community’s
prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding through a
NYRCR Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in depth, but
has not proposed for funding through the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations
are projects and actions that the Planning Committee would like to highlight and that are not categorized as
Proposed Projects or Featured Projects. The Proposed Projects and Featured Projects found in this NYRCR
Plan were voted for inclusion by official voting members of the Planning Committee. Those voting members
with conflicts of interest recused themselves from voting on any affected projects, as required by the NYRCR
Ethics Handbook and Code of Conduct.
NYRCR Freeport is eligible for up to $17.8 million in CDBG-DR implementation funds.
While developing projects for inclusion in this NYRCR Plan, Planning Committees took into account cost
estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical
assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees also considered the potential likelihood that a
project or action would be eligible for CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented with this source of
Federal funding must fall into a Federally-designated eligible activity category, fulfill a national objective (meeting
an urgent need, removing slums and blight, or benefiting low to moderate income individuals), and have a tie
to the natural disaster to which the funding is linked. These are among the factors that the Governor’s Office
of Storm Recovery will consider, in consultation with local municipalities and nonprofit organizations, when
determining which projects and actions are best positioned for implementation.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR Community’s CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review, HUD
eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the projects and actions found in this NYRCR
Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan does not guarantee that a particular
project or action will be eligible for CDBG-DR funding or that it will be implemented. The Governor’s Office of
Storm Recovery will actively seek to match projects with funding sources.
In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions outlined in this NYRCR Plan will become
a reality helping New York not only to rebuild, but also to build back better.

Foreword

iii

Table of Contents
Executive Summary

1

Section I : Community Overview
A. Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan
B. Description of Storm Damage
C. Critical Issues
D. Community Vision
E. Relationship to Regional Plans

15
20
23
30
32
33

Section II : Assessment of Risk and Needs
A. Description of Community Assets and Assessment of Risk
B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities

39
40
58

Section III : Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
A. Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

73
74

Section IV : Implementation – Project Profiles
Proposed: Relocation Feasibility Analysis: Move Freeport Department of Public Works Away From Extreme Risk
Proposed: Freeport Channel Crossing Electrical Improvements
Proposed: Outage Management System
Proposed: Protection for Freeport’s Power Plant II, Phase 1: Study, Design, and Proof of Concept
Proposed: Downtown Microgrid Feasibility Study, Phase 1: Financial and Engineering Feasibility Study
Proposed: Downtown Microgrid Phase 2: Redundant Energy Supply at Power Plant I
Proposed: Backup Power for Sewer Lift Stations
Proposed: Community Assistance Centers
Proposed: Operation SPLASH: Resilience Education Center
Proposed: Nautical Mile Buoyant Architecture
Proposed: Modernize the Freeport Industrial Park Study
Proposed: Business Continuity Program
Proposed: Meadowbrook Corridor Stormwater System Modeling, Analysis and Pilot
Proposed: Lifeline Corridor Study and Pilot Implementation: Merrick Road Corridor
Featured: Green Infrastructure Plan Implementation - Main Street Improvements
Featured: Regional Transit-Oriented Development, Access, and Parking Study
Featured: Downtown Microgrid Phase 3: Redundant Distribution Surrounding Microgrid
Featured: Protection for Freeport Electric’s Power Plant II, Phase 2: Construction
Featured: Convert Home Heating to Natural Gas in Extreme and High Risk Areas
Featured: Regional Stormwater Drainage Cleanout, Survey, and Verification
Featured: Street Tree Maintenance and Guidelines
Featured: Green Infrastructure Plan
Featured: Public Bulkhead Repair
Featured: Key Intersection: Streetlight Retrofit Pilot Project
Featured: Key Intersection Signage
Featured: Public Communication and Education Gap Analysis
Featured: Neighborhood Preservation Guidelines

87
94
97
100
102
105
108
111
113
116
119
121
125
127
131
135
138
141
144
146
148
150
152
154
156
158
159
161

Section V : Additional Materials
165
A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations
166
B. Master Table of Projects
168
C. Public Engagement Process
179
D. Community Asset Inventory
184
E. End Notes
189
F. Glossary191

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Executive Summary
Overview
New York State (NYS) established the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program to provide rebuilding and revitalization assistance to communities severely damaged by Superstorm Sandy,
Hurricane Irene, and Tropical Storm Lee. Through the
creation of a Village of Freeport (Freeport) NY Rising
Community Reconstruction Plan (NYRCR Plan), the
NYRCR Program empowers the community to identify resilient and innovative reconstruction projects
that consider current damage, future threats, and
economic opportunities. Freeport’s residents, business owners, first responders, and workers actively
participated in the preparation of this NYRCR Plan
from September 2013 until the end of March 2014.
The State has allocated up to $17.8 million of U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) funds through its Community Development
Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) to
NYRCR Freeport (Community) for implementation of
these programs and actions.
Freeport is an incorporated village located in the
Town of Hempstead (Town) on the south shore of
Nassau County’s (County) mainland on Long Island,
New York. Its shoreline borders Middle Bay, an
embayment of the South Shore Estuary. The geographic scope of the NYRCR Plan includes the entire
incorporated area of Freeport. Its eastern border is
formed by Meadowbrook State Parkway and the
unincorporated hamlet of Merrick; Babylon Turnpike
and the unincorporated hamlet of Roosevelt are to
the north; Baldwin Bay, the unincorporated hamlets
of Baldwin Harbor and Baldwin, and Milburn Creek
form its western border; Middle Bay is to the south.
Lands beyond the municipal boundary located to the
southeast include private landholdings in the Town
and the County’s Cow Meadow Park and Preserve,
which are addressed in the NYRCR Plan to the extent
that Freeport provides municipal services.
Freeport is an industrious, sea-oriented, and artistic community with Colonial American roots dating
to its settlement as an oystering community in the
1640s. By the late 1800s, it grew into a popular
seaside resort and was incorporated as a village in
1892. Today, Freeport covers approximately fourand-a-half square miles of land and maintains its own
municipal electric and water utilities, police, and fire

departments. Its government is made up of a mayor
and four trustees, with one trustee serving in the
capacity of deputy mayor.
A bedroom community of New York City, Freeport is
home to more than 43,000 people. Freeport includes
an attractive mix of inland and waterfront single-family neighborhoods interspersed with higher density
condominiums, co-ops, apartments, and assisted
living facilities offering residents a variety of housing
options to suit a diverse range of household types
and incomes. Freeport’s canals and tributaries are
lined with recreational boats, marinas, charter and
commercial fishing fleets, restaurants, and maritime
businesses. Its residents enjoy a wealth of amenities,
including waterfront parks, the famous Nautical Mile,
a Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) station, the Freeport
Recreation Center, easy access to the barrier islands
and Jones Beach State Park, and numerous retail
and employment centers.
Storm Impacts
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy brought
significant damage to public infrastructure, homes,
businesses, and the estuary’s environment. Both
storms had different impacts on Freeport in terms of
the type and intensity of damages. In August 2011,
Hurricane Irene brought 13 inches of torrential rain,
a storm surge that exceeded seven feet, and wind
gusts up to 90 miles per hour, which caused flooding
and downed trees that resulted in impassable roads
and power outages. Flooding was primarily concentrated south of Merrick Road, while heavy winds and
power outages affected the entire area.
In October 2012, Superstorm Sandy, an extraordinary large and slow moving storm with wind gusts up
to 80 miles per hour, made landfall on a high astronomical tide that brought with it a storm surge height
of 7.85 feet above the normal astronomical tide
level. Located directly across from Jones Inlet, the
shoreline of the Village of Freeport, and specifically
the Nautical Mile, suffered a direct hit from the surge,
which inundated large swaths of low-lying lands. With
only one inch of rainfall, the majority of the storm’s
damage came from the high winds and the powerful surge, which flooded roads, compromised power
lines, and caused boats and other debris to damage
structures. First responders and residents could not
Executive Summary

1

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

access evacuation routes and local roads. Freeport
Electric contained the breadth and duration of power
outages to three days or less, while surrounding
areas that depended on Long Island Power Authority
(LIPA) suffered outages for up to three weeks. Power
outages also disrupted communication networks,
hampering rescue and recovery efforts.
The Freeport Building Department determined more
than 4,000 of Freeport’s housing units and 130
homes were unsafe for habitation. Some businesses
sustained flooding and storm damage, while others suffered power outages and reduced economic
activity. Fortunately Freeport’s gas stations had
power restored more quickly than those in surrounding communities; but increased demand and limited
production and distribution left many people unable
to obtain gas for their vehicles. Tourist destinations
such as the Nautical Mile and waterfront parks were
badly damaged by floodwaters and electrical fires.
In addition to the storm damages, several vulnerabilities within Freeport were exposed. These issues
directly and indirectly impact homes, businesses,
sanitary sewer service, stormwater drainage systems, energy infrastructure, critical public facilities,
and natural resources. The following were identified
as Critical Issues during the NYRCR planning process, and directly informed the development of the
strategies and projects presented in the NYRCR
Freeport Plan:
• Flooding and drainage;
• Homeownership in higher risk areas;
• Shoreline protection;
• Energy infrastructure;
• Business continuity;
• Information, communication,
and access to resources;
• Regional connections; and
• Resilient planning and design.
While local issues are the focus of the NYRCR Plan,
it is helpful to recognize Freeport’s regional context
and relationship to neighboring communities and
to the region. Communities on Long Island’s south
shore have experienced similar patterns of development, share interconnected infrastructure systems
2

Executive Summary

and road networks, overlapping municipal service
areas, and a common shoreline. These commonalities call for a regional perspective in addressing the
challenges facing Freeport. Collectively, the local
solutions can take into account and leverage regional
considerations for reconstruction, recovery, and
resiliency. Through a compilation and evaluation of
regional plans and studies, meetings with neighboring communities, and sessions with Village, County,
and State officials, regional considerations were
identified and used to expand upon local projects
and develop projects that could potentially be shared
with neighboring communities.
Community-Driven Process
The NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee), which
consists of fourteen dedicated community members
and municipal liaisons, considered the Community’s
goals and aspirations for the future and aligned the
Community goals with the goals of this NYRCR Plan
in order to develop a NYRCR Plan. The NYRCR
Plan seeks to creatively reduce potential stormand climate change-related impacts, and leverage
proposed investments from this NYRCR Plan by
addressing other identified needs and opportunities
in Freeport. Thus, while the NYRCR Plan addresses
risks identified in this document, the same projects, if
thoughtfully conceived, can also address long-standing future needs. The NYRCR Plan moves from asset
identification to risk assessment to presenting strategies and projects that respond to critical issues, and
which contribute to building a more resilient, safer,
and sustainable future for the Community.
The Committee Co-Chairs and Committee Members
met more than six times individually and joined two
meetings with the neighboring NYRCR Communities
of Baldwin/Baldwin Harbor, Bellmore/Merrick,
Seaford/Wantagh, and Massapequas to guide the
development of the NYRCR Plan. The Committee
played an integral role throughout the planning process, providing overall direction and guidance; generating material; reviewing, revising, and responding
to components of the NYRCR Plan; and deliberating
on the initiatives that will bring the greatest recovery
potential and resiliency value to the Community.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

In addition to guidance from the Committee, more
than 125 residents and stakeholders participated
in three Public Engagement Events or shared their
opinions and ideas through online surveys, business surveys, and key informant interviews. The
strategies and projects outlined in the NYRCR Plan
will ultimately impact the quality of life for those who
live, work, visit, and play in the Community. As such,
input from residents, business owners, and community leaders has been an important component of
the planning process. The three Public Engagement
Events provided Community residents the opportunity to participate in the shaping of the NYRCR Plan
Vision Statement and goals, which helped to guide
the planning process; community assets, needs,

NYRCR Freeport Plan Vision Statement
The Village of Freeport draws upon our independence, nautical commerce, and rich cultural past to
create a resilient future with the economic, social,
and recreational outlets that build upon our strong
sense of community. The NYRCR Plan strives to:
• Revitalize the local economy and
create opportunities for growth;
• Connect vulnerable and seasonal economic
drivers with less vulnerable growth locations;
• Leverage and build upon infrastructure
investments to maximize economic
development potential;
• Build on a legacy of self-support, exploring
new ways to deliver public amenities;
• Enhance parks and cultural assets so
they serve multiple purposes, including
recreation, resilience, and refuge;
• Provide a range of housing types for all Freeport
residents that are resilient in design and location;
• Ensure proper health and social services
are accessible to all residents on a daily
basis and in emergency scenarios; and,
• Improve social resilience by establishing
connectivity between communities and services.

opportunities and risks; and the projects put forth by
the Committee to bolster reconstruction and improve
community-wide resilience.

NYRCR Plan Development
Assessment of Risks and Needs
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy exposed certain vulnerabilities related to the Community’s ability
to mitigate for and respond to major storm events,
climate change, and sea level rise. As part of developing the NYRCR Plan, an inventory of community
assets was compiled and evaluated to determine
each asset’s potential of being damaged or destroyed
by a future storm surge or flooding event. By analyzing potential hazards, as well as levels of exposure
and vulnerability to possible storm impacts, a measure of risk was calculated for each asset. In addition, the community asset locations were combined
with NYS Department of State (DOS) hazard maps
that illustrate a range of risks and consider both the
frequency and impact of flooding. These quantitative
and spatial analyses, in addition to local knowledge
gathered from stakeholders throughout the process,
helped to highlight assets and geographic areas
requiring attention and served as a basis for the generation of project ideas.
In Freeport, thousands of community assets are
located in NYS DOS-identified high and extreme
risk zones. Specific assets of concern to Committee
Members and members of the Community include
the Nautical Mile; Sea Breeze Park; the Department
of Public Works (DPW) central garage, communication center, and fuel stations; Freeport Electric’s
Power Plant II; one school; three sanitary sewer lift
stations; many marinas; the Industrial Park, and sections of the Merrick Road; Sunrise Highway; South
Main Street; and Atlantic Avenue commercial corridors, including the section of Merrick Road adjacent
to the Meadowbrook Parkway, a key County evacuation route. In addition to these individual assets, more
than 3,600 homes are located in high and extreme
risk areas. Detailed information on these analyses
can be found in Section II of the NYRCR Plan.

Executive Summary 3

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The risk assessment was paired with an exploration of reconstruction and resiliency-related needs
and opportunities, many of which were identified by
Committee Members and the public at Committee
Meetings and Public Engagement Events. Risks,
needs, and opportunities were organized into six
categories that relate to various aspects of life in
the Community: community planning and capacity
building, economic development, health and social
services, housing, infrastructure, and natural and
cultural resources. The Community identified the following key needs and opportunities:
• Improved communication, education and
access to resources in the Community;
• Modernized workforce training and business
centers for new and growing industries;
• Diversified housing choices for
existing and future residents;
• Expanded community education and awareness
programming centered around coastal
living, climate change, and sea level rise;

• Establish programs and policies for
resilient planning and design;
• Improve transportation access and connectivity;
• Plan for business continuity and growth; and
• Improve stormwater management
and drainage systems.
Proposed and Featured Projects
The projects that resulted from this extensive planning
process support the Reconstruction and Resilience
Strategies as well as the vision and goals for the
Community. The projects included in the NYRCR
Plan are organized into three categories:
• Proposed Projects are discrete projects that
are affordable within the Community’s allocation of Community Development Block Grant
Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) assistance.

• Increased energy safety, resilience,
sustainability, and independence, building on
Freeport Electric’s strong foundation; and,

• Featured Projects are innovative projects
where an initial study or discrete first phase of
the project is proposed for CDBG-DR funding
or other funding resources. Featured projects
may also include regulatory reforms and other
programs that do not involve capital expenditure.

• Expanded and improved parks, preserves,
and green spaces that aid or enhance storm
protection and stormwater management,
foster a sense of place and community,
and improve recreational opportunities.

• Additional Resiliency Recommendations are
resiliency projects and actions the Committee
would like to highlight and are not categorized as
Proposed or Featured Projects.

Strategies for Reconstruction and Resilience
Strategies included here are designed to support
the goals of the NYRCR Program – reconstruction
and resiliency. Reconstruction focuses on restoring, repairing, or replacing what was damaged or
destroyed by Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane
Irene. Resiliency is about strengthening the ability
Freeport to rebound quickly when confronted with
similar challenges in the future.
Reconstruction and Resilience Strategies for the
Community are listed below and are described in
detail in Section III of the NYRCR Plan:
• Invest in resilience enhancements
for critical assets;

4

Executive Summary

Table 01 on the following page lists Proposed and
Featured Projects for NYRCR Freeport. The projects have not been ranked or prioritized. Detailed
descriptions of each project can be found in Section
IV of the NYRCR Plan and Additional Resiliency
Recommendations can be found in Section V.

Figure ES-01: Geographic Scope
IN ST
N MA

B

AB

YL

O

N

TP

K

N AVE
W SEAMA

ND

E

E
AV

A

GR

E HWY

Freeport LIRR

D
ICK R

GUY

MERR

SUNRIS

MILL RD

S MAIN ST

E AVE

BROOKSID

T
BEDELL S

LOMBARDO AVE

SMITH ST

IC AVE

T
ATLAN

N
S OCEA
AVE

IEW

YV
S BA
AVE

AVE

E
ON AV

HUDS

CLEFT

WOOD

0

Legend

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Water

Long Island Rail Road

Main Roads

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Rail Station

Local Roads

Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

This page intentionally left blank

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 01: Proposed and featured projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Regional

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Relocation Feasibility
Analysis: Move
Freeport Department
of Public Works Away
from Extreme Risk

Study opportunities to relocate DPW out
of the SFHA while minimizing impact on
existing neighborhoods - provide concept
design for recommended solution and
possible site acquisition.

Proposed

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Freeport Electrical
Cable Channel
Crossing
Improvements

The project would extend the buried
portion of the cables beyond the boat
yard to protect the lines from freed boats
and debris during storm surges.

Proposed

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Outage Management
System

The system upgrade creates a webbased reporting and response system
for outages or issues with essential
services (power, water mains, gas). It
would link directly to existing systems and
enables asset protection before an event,
incident mitigation during an event, and
faster incident management and service
restoration after an event.

Proposed

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Protection for
Freeport’s Power Plant
II: Phase I: Study,
Design, and Proof of
Concept

This project would seek to study
protection options, design flood
protection, and identify further funding
from NYS and US grant programs to
implement and construct the design. A
proof of concept would be constructed
along the most vulnerable portion of the
site.

Proposed

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Downtown Microgrid
Phase I: Financial and
Engineering Feasibility
Study

This project seeks to identify funding and
financing methods for the development
of the microgrid - including State
and Federal grant programs, capital
budgeting, and contributions from
benefitting private entities. In addition,
it will explore preliminary engineering
feasibility concepts for the development
of the microgrid, examine costs and
identify necessary construction.

Proposed

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Downtown Microgrid
Phase 2: Redundant
Energy Supply at
Power Plant I

This project would purchase a dual-fuel
(diesel/natural gas) generator with blackstart capability and replace an outdated
diesel generator at Freeport Power Plant
I.

Proposed

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Backup Power for
Sewer Lift Stations

This project seeks to install permanent
backup natural gas generators at each
of the Village of Freeport’s three sewer lift
stations located in a SFHA.

Proposed

N

Executive Summary 7

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 01 (cont’d) : Proposed and featured projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Regional

Improve Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Community Assistance
Centers

Community Assistance Centers are
places for residents to gather information
about emergency preparedness under
normal conditions. After a storm, these
centers would become a place to gather,
collect and distribute resources, charge
cell phones, access the internet/TV, and
seek comfort. This project would install
backup power generation, dynamic
electronic notification and alert signage,
and additional charging and wifi capacity
at each center. In addition, a Local
Disaster Recovery Manager would be
hired for two years.

Proposed

N

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning and
Design

Operation SPLASH:
Resilience Education
Center

This project seeks to fortify and protect
Operation SPLASH with innovative flood
protection design and infrastructure
(two passive self-closing flood barriers,
sewage backflow preventers, and
personnel door barriers).
In addition, partnerships with Nassau
County higher education institutions will
be sought to raise awareness of climate
related risks on the South Shore and
promote environmental stewardship.
Finally, surveillance cameras will be
installed at high points along the coast
and the video feeds will be displayed
at Operation SPLASH as a scientific
monitoring, community awareness, and
educational tool.

Proposed

N

Plan for Business
Continuity and Growth

Nautical Mile Buoyant
Architecture

This project will design and construct a
buoyant building along the Nautical Mile
to demonstrate the ability to economically
and resiliently maintain a coastal
economy.
In addition to improving resilience of
coastal structures, this allows buildings
and neighborhoods to maintain their
character, retain access for elderly and
disabled populations, prepare for sea
level rise, and in some cases reduce the
cost of construction to comply with new
building elevation requirements.

Proposed

N

8

Executive Summary

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 01 (cont’d) : Proposed and featured projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Regional

Plan for Business
Continuity and Growth

Modernize the
Industrial Park Study

This project seeks to outline
implementation steps for the formation of
a local nonprofit development authority
that is committed to transforming
the Industrial Park into a modern,
environmentally conscious, and resilient
business center.
The study will also propose design
guidelines for safe, affordable, and
environmentally conscious light industrial
and commercial development. Short-term
and long-term goals, strategies, actions,
and design concepts will be developed.

Proposed

N

Plan for Business
Continuity and Growth

Business Continuity
Program

This program would help small
businesses create their own business
continuity plans, and provide a custom
roadmap for businesses to continue
operations under adverse conditions. This
includes planning assistance and access
to alternate spaces and facilities and
grant assistance.

Proposed

Y

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Meadowbrook Corridor
Stormwater System
Modeling, Analysis,
and Pilot

This project would include the
reconstruction of five stormwater outfalls
currently entering Freeport Creek and
reconnecting the Creek with the natural
floodplain.
A floating wetland pilot and drainage
study would also be conducted for East
Meadow Pond to improve water quality
and reduce future flooding.
A daylighting study for Freeport Creek
would examine the potential benefits
of uncovering the current underground
portion of the Creek.

Proposed

Y

Improve Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Lifeline Corridor
Study and Pilot
Implementation:
Merrick Road Corridor

Merrick Road is an important lifeline for
many people, businesses and institutions.
Due to the importance of the road, it is
proposed that a study and subsequent
pilot projects to improve its post-storm
functionality take place. Based on the
findings and results, the Lifeline Project
could then be applied to additional streets
that are critical at the neighborhood and
community level.
The study will identify best practices and
develop design guidelines for resilient
streetscapes and implement a pilot
project.

Proposed

Y

Executive Summary 9

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 01 (cont’d) : Proposed and featured projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Regional

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Downtown Microgrid
Phase 3: Redundant
Distribution
Surrounding Microgrid

Phase 3 of the Downtown Microgrid
project involves the installation of four
new underground circuits on the streets
that border of the microgrid. These
circuits increase redundancy and replace
outdated circuits, while increasing
capacity.

Featured

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Protection for Freeport
Electric’s Power Plant II
Phase 2: Construction

This project would seek to construct
the recommended design of protection
options from Phase 1 of the Protection for
Freeport Electric’s Power Plant II project.
Further funding from NYS and US grant
programs for construction is required.

Featured

N

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning and
Design

Convert Home Heating
to Natural Gas in
Extreme and High Risk
Areas

This project will develop policy
recommendations and an incentive
program to convert home heating oil
to natural gas in extreme and high risk
areas.
Temporary regulations to require proper
anchoring of tanks in risk areas will be
developed and incorporated.
A deadline for all structures in extreme,
high and moderate risk areas to convert
to natural gas and/or other heat/hot water
supply will be established.

Featured

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Regional Stormwater
Drainage Cleanout,
Survey, and Verification

This project seeks to clean out all storm
drains in the Freeport area. While they are
being accessed, it is recommended that
a comprehensive survey is conducted
to document and verify all missing
stormwater infrastructure from the local
data inventory.
The data collected will feed into the
hydraulic and hydrologic model to analyze
the current drainage system and identify
critical drainage projects. This will include
the implementation of green infrastructure
projects and will quantify the benefits of
green infrastructure solutions.

Featured

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Street Tree
Maintenance and
Guidelines

This project seeks to recommend
policy changes to identify roads for
tree trimming, maintenance and/or
replacement with more resilient trees.

Featured

N

10

Executive Summary

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 01 (cont’d) : Proposed and featured projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Regional

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Green Infrastructure
Plan

This Plan seeks to identify green
infrastructure opportunities based
on feasibility, level of impact, funding
and street reconstruction schedules.
Opportunities to manage stormwater on
public and private properties will also be
identified and recommended.

Featured

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Green Infrastructure
Plan Implementation:
Main Street
Improvements

This project builds on the existing
"Building a Better Freeport" plan, which
recommends street improvement
projects along North Main Street. This
project would operate in tandem with
the proposed improvements, ensuring
that any pedestrian improvements
incorporate bioswales or open channel
infiltration areas to the extent possible.
It also recommends reconstruction of
areas along South Main Street that have
been improved recently but missed
opportunities to incorporate green
infrastructure.

Featured

N

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning and
Design

Public Bulkhead Repair

Publicly-owned bulkheads will be
replaced at an appropriate height and
with modern materials that are more
resilient to erosion and wind.
The reconstruction of the bulkheads will
provide coastal protection in public areas,
helping to maintain Freeport’s open space
and recreational areas. In addition, the
bulkheads can reduce flooding impacts
on local streets, helping to maintain
access during and after flood events.

Featured

N

Improve Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Key Intersection
Streetlight Retrofit Pilot
Project

This project seeks to provide solar
powered lighting with backup power
leading to key intersections, to ensure
these roads always stay lit in the event of
a power outage and residents can follow
these lit streets toward safer areas and
critical resources. In addition to providing
solar power and backup energy for street
lights, traffic signals at each of these
intersections will also be provided.

Featured

N

Executive Summary

11

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 01 (cont’d) : Proposed and featured projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Regional

Improve Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Key Intersection
Signage

This project provides wayfinding and
destination signage to guide people
toward critical assets, assistance centers
and information after storms and during
power outages. This will enhance route
clarity and orient residents toward
streets that should be used after future
emergencies.

Featured

N

Improve Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Public Communication
and Education Gap
Analysis

This project would begin with a gap
analysis to determine additional
emergency community needs in the
region. Findings would guide the creation
of a central website with a communitydriven communication component,
and eventually include education and
outreach activities.

Featured

Y

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning and
Design

Regional Transit
Oriented Development,
Access and Parking
Study

This study will identify opportunities to
combine parking areas and develop
structured parking facilities in key areas,
and provide recommendations on their
best use based on community need.
Guidelines for the design of resilient,
sustainable and aesthetically pleasing
parking structures will be identified.
This study will also develop a concept for
local public transportation that connects
Freeport’s key business, retail and
recreational areas.

Featured

N

Establish Programs
and Policies for
Resilient Planning and
Design

Neighborhood
Preservation Guidelines

This project seeks to undertake
a planning study and make
recommendations to revise Freeport
zoning, planning, and building code
regulations for resilient design.
The study will work with Freeport
planning and building agencies to ensure
that needs specific to the Community’s
rebuilding efforts are not omitted or
overlooked.

Featured

N

12

Executive Summary

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

This page intentionally left blank

Executive Summary

13

Section I : Community Overview
The NYRCR Community Village of Freeport (Freeport) is the second highest populated village in New York State and one of the most diverse communities in Nassau County. It is located along the south shore of Nassau
County on Long Island and occupies 4.6 square miles. The Village has a
directly elected mayor and a Board of Trustees. As an incorporated village,
Freeport has its own municipal electric and water utilities, police force, emergency management team, and fire department. The Village prides itself on
its self-sufficiency, quality of life, and long history of sea-oriented activities.
In 1659, a Hempstead cow keeper by the name of Edward Raynor started
bringing cows to the shoreline’s spacious meadows, and thus the Village
of Freeport was born. Over the course of the next three centuries, Freeport
transformed from a farming community into a fishing village. The relationship
to the Hempstead Bays and the Atlantic Ocean for commercial, recreational,
or aesthetic reasons always figured prominently in the identity of Freeport,
including the daily lives of its residents and the character of its businesses.
The South Shore Estuary Reserve Council recognized Freeport as a major
maritime center for its maritime heritage and community character uniquely
associated with the Estuary.
As early as the 1640s the settlement served as an osystering community,
before becoming an incorporated village in 1892. Acknowledging its relationship to the sea, residents of the settlement voted to name it ‘Freeport’ in
1853.2 The maritime heritage of Freeport continues to distinguish the Village;
to this day Freeport has one of the largest networks of marinas in the State
of New York and enjoys a vibrant waterfront as diverse as the people who
live there, including commercial fishing, recreational boating, environmental education and outreach organizations, and numerous parks and open
spaces.

Facing image: Hurricane Harry’s – a business on Freeport’s popular Nautical Mile (source: Joe Mabel)

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Serving as home to the Long Island Good Hearted
Thespian Society (LIGHTS) and recognized as a
popular artists colony as far back as the early 1900s,
Freeport draws on a rich cultural heritage. It was a
popular amusement park destination in the 1920s
and hosted stock car racing from the 1930s to
the 1980s at the 10,000-seat Freeport Municipal
Stadium. These cultural institutions have created a
legacy of waterfront commercial and retail development that lives on to this day and which will be discussed throughout the following sections of the NY
Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Freeport
Plan. The residents remain committed to the history
and legacy of the Village and the Freeport Historical
Museum tells the story of Freeport’s past, bringing to
life how Freeport’s unique heritage shapes the present and future life of the Village.
Freeport is an employment center with a variety of
small and mid-sized businesses, including one of
the south shore’s largest concentrations of marinerelated commercial businesses. Retail, restaurant, and commercial uses are present along the
Woodcleft Canal (regionally known as the Nautical
Mile), Merrick Road, Atlantic Avenue, and North and
South Main Streets. The Industrial Park is one of few
remaining concentrated industrial development areas
along the south shore of Long Island. Many areas
within Freeport, however, were already struggling
before the Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy
and the Village and its residents are now even more
committed in working towards a brighter future. The
areas of Downtown Freeport, North Main Street, the
Nautical Mile, and the Industrial Park are working to
rebound from the aftermath of the storm events, but
many storefronts and buildings sit underutilized. As a
result, many NYRCR Freeport Committee Members
have emphasized the need to support local businesses and merchants.3
With 9,378 people per square mile, more than double
the average density of Nassau County, Freeport has
one of the highest residential population densities on
Long Island. In 2012, the population of Freeport was
estimated at 43,138, making it the second largest village by population in New York State.4 Freeport’s high
population and high density add a layer of complexity to disaster planning, management, and response.

16

Community Overview

Downtown Freeport (source: Arup)

The complexity arises from two major aspects: the
sheer number of people living in risk areas and the
existence of a demographically diverse community.
According to the United States Census Bureau’s
2012 American Community Survey estimates, 43%
of the population identify themselves as “Hispanic or
Latino,” 31% as “Black or African American,” 21%
as “White,” less than 1% as “American Indian and
Alaska Native,” and nearly 3% as “Asian,”, while no
Freeport residents identify themselves as “Native
Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander.” Two percent of
residents identify with two or more races.5
The median age in Freeport is 38.5 years. Freeport’s
population is younger than the adjacent NYRCR
Communities but, like most of Long Island, a growing
proportion of the Freeport population is over age 65.6
The diversity of housing choices in Freeport allows
many different types of households and demographic
groups to settle in the Village. Apartments and multifamily buildings offer housing opportunity for younger
households, low-income households, or seniors who
wish to downsize to a smaller dwelling. Single-family
opportunities are available for those who wish to
have larger homes or yards, while those who prize a
waterfront lifestyle can live in homes along the water.
The mixture of housing typologies offers a variety of
options to meet residents’ needs at all stages of life,
including single living, family development, and aging
in Freeport.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The Community is served by the LIRR’s Babylon
Branch, which runs from Penn Station in Manhattan
to the Village of Babylon in Suffolk County. It is a
45-minute express train ride to Penn Station from
Freeport. Freeport Station averages 5,365 passenger
trips daily and nearly 30% of the Village’s residents
live within a half-mile of the station.9 Eight Nassau
Inter-County Express (NICE) bus routes also serve
the Community, with the N40 and N41 lines providing
important north-south transit access for residents.

Freeport’s Milburn Lake Park (source: Arup)

The building stock and ownership patterns in Freeport
diverge significantly from adjacent areas in Baldwin,
Baldwin Harbor, and Merrick. Single-family homes
represent just 62% of Freeport’s housing stock,
lower than the 77% county average.7 Freeport also
offers publicly subsidized housing options for those
residents who need housing support. The downtown
area is characterized by commercial corridors with
varying quality of retail stores, limited restaurants,
stores, empty lots, and some multi-family and rental
housing; the area is predominantly low-income with
more than 10% of households below the poverty
line.8
A part of the greater New York City metropolitan
area, Freeport is approximately 22 miles east of
Midtown Manhattan, and 7 miles east of the Nassau
and Queens border. Sunrise Highway (New York
State Route 27) and Merrick Road (Nassau County
Route 27A) are the two major east-west thoroughfares serving the Freeport area. The NYRCR
Freeport Community (Community) is bordered by
the Meadowbrook State Parkway to the east, which
intersects Merrick Road and Sunrise Highway and
provides access to northern Nassau County, and to
the south by the Long Beach and Jones Beach barrier islands. The Milburn Creek corridor creates the
boundary between NYRCR Freeport and NYRCR
Baldwin to the west. The municipality of Roosevelt
borders Freeport to the north. North Main Street is
the major north-south route through the Village, providing access to the Sunrise Highway and Freeport’s
Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) station.

Freeport’s canals and waterfront grid were developed
in the late 1800s and early 1900s by the developer
John J. Randall. His most notable achievement was
the Woodcleft Canal, now adjacent to the Nautical
Mile.10 Waterfront development has been a mixed
blessing for Freeport, attracting significant population and economic growth in 1900s when marshlands, which include wetlands (these terms are used
interchangeably in this NYRCR Freeport Plan), were
dredged and filled for development. People came to
live on or near the water and Freeport benefitted from
this growth and development. These marshlands and
tidal wetlands, however, provided important ecological services and coastal protection and were naturally
subject to periodic inundation.That natural protection
was lost with the wetlands and now that development sits in these areas there is no natural defense
against inundation. Consequently, the development
that replaced these marshlands is now subject to
repeated flooding during storm events and normal
tidal cycles. As the effects of increasing sea level rise
continue, greater portions of Freeport’s developed
areas are vulnerable to coastal inundation.
Freeport’s southern edge is penetrated by a number of canals, which provide access through Middle
Bay’s marshlands and the Jones and East Rockaway
inlets to the Atlantic Ocean. The Nautical Mile, a
commercial and recreational waterfront strip west
of Woodcleft Canal, is a popular regional summer
destination for boating, dining, and nightlife. It features a variety of restaurants and bars, retail stores,
boat sales and services, charter boats, and seafood
markets. Many, if not all, of these stores and restaurants depend on their waterfront location for success, particularly places like the Fiore Brothers Fish
Market, which burned down in the immediate aftermath of Superstorm Sandy, and the former Schooner

Community Overview 17

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Restaurant, which closed after repeated damages
sustained during Hurricane Irene and Superstorm
Sandy. The Village’s four-acre Sea Breeze Waterfront
Park, located at the foot of the Nautical Mile, includes
a transient boat dock, rental boat slips, and a public
building with rest facilities.
Recent community revitalization efforts have acknowledged the increasing impact of coastal flooding.
The Nautical Mile, which was redeveloped in the
late 1990s, incorporated road and private property
raising, undergrounding of power lines, contruction
of a new drainage system to minimize upstream
impacts, and the installation of tide valves to prevent
tide waters from entering the drainage system.11 12
However, recent storms, such as Superstorm Sandy
and Hurricane Irene, have had significant impact in
coastal areas despite the strengthening of defenses
that was incorporated into the redevelopment plans
from the 1990s. Specific impacts of these storms are
discussed in Section I.B.
This Community Overview section of the NYRCR
Freeport Plan (NYRCR Plan) includes the following
sub-sections:
• Geographic Scope of the NYRCR Plan
defines the “planning boundary” of the study
area, as defined by the NYRCR Freeport Planning
Committee (Committee);
• Description of Storm Damage summarizes
the impacts of Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane
Irene on residents, homes, businesses, services,
and public and government facilities;
• Critical Issues briefly describes the key concerns facing the community as it relates to major
storm events. These issues are further detailed in
Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs;
• Community Vision includes the Committee’s
aspirations for a more resilient future; and,
• Relationship to Regional plans describes the
regional perspectives considered in the preparation of this plan to address shared challenges
and issues.

18

Community Overview

Material presented in this NYRCR Freeport Plan was
developed collaboratively among residents of the
Community, a range of state and local agencies, and
the Consultant Team of Ove Arup and Partners, P.C.,
Sasaki Associates, Urbanomics, HealthxDesign, and
CAS Group (the Consultant Team). Fourteen community representatives dedicated their time, passion, and
expertise as the Co-Chairs and Committee Members
of the NYRCR Freeport Planning Committee to guide
the development of the NYRCR Freeport Plan from
its inception. Residents and businesspeople participated in three Public Engagement Events and shared
their opinions and ideas through online platforms and
business surveys. The Consultant Team provided
technical expertise and supported the evolution
of the NYRCR Plan content, at the direction of the
Committee, to reflect best practice, local conditions,
and Community input in development of the projects
discussed in Section IV.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

This page intentionally left blank

Community Overview 19

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

A. Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan
The Village of Freeport has a strong community
identity; while the population of the Community is
very diverse, it is also inclusive and welcoming. The
Committee and public discussed limiting the scope
of the project to the areas that are most vulnerable to
future storms and coastal flooding, however, it was
ultimately decided that the entire Village should be
considered as the Community chose to embrace the
“we are all in this together” attitude.
As shown in Figure 01, the geographic scope of
the Community area extends north from the Middle
Bay to Babylon Turnpike and the southern border
of Roosevelt. The geographic scope of the NYRCR
Freeport Plan follows the existing Village boundaries except where, for planning purposes, it extends
into a small, unincorporated area in the Town of
Hempstead. This additional area includes several
private landholdings and Nassau County’s Cow
Meadow Park and Preserve, which receive electric,
water, and some emergency services from the Village
of Freeport.

shares borders with the unincorporated areas
of Baldwin to the west, Merrick to the east, and
Roosevelt to the north.
Only 25% of the Community’s land area is located
outside of a risk zone and nearly 34% of the
Community is located in an ‘extreme’ or ‘high’ risk
zone (risk zones are defined in Section II.A). As noted
in subsequent sections, opportunities exist in the
central and northern portions of the Community to
potentially relocate or accommodate new critical
infrastructure, commercial businesses, and residential properties farther removed from the low-lying
areas that are prone to coastal inundation.

The Community is generally bounded on the east
by the Meadowbrook State Parkway and the Cow
Meadow Park and Preserve. The western boundary
begins from the south at Baldwin Bay and extends
north along Milburn Creek, intersecting the Sunrise
Highway and the LIRR Babylon Branch. The Village

Freeport’s downtown area (source: Arup)

20

Community Overview

Homes along the Community’s southern
canals (source: Urbanomics)

Figure 01: Geographic Scope
IN ST
N MA

B

AB

YL

O

N

TP

K

N AVE
W SEAMA

ND

E

E
AV

A

GR

E HWY

Freeport LIRR

D
ICK R

GUY

MERR

SUNRIS

MILL RD

S MAIN ST

E AVE

BROOKSID

T
BEDELL S

LOMBARDO AVE

SMITH ST

IC AVE

T
ATLAN

N
S OCEA
AVE

IEW

YV
S BA
AVE

AVE

E
ON AV

HUDS

CLEFT

WOOD

0

Legend

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Water

Long Island Rail Road

Main Roads

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Rail Station

Local Roads

Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

Figure 02: Extent of Flooding
IN ST
N MA

B

AB

YL
O

N

N AVE
W SEAMA

ND

TP

K

E

E
AV

A

GR

Freeport LIRR

E HWY

SUNRIS

GUY

BROOKSID
E AVE

D
ICK R

MERR

MILL RD

T
SMITH S

S MAIN ST

AVE

T
BEDELL S

VIEW
S BAY
IC AVE

T
ATLAN

MBA
GUY LO
E
RDO AV

N AVE
S OCEA

CLEFT
AVE

E
ON AV
HUDS

WOOD

0

Legend

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Water

Long Island Rail Road

Superstorm Sandy extent of storm surge

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

Hurricane Irene extent of storm surge

Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

B. Description of Storm Damage
Both Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene had
significant impacts on the Community. The following
sections describe why, how, and when the storms
happened, followed by the specific damages sustained by the Community.

Hurricane Irene
Hurricane Irene made landfall in New York on August
28, 2011 as a Category 1 Hurricane and was immediately downgraded to a Tropical Storm upon arrival.
The storm brought heavy rainfall to NYRCR Freeport
and a storm surge of more than seven feet.13 Flooding
of this extent equates to a one-in-one hundred year
event; or a 1% chance of occurrence in any given
year.14
Hurricane Irene caused significant damage to homes,
businesses, infrastructure, and natural systems.
Superstorm Sandy was a unique occurrence and a
stronger storm than Hurricane Irene; this is reflected
in the extent of damages and impacts described
below.

Superstorm Sandy
On the night of October 29, 2012, Superstorm Sandy,
the most destructive storm of the 2012 Atlantic
Ocean hurricane season, devastated New York and
the tri-state region, which includes New Jersey and
Connecticut as well. At the time of landfall, the storm
was classified as post-tropical.15 However, several
characteristics led to the especially high level and
breadth of flooding, including:
• Daily high tide cycle;
• The gravitational pull of a full moon
which increases sea surface elevation,
exacerbating the regular high tide;
• Strong winds related to Superstorm
Sandy, which pushed greater quantities of
water onshore during the surge; and,
• Precipitation received in the upper watershed
areas, which then drained through Freeport and
converged with the incoming storm surge.16
In addition to the unusual characteristics of
Superstorm Sandy, long-term sea level rise has added
roughly one foot to local water levels since 1900.17

What causes coastal flooding?
Coastal flooding, or coastal inundation, is the
flooding of normally dry, low-lying coastal land,
primarily caused by severe weather events along
the coast, estuaries, and adjoining rivers. In
coastal communities like Seaford and Wantagh,
several factors can contribute to coastal flooding.
Storm Surge: Storm surge is an abnormal rise
in water level, over and above the regular astronomical tide, caused by forces generated from a
severe storm’s wind, waves, and low atmospheric
pressure.
Tidal Flooding: High tide levels are caused by
normal variations in the astronomical tide cycle
and occur twice a day in Seaford and Wantagh.
Approximately twice a month these daily high
tides are at their highest and have been known to
cause flooding in low lying areas in Seaford and
Wantagh.
Inundation Flooding: Intense periods of rainfall over inland areas may overflow into creeks
and combine with storm surge and high tides
to increase the flood severity along the coast.
Intense periods of rainfall can also cause flooding in inland areas where there is not sufficient
capacity for the water to infiltrate into the ground
or sufficient capacity for the water to be taken
away with drainage infrastructure.
Sea Level Rise: Global sea level has been rising since the end of the last ice age. This gradual
and permanent change in sea level increases the
odds of damaging floods from storm surges.

The south shore of Long Island, which includes the
Village of Freeport, suffered massive storm damage,
power outages, sewer line and stormwater drainage system overflows, and utility and transportation
disruptions during the storm event. Few were prepared for the extent of Superstorm Sandy’s impacts.
Directly or indirectly, the lives and well being of virtually everyone in the region were, and continue to
be, affected by the storm’s aftermath. It is important
to note that while the full moon enhanced the daily
high tide, had the Superstorm Sandy reached local
shored the following morning during high tide, the
storm surge could have been seven inches higher.

Community Overview 23

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Freeport’s Ongoing Recovery
Recovery and reconstruction in Freeport started in
the immediate aftermath of Superstorm Sandy and
is an ongoing process at both the individual level
and community-wide. With the introduction of the
NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Program, the Village of Freeport and the NYRCR
Freeport Planning Committee (Committee) have
been actively identifying issues and developing
strategies to enhance the long term resiliency of the
Village against future disasters. In addition to the
Committee members, more than 100 residents and
stakeholders from the community actively participated in the NYRCR Planning Process to address
storm-related impacts that affect their community
as a whole. The result of their efforts is the NYRCR
Freeport Plan, which presents a series of strategies and projects that respond to critical issues and
Community aspirations that will contribute to building a more resilient, safer, and sustainable future for
Freeport.

northern boundary for most of the severe damage.
Committee Members and Village employees reported
widespread flood damage in areas where flooding events are less common. The northern extent
of flooding in eastern Freeport impacted Sunrise
Highway and roads like Merrick Road, Mill Road,
Buffalo Avenue, and South Main Street. In central
Freeport, the northern extent of flooding fluctuated
significantly, but the northernmost point affected by
floodwaters was just south of Merrick Road on Guy
Lombardo Avenue. All roads south of and including
Atlantic Avenue flooded, including all of Freeport’s
finger canals, marinas, and the Nautical Mile. In
western Freeport, floodwaters followed the Milburn
Creek corridor (the border between Freeport and
Baldwin) north to Milburn Pond. The northern extent
reached just south of Freeport High School. Notable
roads that flooded in the east include Merrick Road,
Atlantic Avenue, South Bayview Avenue, and South
Brookside Avenue.
Community Response

Had the gravitational impacts on high tides resulting from a new moon experienced two weeks earlier
been a factor, the storm surge could have been an
even more devastating or 17 inches higher.18
The Village of Freeport, situated directly across from
the Jones Inlet, suffered a direct hit as Superstorm
Sandy came ashore, experiencing a storm surge
combined with high tide that was in excess of 10
feet. In parts of Freeport the Federal Emergency
Management Agency flood zone was exceeded by
250 horizontal feet.19 Flooding at this level of severity
equates to a one-in-five hundred year event – or a
0.2% chance of occurrence in any given year.20
As Superstorm Sandy moved across Freeport, a rush
of water entered its waterways, including Hudson
Bay, Woodcleft Bay, Woodcleft Basin, Randall Bay,
Baldwin Bay, Grover’s Canal, Albert Canal, Freeport
Creek, and Milburn Creek. The storm surge and
resultant damage decimated the historic Nautical
Mile and other marine commercial areas, as well as
the Industrial Park, homes, businesses, and public infrastructure, with Atlantic Avenue marking the

24

Community Overview

A close-knit community, NYRCR Freeport responded
quickly and vigorously to Superstorm Sandy and
Hurricane Irene. Institutional, civic, and Community
leaders came together to help each other recover
and rebuild from the storms. Freeport’s response to
Superstorm Sandy’s approach began on October
25, 2012, three days before the storm made landfall
on Long Island. The then-Mayor of Freeport, Andrew
Hardwick, and the Director of Freeport’s Office of
Emergency Management (OEM), Richard Holdener,
met daily and provided briefings to all other Village
departments. Mayor Hardwick ordered a mandatory
evacuation of all Freeport residents south of Merrick
Road (approximately 7,000 homes) on October 28
at 1:00pm, seven hours before Superstorm Sandy
started impacting Long Island and several hours
before other Nassau County Communities were
ordered to evacuate by the Nassau County Executive
Order.21 Only one-third of residents ordered to evacuate actually left their homes.
Between October 28 and November 6, Freeport
OEM answered 2,500 calls for help with downed
trees and wires, 5,000 requests for information and
500 calls for Fire Emergency Responses. In addition,
34 bilingual Code Red (an emergency alert company

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

hired by Freeport OEM four years ago) phone messages were sent to residents after Superstorm Sandy
to provide updates. The Emergency Operations
Center at 76 Church Street was activated and staffed
around the clock for 12 days, from October 27 to
November 8, 2012.
Five days after Superstorm Sandy, Freeport Electric
had restored power to 98% of the Village, which was
several days before the Long Island Power Authority
(LIPA) had restored power to other storm damaged
areas beyond the Village. Community Members
reported being impressed with both the preparation
of Freeport OEM and with the quick and efficient
response of Freeport Electric.
The Leo F. Giblyn Elementary School, located along
South Ocean Avenue in a Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA)-designated Special
Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), suffered significant storm
surge damage and 564 students were temporarily
relocate to neighboring schools in the district. The
students were displaced for six weeks as repairs were
made, returning to Giblyn Elementary on December
10, 2012.
The Village’s Recreational Center served as a temporary location for displaced Freeport Department
of Public Works workers and Village vehicles prior
to inundation. The Center suffered damage during
the storm, but repairs were made quickly and following the retreat of floodwaters, it became a charging,
communicating, drying, warming, and showering
center for residents.
Home and Business Impacts
Approximately 4,000 homes in Freeport, including
213 that are located outside the flood zone, were
affected by seawater as a result of Superstorm
Sandy.22 23 Flooding caused a wide range of damage
to individual buildings’ mechanical, electrical, and
structural components.
More than 130 homes were “red tagged” (a label
marking them as unsafe for habitation) by the Village
of Freeport Building Department.24 More than 200
additional properties were deemed substantially
or heavily damaged by the flooding. One year after
the storm, approximately half of the red-tagged

What makes storm events so damaging?
Coastal communities are subject to a higher degree
of risk due to their proximity to water; development is generally in former wetland and marshland
environments where natural flooding occurs, making them difficult to protect from the vicissitudes of
nature. Freeport has long lived with the challenges
of a coastal environment and learned to find ways
to address these risks. Hurricanes, tropical storms,
and other weather events can have wider and
more devastating impacts for places like Freeport.
The direct impacts experienced by Freeport during
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy included:
• Coastal flooding of homes and businesses;
• Wind damage to trees, utility poles
and other support structures;
• Localized flash flooding of streets;
• Boat and debris damage to homes, business
parks, open spaces, and infrastructure; and,
• Backups and overflows of sanitary and
stormwater drainage systems due to
storm surge and heavy rainfall.
It is important to acknowledge that these weather
systems continue to impact communities long after
a storm has passed. Secondary, or indirect impacts,
can be equally as damaging and further destabilize
recovering communities. Secondary impacts experienced by Freeport included:
• Fires from broken gas pipes and
exposed electrical wires;
• Contamination of natural environments, homes,
businesses and drinking water systems
due to fuel and hazardous material spills;
• Corrosion of electrical wires and
other utility infrastructure;
• Illnesses related to rotting and
molding building components;
• Diminished health from food,
water and power shortages;
• Communication and transportation
loss due to extended power outages
and fuel shortages; and,
• Job losses due to closed businesses.

Community Overview 25

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Homeowner Assistance
Although damage to privately-owned homes was
extensive in some areas of the Community and was
a concern raised at Public Engagement Events,
direct assistance is not part of the NYRCR Freeport
Plan’s articulated strategies and projects. The
Freeport NYRCR Plan focuses on community-wide
resiliency initiatives that seek to mitigate the effects
of storm events on residents, neighborhoods and
community assets. Other Federal, State, local, and
not-for-profit programs, including the NY Rising
Housing Recovery Program are assisting homeowners with reconstruction directly. Other Federal,
State, local, and not-for-profit programs, including the NY Rising Housing Recovery Program are
assisting homeowners with reconstruction directly.

Many homes in Freeport were flooded during
Superstorm Sandy (source: Urbanomics)

Some homes were damaged beyond
repair (source: Urbanomics)

26

Community Overview

structures were repaired and the Village has reported
that a majority, if not all, of such residences will be
safe to inhabit by 2015.
As of July 2013, some 3,900 Freeport homeowners
(approximately 45% of all homes in the Village) had
registered claims with FEMA. From those claims,
FEMA assessed total damages to owner-occupied
housing at $65.4 million and approved assistance to
2,750 property owners. Over 1,300 renters (roughly
40% of all renters in Freeport) also filed claims. FEMA
assessed an undisclosed amount of rental housing
damage and provided assistance to little more than
half of those renters registered. The total amount of
approved funds dispersed to Freeport residents by
FEMA under the Individuals and Households Program
(IHP) was $24.1 million to homeowners and $4.0 million to renters. As of September 2013, an additional
$39.1 million was lent to homeowners by the federal
Small Business Association (SBA) disaster loan program. It is unknown, however, how much of these
funds have been, or will be, received by Freeport
property owners. It is also unknown what funds have
specifically been disbursed to the Community from
the NYS Homeownership Repair and Rebuilding
Fund (HRRF), the Empire State Relief Fund, the NY
Rising Housing Recovery Program, or the NY Rising
Acquisition program to supplement FEMA aid. Aid to
south shore communities amounted to $2.9 million
under HRRF and $1.2 million under ESRF.
According to data from the U.S. Small Business
Administration (SBA), 234 Freeport businesses, representing 1,053 employees, applied for disaster management assistance after Superstorm Sandy. These
applications represent claims totaling $14.7 million
in real property damage, $8.3 million of machinery damage, an inventory loss of $2.4 million, and
a leaseholder improvement loss of $2.2 million. Of
these applications, 49 (20.9%) were approved for an
amount totaling slightly less than $6.7 million, roughly
one quarter of the $27.6 million in verified damage
assistance applied for.25
Stores and restaurants along the Nautical Mile and in
other waterfront areas experienced direct and indirect damages. Seven structural fires occurred during
or immediately following the storm. One Nautical Mile
business, Fiore Brothers Fish Market, burned down
in the immediate aftermath of Superstorm Sandy and

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Socially Vulnerable Populations
More than $207,000 was expended by the Village
of Freeport Housing Authority to make critical
repairs to the Moxie Rigby, South Main, and 100
North Main Street public housing developments.
Many of the buildings’ power and heating systems that were repaired were compromised during Superstorm Sandy as well as Hurricane Irene.
The Housing Authority, therefore, is seeking financial assistance from FEMA to elevate and relocate
mechanical equipment to prevent future damage.
The Authority, working with engineers, has provided
a pre-engineering estimate of $342,000 to address
these repairs.

sustained $3.5 million in damages. Tropix Bar and
Restaurant also burned down and has since been
rebuilt, while The Schooner Restaurant, located at
the southern tip of the Nautical Mile, was forced to
permanently close its doors after sustaining damages
from both Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy.
Many gas stations throughout Long Island were left
without power for their pumps and/or lacked fuel to
sell, as the storm prompted the shutdown of two
east coast refineries. While a majority of gas stations
in Freeport did not lose electrical power, enabling
them to remain operational and thus serve the
greater south shore region, many wholesale gasoline
suppliers did lose power, and were unable to pump
fuel into tanker trucks for distribution. Wholesalers
that did have power had difficulty keeping up with
demand, as service stations that were able to open
had to be replenished much more frequently.
Environmental Impacts
Wetlands and parks across the south shore were
washed away or severely damaged by both Hurricane
Irene and Superstorm Sandy. The Freeport-based
nonprofit organization Operation SPLASH (Stop
Polluting Littering and Save Harbors) estimates that
the storm deposited over one million pounds of garbage into the wetlands, from car tires and boats to
building components and furniture. Saltwater marshlands off the Freeport waterfront remained covered
with debris for months after the storm, while household chemicals, fuel from damaged boats, and gas

The Crows Nest Cove on Freeport’s
Nautical Mile (source: Arup)

and oil tanks were carried away by flood waters
and were also deposited in wetland areas, coating the water and wildlife in leaked fuel and other
contaminants.
Freeport Department of Public Works (DPW) structures located in John J. Randall Park and Sea Breeze
Waterfront Park, in particular, sustained substantial
flood damage.26
Storm events also often result in hazardous material spills, further damaging the environment. During
2012, approximately 170 of the 302 total hazardous
material spills in Freeport were a result of Superstorm
Sandy.27
Many of the storm’s impacts on natural resources
were felt at the regional level in the South Shore
Estuary. Debris, oil, and other toxic substances
that were released were carried to various parts of
the Community. This will cause long-term impacts
to trees, wetlands, watersheds, and waterways,
as well as to the fish and wildlife that depend on a
healthy ecosystem. Flooding and wind damage created a significant amount of debris, including damaged bulkheads, pilings and other marine structures,
unmoored boats, and building fragments carried by
the storm surge.
Infrastructure Impacts
The high tide and surge waters infiltrated as far
north as Sunrise Highway and left roadways flooded
throughout the southern portion of Freeport. Streets
Community Overview 27

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

south remained closed until they could be cleared of
obstructions, such as downed trees and live electrical wires.
The LIRR began suspending service the night before
Superstorm Sandy was expected to make landfall.
In order to avoid damage, substations feeding the
track’s third rail had to be powered off. The storm left
tracks covered in debris, however partial service was
restored to the Babylon Branch on Friday, November
2, 2012, four days after the storm. By Monday,
November 5, 2012, trains were operating on a modified weekday schedule and service was almost completely restored within the next week.28
Freeport Electric’s Power Plant II (source: Arup)

During Superstorm Sandy, water levels came close to
reaching Freeport Electric’s Power Plant II (source: Arup)

in low-lying areas were completely inundated, and
receding floodwaters left roadways littered with
debris. Heavy winds knocked down trees, traffic signals, and utility lines. Superstorm Sandy was
responsible for causing 12 fires, several of which
were located in heavily flooded areas and could not
be reached by the Freeport Fire Department. In the
storm’s immediate aftermath, Nassau County officials closed all roads, declaring them impassable
and unsafe. While the New York State Police were
able to reopen Long Island’s major highways north
of Merrick Road within the day, several roads to the

28

Community Overview

Freeport is served by a municipally owned utility,
Freeport Electric. Freeport Electric has instilled many
management practices designed to diminish damages, such as the use of spacer cables to stabilize
overhead wires and reduce the risk of downed wires
during heavy winds. Freeport has primary and secondary power generation capability, enabling the
community to generate power locally or pull from the
regional grid. While this makes Freeport’s electrical
supply more resistant to widespread outages, it also
means that critical electricity generating facilities are
located in the Village, one of which – Power Plant II
– is at the water’s edge. Although Superstorm Sandy
did not significantly damage Freeport Electric’s Power
Plant II, water levels rose to the control room’s doorstep making the exposure of its fuel storage tanks
to open water a major concern and highlighting the
potential for considerable damage in future storm
events. While the Power Plant is located in a high risk
area directly adjacent to the water, local topography
placed it high enough to avoid damage. The same
was not true for the Department of Public Works,
where water surrounded the 250,000, 500,000
and 1,000,000 gallon fuel storage tanks during
Superstorm Sandy. Despite being bolted down, the
force of the surge water moved the fuel storage tanks
on their foundations. It is clear that in the future, a
larger storm surge could completely destroy a majority of the facility’s power generation infrastructure.
Freeport’s 13 kV and 4 kV electrical distribution system suffered extensive damage from Superstorm
Sandy and many assets were powered down to avoid
additional damage. The 13 kV Tie Line #1 tripped and
locked out, along with three 13 kV circuits. Flooding

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

and distribution system was unharmed, all three of
its sanitary sewer lift stations sustained damage to
the electrical panels and compressors. Once the
floodwaters dispersed, work began to replace and
elevate electrical panels in order to keep the system
operational.

Flooding at the Village of Freeport Department
of Public Works (source: Freeport DPW)

surrounding Substation A and Substation D forced
the system operator to trip the breakers and safely
power down to limit damage. Additionally, drifting
boats and debris threatened the aboveground transition point for a critical submarine transmission cable
that provides 24% of Freeport’s electricity supply. On
October 30, 2012, the day after the storm, approximately 73% of Freeport Electric’s customers were
without power, yet by November 3, only 2% of the
utility’s customers remained in the dark. Residents of
the Village and residents in adjacent hamlets repeatedly noted how impressive they found Freeport
Electric’s quick return to operation.
Cellular communication networks were down for
days after the storm, as many cellphone towers
had insufficient backup power to maintain service.
Flooding also affected numerous cell towers and
Internet switching centers; Facilities that did have
reserve power capacity were forced to go offline to
prevent damage. Heavy winds and falling trees took
out aboveground communication lines on shared
utility poles, which could then only be accessed for
repair after initial utility line repairs were made. These
outages rendered emergency notification systems
ineffective for many Freeport residents.

Freeport’s Department of Public Works (DPW) facility
houses a majority of the communication equipment,
dedicated fuel pumping stations, storage, and maintenance facilities for the Village’s vehicle fleet. The
DPW facility was inundated with approximately 3.5 to
4 feet of surge water during Superstorm Sandy and
it remained unusable for approximately two months
after the storm. Due to the facility’s low-lying waterfront location, it sustained more than $100,000 in
damages during Hurricane Irene and nearly $1.6 million in damages, repairs, and vehicle replacements in
Superstorm Sandy.29
Some residents suffered natural gas outages and
damaged equipment and gas lines created potentially
dangerous situations. Seawater entering residential
fuel tanks displaced the oil inside, forcing it out and
into surrounding yards and homes. Aboveground
tanks were ripped off of their foundations and carried
into nearby properties, while in some areas flooding caused buried fuel tanks to float up out of the
ground.30
The Village incurred approximately $4.5 million in
Superstorm Sandy related damage expenditures,
of which $3.3 million are attributable to the Village’s
General Fund and almost $1.2 million to its Electric
Fund, which helps fund municipally-owned Freeport
Electric. Approximately $2 million was expended on
debris removal, of which $575,000 was for non-capital equipment and materials, $820,000 for Village
labor overtime costs, and $1.1 million for contractual
costs. In total, an estimated 13,347 tons of debris
was removed.31

Power outages and storm surge waters also
affected a number of other critical infrastructure
systems. Although Freeport’s drinking water supply

Community Overview 29

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

C. Critical Issues
The damage caused by Superstorm Sandy and
Hurricane Irene directly and indirectly impacted
homes, businesses, sanitary sewer, stormwater and
energy infrastructure, public facilities, and natural
resources in the Community. These impacts revealed
several critical issues facing the Community and
it is crucial moving forward that these issues are
addressed in a way that allows the Community to be
more resilient when faced with future natural disasters. The following are critical issues facing Freeport
(a more detailed description of issues exists in
Section II: Assessment of needs and opportunities):
• Flooding and Drainage: Drainage infrastructure is
aged and optimal system performance is diminished by different maintenance protocols across
municipal boundaries. Drainage infrastructure
improvements have not been made in concert
with increases in population. Seemingly minor
instances of precipitation can destabilize areas
downstream, like Freeport, when discharge
areas converge with incoming storm surges.
A significant amount of the stormwater that
drains through Freeport is generated in upland
areas and stresses the system’s capacity. Debris
and sediment from both Hurricane Irene and
Superstorm Sandy left drains clogged in many
areas.
• Homeownership in Higher Risk Areas: More
than 3,600 homes in Freeport are located within
extreme or high risk areas (risk zones are defined
in Section II). Many rental residences and those
occupied by lower income households also sit in
higher risk areas. Home values were destabilized
and many have decreased, primarily in areas
closer to the bays. The cost of home ownership
has, and will continue to increase for many due
to increases in repair, maintenance and flood
insurance costs.
• Shoreline Protection: Freeport’s development
has always been oriented towards the water.
Historic development patterns, coupled with
more recent suburbanization, diminished wetlands around the Village. Wetlands loss reduced
or eliminated the “transition area,” which offers
protection from regular tidal flooding and filtration
of toxins from stormwater runoff. As waterfront
30

Community Overview

Many homeowners in high risk areas face increased costs
from insurance premiums and repairs (source: Arup)

Development has changed waterfront areas from wetlands
into residential and commercial areas (source: Arup)

areas developed, bulkheads were introduced to
reduce soil erosion and provide water access.
While people have come to rely on bulkheads
to prevent inundation, this was not the intended
function. Further, their varying height, composition, maintenance, and age create gaps and
inconsistencies in the coastline.
• Energy Infrastructure: More than 70% of
Freeport experienced power outages due to failures in the energy infrastructure, but power was
restored quickly following the two storm events.
While Freeport bounced back quickly, the experience during Superstorm Sandy brought a

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

• Information, Communication, and Access
to Resources: A majority of residents south of
Merrick Road did not heed mandatory evacuation orders until it was too late, which put emergency responders at risk. During and after the
storm, with power loss, downed communication
lines, and inoperable cellular towers, residents
were unable to access information. There was
uncertainty on where to go to find help centers,
temporary accommodations, or locations for the
distribution of supplies.

The submarine cable crossing is vulnerable to damage
from unmoored boats and debris (source: Arup)

higher degree of awareness to the vulnerabilities
of the Freeport Electric Network. The lack of
‘black-start’ capability at Power Plant I, Freeport
Electric’s main generation facility, puts at risk the
ability to restart quickly after a service disruption. Outdated circuits in the downtown Freeport
area limit economic development potential and
restrict the ability to develop system redundancy.
A cable channel crossing in south Freeport that
is responsible for transmitting 24% of Freeport
Electric’s load transitions to overhead wires that
pass through a boatyard, presenting a critical fire
hazard and therefore creating system vulnerability. Power Plant II is located in a high risk area
directly adjacent to the water.
• Business Continuity: Local businesses suffered significantly; many were closed for
extended periods and a few did not reopen
after Superstorm Sandy. The loss of revenues,
combined with the financial investment required
to reopen storefronts, created a significant financial loss for business owners. Two of Freeport’s
economic drivers, the Industrial Park and the
Nautical Mile, are located in coastal flood risk
areas, representing 35% of total commercial
property value located in extreme and high risk
zones.

• Regional Connections: The Meadowbrook
State Parkway was covered with debris rendering it unavailable for use for two weeks following Superstorm Sandy. Long Island Rail Road
service was quickly restored and many of the
regional roadways were available after a short
period. Most local roads were inundated and
blocked with downed trees or power lines, making them impassable for several days after the
storm.
• Resilient Planning and Design: Existing
land use, buildings, infrastructure networks,
and marinas – many of which were planned,
designed and built more than 50 years ago – are
not well suited to dealing with climate change
and extreme weather patterns. They do not
reflect current best practice regarding energy
resilient buildings. Many support centers designated to provide shelter and assistance to storm
victims lacked reserve power or other necessary
services to support displaced residents. During
Superstorm Sandy many residential heating oil
tanks in low-lying areas were displaced due to
the force of floodwaters. In addition, home and
business electrical and communication systems,
often located in basements and on groundfloors,
were also damaged.

Community Overview 31

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

D. Community Vision
Through input received from the Community during Public Engagement Events and the work of the NYRCR
Freeport Planning Committee (Committee), a vision statement and goals were developed reflecting the
Community’s aspirations for the future. These statements provide the foundation for the NYRCR Freeport Plan.
They were used to guide the development of the NYRCR Freeport Plan’s strategies and projects and should
serve as an ongoing reminder of what the Community aims to achieve.

Community Vision
Vision for a Resilient Future
The Village of Freeport draws upon our independence, nautical commerce, and rich cultural past to create a
resilient future with economic, social, and recreational outlets that build upon our strong sense of community.
Goals for the Future
• Revitalize the local economy and create opportunities for growth.
• Connect vulnerable and seasonal economic drivers with less vulnerable growth locations.
• Leverage and build upon infrastructure investments to maximize economic development potential.
• Build on a legacy of self-support, exploring new ways to deliver public amenities.
• Enhance parks and cultural assets so they serve multiple purposes: recreation, resilience, and refuge.
• Provide a range of housing types that are resilient in design and location for all Freeport residents.
• Ensure proper health and social services are accessible to all residents
on a daily basis and in emergency scenarios.
• Improve social resilience by establishing connectivity between communities and services.

32

Community Overview

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

E. Relationship to Regional Plans
Regional plans and studies previously conducted
raise many of the issues and challenges expressed
by Committee Members and the public in the
Community. The LI 2035 Visioning Initiative (2009)32
discusses the risks faced in coastal areas from hurricanes and major storms, while also documenting
infrastructure needs in the Community. The South
Shore Estuary Reserve Comprehensive Management
Plan (2001)33 deeply examines the needs of wetlands
and bay ecosystems. These plans and others formed
a foundation of needs and opportunities that were
then used to frame strategies, projects, and programs to respond to those needs.

Freeport, as an incorporated village, is unique along
Nassau County’s south shore due to its direct control over zoning and building codes, emergency
management, water and sanitary sewer system, and
power generation and distribution. As such, it can
quickly adapt to meet local needs and respond to
local issues.

What was learned from reviewing these plans is that
the Communities along the south shore in proximity to NYRCR Freeport share common issues and
concerns related to reconstruction, recovery, and
resiliency. They inhabit one natural ecosystem along
the Great South Bay and also share similar physical
attributes. Further, these Communities share similar
patterns of development, interconnected infrastructure systems, common road networks, overlapping
municipal service provision areas, and a common
coastline. This dynamic demands a regional perspective on the challenges facing the Community,
ensuring local solutions take into account and leverage regional considerations, as well as grounding
regional strategies in local context.

• Infrastructure Investment: Long Island’s aging
infrastructure is struggling to accommodate previous population growth and changing demographics while adapting to the increasing threat
of storm events and sea level rise. Infrastructure
systems, such as roadways, bulkheads, and
utility lines, have been particularly affected by
flooding and storm damage. Additionally, the
transportation network no longer best serves
Long Island’s present-day commuting patterns
and should be re-evaluated to better accommodate trips that are not bound for New York City.34
Infrastructure investment has consistently been
identified as critical to Long Island’s regional
growth and economic viability. The recent storms
exposed many of the vulnerabilities inherent in
aging infrastructure and further confirmed the
need to make upgrades and improvements.

The NYRCR Freeport Plan is therefore informed by
numerous existing planning documents and efforts,
several of which offer relevant strategies, projects,
and actions. A list of the regional and sub-regional
plans reviewed can be found in Table 02. Although the
geographic scope covered by some of these documents is beyond the boundaries of the Community,
many of the strategies identified can be applied at a
local level.
In addition to the documents reviewed, there
were two Joint Committee Meetings held with the
NYRCR Planning Committees from the neighboring
NYRCR Communities of Baldwin, Bellmore/Merrick,
Massapequa, and Seaford/Wantagh. These Joint
Committee Meetings promoted understanding of
regional issues and developed shared projects.

The Committee and Consultant Team have identified
a set of key themes that outline common issues and
opportunities within the south shore. Some of these
issues apply to the Community in the context of this
planning effort, while others may not.

• Water Resources: Groundwater contamination from polluted recharge waters and saltwater
intrusion is an issue in Nassau County where
potable water is supplied solely by aquifers.
Real estate development to facilitate and attract
population growth, combined with sea level rise,
threatens future drinking water and consumptive water resources (those removed from the
system without a return, such as manufacturing and food preparation) on Long Island. The
South Shore Estuary Reserve Comprehensive
Management Plan (2010)35, the NYS Coastal
Management Plan (2006)36, and the 2010 Draft
Nassau County Master Plan (2010) address
these issues, in addition to flood management, water conservation, and environmental

Community Overview 33

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

protection concerns.37 Stormwater management
is of special concern to Long Island. As runoff
moves across roofs, parking lots, and streets, as
well as through pipes, it picks up and transports
pollutants - bacteria, trash, oil, road salt, soil,
and chemicals - into the South Shore Estuary
and Atlantic Ocean. Freeport is at the receiving end of upland drainage systems and must
process stormwater and associated pollutants
from a much wider area. As discussed in Cleaner
Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan
(2013), implementing green infrastructure practices, or replacing impervious surfaces, such as
roads, parking lots, and roofs, with vegetated
areas, is one way to increase groundwater supplies, filter toxins, and combat saltwater intrusion
of aquifers.38

Transportation infrastructure has been the subject
of many regional studies (source: Arup)

• Energy Rates: As an incorporated village,
Freeport generates, purchases, and distributes
its own energy through Freeport Electric. This
makes Freeport’s energy supply more affordable, reliable, and diverse than other areas of
Long Island. Many of the documents reviewed,
including the 2010 Draft Nassau County Master
Plan (2010)39 and the Cleaner Greener Long
Island Regional Sustainability Plan (2013),40
favored investment in energy efficiency and conservation, renewable energy sources, and distributed energy generation strategies to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, improve air quality,
increase energy independence, and reduce ratepayer costs. Freeport Electric is a leader in providing reliable and affordable electricity and continues to explore ways to reduce costs, increase
resiliency, and identify more sustainable forms of
energy.
• Housing: The Village of Freeport has a broad
range of housing types, from single-family to
multifamily homes and from stand-alone to mixed
use, multi-story developments – a diversity that
separates Freeport’s housing stock from much
of the rest of Nassau County. Much of the building stock in Freeport is over 50 years old. Before
Superstorm Sandy, unstable home prices and a
reduction in lending due to the Great Recession,
as well as increasing property tax levels, limited

34

Community Overview

Multifamily housing in Freeport (source: Arup)

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

the stock of housing available for the young and
aging population, low-income residents, and
those displaced by previous storms. Several
plans, including the Building a Better Freeport
(2010),41 2010 Draft Nassau County Master
Plan (2010),42 the Nassau County Consolidated
Plan (2010),43 the Sustainable Strategies for
LI 2035 (2010),44 the New Vision for the Long
Island Economy (2011),45 the Long Island 2035
Visioning Initiative (2009),46 the Cleaner Greener
Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan (2013),47
the Strong Island (2013) report,48 and the Nassau
County Infill Redevelopment Study (2013),49 have
recommended an increase in smaller, affordable
housing and rental unit developments. These
plans can complement efforts to increase resilient housing by creating housing opportunities
outside of coastal flood risk areas. However,
following the impacts of Superstorm Sandy, it is
uncertain if home prices will remain at their current level due to increasing insurance costs that
reflect the risk associated with living on the coast
and in blighted areas where there are a number
of abandoned or dilapidated houses.
• Governance: As described in the Long Island
2035 Visioning Initiative (2009)50 and the New
Vision for the Long Island Economy (2011), 51
Long Island’s mesh of municipal and administrative jurisdictions can reduce public sector
efficiency and limit coordination, while creating
an inconsistent regulatory landscape for residents and businesses. The Village of Freeport’s
governance structure streamlines many of these
issues and does not have the same layers of
complexity other areas in Nassau County.

walkable and transit-friendly area. By implementing recommendations, Freeport has the potential
to become a regional leader in suburban redevelopment, begin to reverse the 40 years of economic decline it has experienced, and establish
a new opportunities within the existing industrial
and auto-oriented uses that are characteristic of
the area. Recent developments in places such
as Farmingdale and Glen Cove have incorporated transit-oriented development (TOD) and
transit-supportive development (TSD) elements
to preserve the quality of life for residents while
allowing for future growth. Freeport has a TOD
plan for its Downtown and recently approved the
first project to emerge from that planning initiative. The proposed development includes retrofitting an abandoned bank building adjacent to
the LIRR Freeport Station to provide apartmentstyle housing, hotel rooms, retail space, and
public open space. The NYRCR Freeport Plan
builds on Freeport’s existing planning initiatives
and adds support and momentum to the redefinition of the Downtown and LIRR station areas,
with the goal of increasing economic development and housing opportunities in lower flood
risk areas.
• Equitable and Supportive Communities:
Regional plans, such as the Long Island 2035
Visioning Initiative, call for greater social equity
in the communities of Long Island and recognize
that more can be done for the growing numbers
of socially vulnerable populations. Many of the
calls for action in these reports are reflected in
Freeport.

• Transit-Oriented Development: The Village
of Freeport has a vision for Transit-Oriented
Development in downtown and along Main
Street. The Building a Better Freeport – The
Master Plan for the North Main Street Corridor
and Station Area for the Village of Freeport,
NY (2010)52 study focuses on TOD and makes
recommendations for creating a walkable Main
Street Corridor. The Master Plan recommends
a link to the LIRR station area and downtown
Freeport via the Main Street corridor to create a

Community Overview 35

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 02: Existing regional plans, local plans, and other reports
Document Name

Date Published

Author

Blue Water Trail Master Plan

October 2013

Nassau County

Building a Better Freeport

July 2010

Freeport Vision and Master Plan Steering Committee,
Regional Plan Association, Moule & Polyzoides, Sustainable
Long Island

Cedar Creek WPCP Facilities Masterplan

2009

Nassau County Department of Public Works

Cleaner Greener LI Regional Sustainability
Plan

April 2013

Regional Plan Association

Coastal Risk Assessment Areas

2013

New York State Department of State, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration Coastal Services Center,
Federal Emergency Management Agency

Community Profiles

2012

United States Census Bureau

Draft Nassau County Master Plan

October 2010

Nassau County

LI Comprehensive Economic
Development Strategy

August 2012

Long Island Regional Planning Council, Long Island
Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy
Committee

LI 2035 Visioning Initiative

December 2009

Long Island 2035 Study Team

Nassau County Consolidated Plan

2010

Nassau County

Nassau County Infill Redevelopment
Feasibility Report

September 2013

Regional Plan Association

A New Vision for the Long Island
Economy – The Strategic Economic
Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk
Counties

November 2011

Long Island Regional Economic Development Council

Nassau County Stormwater Management
Program Plan

2009

Nassau County Department of Public Works

Nassau County Multi-jurisdictional Hazard
Mitigation Plan

February 2007

Nassau County Office of Emergency Management

Nassau County Debris Management Plan

January 2009

Nassau County

North Atlantic Coast Comprehensive
Study (NAACS) Draft

Document in
Process

United States Army Corps of Engineers

NYS Coastal Management Program

1982

New York State Department of State

Long Island’s Rental Housing Crisis

September 2013

Regional Plan Association

36

Community Overview

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 02 (cont’d) : Existing regional plans, local plans, and other reports
Document Name

Date Published

Author

Places to Grow – An Analysis of the
Potential for Transit-Accessible Housing
and Jobs in Long Island’s Downtowns
and Station Areas

January 2010

Regional Plan Association

Progress and Promise – Building a
Foundation for Long Island’s Future
(Update)

September 2012

Long Island Regional Economic Development Council

Significant Coastal Fish and Wildlife
Habitat Assessments Narrative

2008

New York State Department of State

South Shore Estuary Reserve
Comprehensive Management Plan

2001

South Shore Estuary Reserve Council with assistance
provided by New York State Department of State

South Shore Estuary Reserve Workplan
Implementation- Estuary Public Use and
Tourism Study

September 2010

Cashin Associates for Town of Oyster Bay, New York State
Department of State

Strong Island – Recovery & Resurgence –
Strategic Economic Development Plan for
Nassau and Suffolk Counties (Update)

September 2013

Long Island Regional Economic Development Council

Sustainable Strategies for Long Island
2035

December 2010

Long Island Regional Planning Council

Village of Freeport Draft All Hazard
Mitigation Plan

2012

Village of Freeport

Community Overview 37

Section II : Assessment
of Risk and Needs
As part of developing the Freeport NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Plan, an inventory and risk assessment evaluated the vulnerability
of Community Assets to future storm damage, specifically flooding, in the
NYRCR Freeport Community (Community). The aim of the assessment process was to provide a quantitative risk analysis of Community Assets to supplement the qualitative information collected at NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee) Meetings and Public Engagement Events.
An additional assessment of needs and opportunities provides a basis for
Community strategies and projects proposed in the NYRCR Freeport Plan.
Many of the needs and opportunities addressed are a result of recent storm
damage to the Community and consider the ongoing risk to Community
Assets. This includes lost economic opportunities attributed to Superstorm
Sandy and Hurricane Irene-related damages, opportunities for rebuilding or
expanding the local economy, and opportunities for creating a more resilient
future for the Community.

Facing image: Businesses along the Woodcleft Canal (source: Arup)

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

A. Description of Community Assets
and Assessment of Risk
Community Assets are places or things where
economic, environmental, and social functions of
Communities take place. Assets may be part of the
built or the natural environment. Community Assets
were initially identified through data collected from
New York State and Nassau County Geographic
Information System (GIS) databases. Using GIS software, County and State data was filtered to include
only assets within the geographic scope of the
Community. Attribute information contained within
different datasets was used to parse individual assets
into asset class categories: Economic, Health and
Social Services, Housing, Infrastructure Systems,
and Natural and Cultural Resources.

Asset Class Categories
Economic: Assets in this category include
office buildings, businesses and industrial parks,
manufacturing, warehouses, storage facilities,
grocery, restaurants, banks, lodging, storefronts,
downtown centers, and seasonal or tourism
destinations.
Health and Social Services: These assets
include schools, health care, day care, elder care,
emergency operations, government and administrative services, media and communications,
police, and fire and rescue.
Housing: Assets include single-family and multifamily dwellings, supportive housing or group
homes, senior housing, and affordable housing.
Infrastructure Systems: Includes pedestrian,
bicycle, and vehicular ways, transit, bridges, airports, rail, ferries, gas stations, water distribution
and supply, stormwater and wastewater systems,
and solid waste and recycling services.
Natural and Cultural Resources: Includes natural habitats, wetlands and marshes, recreation
facilities, parks, public open spaces, religious
establishments, libraries, museums, historic landmarks, and performing arts venues.

40

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Asset information was combined with New York
State Department of State (NYS DOS) hazard maps
to identify individual assets in each risk zone. Hazard
maps incorporate a range of coastal risks and consider frequency and severity of flooding. The maps
were prepared for the NYRCR Program by NYS
DOS with assistance from the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration Coastal Services
Center (NOAA-CSC) and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) and identify three levels
of risk based on aggregated information for multiple
hazards. These risk areas are qualified as subject to
extreme, high, and moderate risk from inundation
and erosion from future storm event and sea level
rise. Risk areas within the Community are identified
in Figure 03.
• Extreme Risk Areas: Areas currently at risk
of frequent inundation, vulnerable to erosion in
the next 40 years, or likely to be inundated in
the future due to sea level rise. This includes
FEMA designated Zone V Coastal High Hazard
Areas (CHHA), areas subject to Shallow Coastal
Flooding per the National Weather Service’s
(NWS) advisory threshold, areas prone to erosion or natural features susceptible to erosion,
and areas subject to future sea level rise.
• High Risk Areas: Areas outside the Extreme
Risk Area that are currently at frequent risk of
inundation or at future risk from sea level rise.
High Risk areas include geography within FEMA
Zone V and Zone A Special Flood Hazard Areas
(SFHA), also known as 1% annual risk (100-year)
flood zones, and areas subject to future sea level
rise.
• Moderate Risk Areas: Areas that are outside
the Extreme and High Risk Areas but are currently at moderate risk of inundation from infrequent events or at risk in the future from sea level
rise. This includes areas within 0.2% annual risk
(500-year) flood zones and areas within NOAA’s
Sea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes
(SLOSH) category 3 hurricane inundation zones.

Figure 03: New York State Department of State Risk Areas
IN ST
N MA

B

AB

YL

O

N

TP

K

N AVE
W SEAMA

ND

E

E
AV

A

GR

E HWY

Freeport LIRR

GUY

D
ICK R

MERR

MILL RD

S MAIN ST

E AVE

BROOKSID

T
BEDELL S

LOMBARDO AVE

SMITH ST

SUNRIS

IC AVE

T
ATLAN

N AVE
S OCEA

CLEFT

AVE

WOOD

IEW

YV
S BA

AVE

E
ON AV

HUDS
0

Legend

New York Department of State
Risk Areas

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Extreme

Long Island Rail Road

High

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

Moderate

Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

Figure 04: Economic Land uses
IN ST
N MA

B

AB

YL
O

N

N AVE
W SEAMA

ND

TP

K

E

E
AV

A

GR

SUNRIS

D
ICK R

GUY

MERR

MILL RD

S MAIN ST

E AVE

BROOKSID

T
BEDELL S

LOMBARDO AVE

SMITH ST

E HWY

IC AVE

T
ATLAN

N AVE
S OCEA

CLEFT

AVE

WOOD

IEW

YV
S BA

AVE

E
ON AV
HUDS
0

Legend

Land Uses

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Mixed-use

Industrial

Long Island Rail Road

Office

Other Land Use

LIRR Station

Retail

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS
Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

i. Description of community assets
The following presents a summary of Community
Assets, organized by asset class, that have been
affected by previous storms or are at risk to future
impacts. Assets were identified through a combination of research and data analysis, meetings with local
officials and Community figures, and Community
member feedback. Asset information was periodically gathered and reviewed at Committee Meetings.
During the first two Public Engagement Events, residents were asked to annotate or amend asset maps
organized in these asset classes. Further information
about the public engagement process is located in
Section V. Table 06 and Table 07 at the end of this
section and identifies the number of assets in each
asset class located in the extreme, high, and moderate risk zones.
Economic
The Nautical Mile, downtown Freeport, the Industrial
Park, Sunrise Highway, and North Main Street represent the key nodes and corridors for economic
activity in Freeport. The majority of commercial
and industrial property value in Freeport (56.4%) is
located in moderate risk zones, with 16.6% in high
risk zones, 18.4% in extreme risk zones, and 8.5%
located completely outside of hazard areas. Industrial
land uses are most at risk, constituting over half the
total assessed property value in extreme (25.6%)
and high (26.7%) risk zones. The uses in these areas
provide higher paying industrial-related jobs and
offer a diverse range of employment choices. Some
of the economic activities rely upon materials that
present pollution risks and their proximity to water
poses risks to business operation as well as the environment. During Superstorm Sandy, the 126-acre
Freeport Industrial Park was unevenly inundated due
to the Park’s size and varied elevation. The Park has
a high vacancy rate, which is primarily the result of
international competition in the manufacturing sector.
The vacancies, plus the vulnerability of the Industrial
Park, made it a key focus for the Committee.
Retail uses are also vulnerable, with 15.6% in high
risk zones and 18.5% in extreme risk zones. Similarly,
less than 20% of the property values associated
with office and mixed-use properties in particular

are within an extreme or high risk zones. Freeport’s
Nautical Mile is home to approximately twenty restaurants and clubs, as well as fish markets, small
shops, an esplanade, parkland, and several marinas. The Nautical Mile was completely inundated
by Superstorm Sandy and many of its businesses
suffered severe damage from flooding and floating
debris.
The Nautical Mile and Industrial Park were key areas
of economic interest for the Planning Committee and
thus were two of the main focus areas for intervention. While marinas represent a large portion of the
Community’s waterfront land use, they were not specifically identified as an area of interest by the NYRCR
Freeport Committee or Community Members.
While a majority of businesses have reopened, a
number of properties at the southern end of the
Nautical Mile have been abandoned due to the extent
of repair work needed, or the repeat damage experienced from Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy.
Three commercial properties on the Nautical Mile
experienced significant damage from Superstorm
Sandy, or repeat damage from Superstorm Sandy
and Hurricane Irene, and either closed for a period
of reconstruction or for good. In addition, Operation
SPLASH, a critical Community Asset and the steward of Nassau County’s waterways, operates out of
a former marina building now owned by the Freeport
Community Development Agency that sustained 4.5
feet of flooding during Superstorm Sandy, and 16
inches of flooding during Hurricane Irene.

South Main Street in Downtown
Freeport (source: Joe Mabel)

Assessment of Risk and Needs 43

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Health and Social Services
Health and social service assets within the Community
encompass both emergency and life-saving assets,
such as police and fire stations, together with
administrative assets, such as schools and government facilities, libraries, and community centers.
Additionally, there are a number of senior care facilities and health-related offices, including a dialysis
center. Only one of the Village’s schools sits within
the extreme or high risk areas – the Leo F. Giblyn
School on Cedar Street. Freeport Memorial Library,
along with the Village’s Recreation Center and fire
stations are located in the moderate flood risk zones.
Housing
At NYRCR Freeport Committee Meetings representatives from the Freeport Building Department
explained that the Village of Freeport participates in
the National Flood Insurance Program’s Community
Rating System, which incentivizes community floodplain management activities with discounted flood
insurance premium rates.53 The vast majority of housing is not constructed to modern building standards
nor does it incorporate resilient designs that would
allow them to survive with minimal damage during a
hurricane or storm. One in every three housing units
built in Freeport was constructed in the decades
before World War II (1945). Most of the remaining two-thirds were built before 1980, when new

development essentially stopped until 2005, when
several new units were built. The Village of Freeport’s
building codes date back to the 1940s and the
majority of the codes have not been amended since
the 1970s.
The most common residential structure type in the
Community is detached single-family housing, which
represents 8,923 homes out of the Community’s total
of 14,589 units, or 61.2%. Freeport also has a significant proportion of residential dwellings in buildings of
20 units or more, comprising 3,360 apartments, or
23.0% of the Village’s housing stock. Compared to
neighboring communities, a larger share of Freeport’s
housing is multifamily buildings, but even so, singlefamily homes are almost three times as common.
Homes located north of Sunrise Highway usually sit
on larger parcels than those south of the Highway.
Many houses on the southern edges of Freeport are
located on canals with direct access and exposure
to the bays.
During the five-year period for which data is available,
from 2007 to 2011, 13,840 households occupied
Freeport’s 14,589 units of housing, leaving 749 units,
or 5.1% of the total, vacant. In Freeport, buyers can
find single-family homes, condos, and co-ops, while
rental apartments can be found in both multistory
buildings and garden apartment developments.
In addition to damages sustained during Superstorm
Sandy and Hurricane Irene, recent flooding events
have brought regional attention to the number of
housing units that are located in highly vulnerable
areas. In Freeport, 2,596 housing units (18.7%) are
located in extreme risk zones, 1,342 (9.7%) are
located in the high risk zones, and 26.7% of all
Freeport housing is located completely outside of
risk areas.
The Village of Freeport Housing Authority’s Moxie
Rigby Apartments, a publicly owned apartment complex, is located in the high flood risk zone. It experienced significant damage in Superstorm Sandy and
Hurricane Irene.

A residential neighborhood in Freeport (source: Arup)

44

Assessment of Risk and Needs

According to the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD), 4,003 houses were damaged in Freeport as a result of Superstorm Sandy. This
represents over 27% of Freeport’s total housing stock
and almost 9% of all Superstorm Sandy-damaged

Figure 05: Rental Housing

B

AB

IN
N MA

YL

O

N

TP

ST

K

N AVE
W SEAMA

ND

E

E
AV

A

GR

E HWY

SUNRIS

D
ICK R

GUY

MERR

ST

T
BEDELL S
S MAIN ST

E AVE

BROOKSID

LOMBARDO AVE

SMITH

MILL RD

IC AVE

T
ATLAN

N
S OCEA
AVE

IEW

YV
S BA
AVE

E
ON AV

HUDS

CLEFT

WOOD
AVE

0

Legend

US Census Blocks, 2010

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

< 6 Renter Housholds

50 - 149 Renter Housholds

Long Island Rail Road

6 - 19 Renter Housholds

150 - 218 Renter Housholds

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

20 - 49 Renter Housholds

No Data

Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

This page intentionally left blank

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

housing units in Nassau County. Nearly 88% of
the homes damaged experienced heavy damage,
defined as exceeding 50% of the pre-storm housing value. Damage was mostly caused by flooding,
which exceeded 4 feet in 700 units, ranged between
1 and 4 feet in nearly 1,800 units, and was less than
1 foot in more than 500 other units.
As of July 2013, some 3,900 Freeport homeowners
(approximately 45% of all homes in the Village) had
registered claims with FEMA. From those claims,
FEMA assessed total damages to owner-occupied
housing at $65.4 million and approved assistance
to 2,750 property owners. Over 1,300 renters – or
roughly 40% of all renters in Freeport – also filed
claims. FEMA assessed an undisclosed amount of
rental housing damage, and provided assistance
to little more than half of those renters registered.
The total amount of approved funds disbursed to
Freeport residents by FEMA under the Individuals
and Households Program (IHP) was $24.1 million to homeowners and $4.0 million to renters.
As of September 2013 an additional $39.1 million was lent to homeowners by the federal Small
Business Association (SBA) disaster loan program.
It is unknown, however, how much of these funds
have been, or will be, received by Freeport property
owners. It is also unknown what funds have been
disbursed specifically to the Community from the
NYS Homeownership Repair and Rebuilding Fund
(HRRF), the Empire State Relief Fund, or the NY
Rising Acquisition program to supplement FEMA aid.
Aid to south shore communities amounted to $2.9
million under HRRF and $1.2 million under ESRF.
Infrastructure Systems
The key infrastructure assets that sit within the
extreme and high risk zones are located on the site
adjacent to the Industrial Park, including Freeport
Electric’s Power Plant II, Village of Freeport DPW buildings, garages and storage, and Town of Hempstead
Department of Conservation and Waterways facilities. Elsewhere there are three sanitary sewer pump
stations and a sewer lift station.
The Meadowbrook State Parkway, a Countydesignated evacuation route, runs through an extreme
flood risk corridor and during both Superstorm Sandy

and Hurricane Irene the combined effects of coastal
flooding and stormwater runoff obstructed access at
the Merrick Road and Sunrise Highway on/off ramps.
Natural and cultural resources
Freeport’s bay and tidal marshlands are important
natural features that sustain plant and wildlife, while
also offering attractive shoreline areas and recreational opportunity. The bay and tidal marshlands
are important for their inherent natural resource and
habitat values, while tidal wetlands provide coastal
protection in addition to many other crucial ecosystem services – flood water retention and treatment
of stormwater runoff and other non-point sources of
water pollution. Marshlands also provide aesthetic
values and air quality benefits.
Over the last 80 years, significant areas of coastal
wetland were filled to create land for residential development. This infill has resulted in the degradation and
loss of wetlands. Consequently, the Community’s
natural protection against storm events has been
reduced.
The Community has a number of public parks, including the Village’s Sea Breeze and John J. Randall
Parks, located at the southern and northern ends
of the Nautical Mile, and Waterfront Park. The Town
of Hempstead’s (Town) Guy Lombardo Marina and
Nassau County’s Cow Meadow Park are located on
Hempstead’s Middle Bay. These parks are located in
extreme and high risk zones. The Community also
has its own recreation center that contains an ice
skating rink, swimming pools, indoor sporting facilities and multi-purpose rooms that are used to hold
classes and courses in a variety of subject areas.
The Freeport Memorial Library is an important
Community Asset that offers access to reading and
educational materials. It also functions as a community center with meeting rooms and other facilities
for groups and organizations to meet and conduct
business. The Library is located in a moderate risk
area and is easily accessible by car and public transportation. Along with the Historic Society, The Library
is well known within the Community and both are
important information clearinghouses.

Assessment of Risk and Needs 47

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Several nature preserves are located along ponds
and tributaries, including the Milburn Creek corridor,
which is shared with the Baldwin Community along the
Village’s western boundary, and the Meadowbrook
State Parkway corridor, shared with the community
of Merrick along the Village’s eastern boundary. Both
of these areas are extreme flood risk zones and these
assets contribute to stormwater retention.

48

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 03: Community assets located in risk areas
Asset Class

Asset Sub-Class

Moderate

High

Extreme

Health and Social

Assisted Living

8

0

0

Community Center

2

0

0

Day Care Facilities

37

8

5

Emergency Services

10

1

0

Government

15

3

2

Hospital

1

0

0

Library

1

0

0

Other Medical

11

3

1

Pharmacy

6

1

0

School

18

1

0

Veterinary

2

0

0

Beach

1

0

1

Cultural

2

1

0

House of Worship

19

2

0

Parks

4

2

2

Recreation

4

2

3

Wetlands (acres)

8

28

0

Power Facilities

2

0

0

Rail Bridges

7

0

0

Rail Stations

1

0

0

Roads (miles)

47

11

26

Road Bridges

2

2

0

Sewer Pump/Treatment

0

0

3

Transmission Cable

0

0

1

Water Treatment Plants

2

0

0

Water Wells

7

3

0

Natural and Cultural

Infrastructure Systems

Assessment of Risk and Needs 49

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 03 (cont’d) : Community assets located in risk areas
Asset Class

Asset Sub-Class

Moderate

High

Extreme

Housing

Low Density Residential

2,763

536

2,587

Medium Density
Residential

283

48

110

High Density Residential

59

3

222

Assisted Living

8

0

0

Commercial Parcels

138

9

162

Industrial Parcels

68

23

92

Mixed Use Parcels

93

11

46

Retail Parcels

110

9

13

Bank/ATM

16

1

0

Industrial Facility

13

2

2

Lodging

1

0

1

Marina/Boat/Pier

2

7

16

Office

2

0

1

Post Office

1

0

0

Restaurant/Food/Caterer

21

10

21

Retail

63

17

18

Economic

Table 04: Summary of community assets located in risk areas
Asset Class

Moderate

High

Extreme

Total

Health and Social

111

17

8

136

Natural and Cultural (wetland acres)

30 (8)

7 (23)

6 (0)

43 (35)

Infrastructure (road miles)

21 (47)

5 (11)

4 (26)

29 (84)

Housing

3,113

587

2,919

6,619

Economic

528

89

372

989

50

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Asset Inventory
As the Community has more than 6,000 at-risk
assets, it was considered impractical to run a quantitative risk assessment for each one. For this reason,
the inventory used for risk assessment was refined to
consider key assets, identified using the critical asset
criteria established by FEMA, or those which were
highlighted through Committee feedback and Public
Engagement Events.
Assets defined by the Committee include schools,
pharmacies and medical centers, and cell towers.
Critical assets defined by FEMA guidelines include
buildings, infrastructure and facilities deemed essential to the health and welfare of the Community’s
population, and those assets whose protection is
important during and following hazard events.54 Key
asset locations are identified in Figure 06. The complete key asset inventory is located in Section V.
For each key asset, a community value was assigned
based on Committee Member input and feedback
from Public Engagement Events. A designation of
high, medium, or low community value was ascribed
based on a number of qualitative measures, applied
individually or collectively based on certain assets
and asset classes (it should be noted that similar
assets in different communities may vary as a result).
Qualitative measures for establishing community
value include economic benefits (e.g., a key business
or employer), services provided (e.g., a grocery store,
medical office, or pharmacy), or a function provided
during emergencies (e.g., a library used for food distribution). Generally, community value is identified as:
• High: Assets that provide multiple important services or functions, which could not be easily and
quickly replicated in whole or in part, or assets
whose loss would impact both long and short
term Community function.
• Medium: Assets whose function could be
duplicated or replaced by similar assets in adjacent areas, or whose loss could be temporarily
tolerated.
• Low: Assets that play an important role in the
Community, but whose loss could be tolerated in
the short to mid-term.

ii. Assessment of Risk to
Assets and Systems
Risk is the potential for an asset or system to be
damaged or destroyed in a future event. The Risk
Assessment process utilized a quantitative risk tool,
provided by NYS DOS, to assess the risk (primarily
flood risk) to each of the key assets identified for the
Community. This tool evaluates risk by considering
a combination of three factors: hazards, exposure,
and vulnerability. These factors are used to calculate
a risk score, based on the formula:
Risk = Hazards x Exposures x Vulnerability
• Hazards: Hazard is a measure of the likelihood
and magnitude of future storm events. Hazards
are based on the aggregated risk maps used
for the asset inventory and identification, which
identify and rate geographic areas susceptible to
future inundation or erosion. Risk areas are categorized as Extreme, High, or Moderate based on
the frequency and magnitude of coastal threats.
• Exposure: Local topographic and shoreline
conditions can increase or decrease the effect
of hazards on assets. Exposure is the measure
of this influence on potential storm impacts. The
tool assesses landscape attributes, such as erosion rate, beach width, and the presence and
condition of natural or engineered protective features, which will be considered when determining asset exposure.
• Vulnerability: Vulnerability is the level of impairment or consequences that assets may experience during and after a storm event. It is the
measure of an asset’s ability to resist damage. In
context of vulnerable populations, it reflects the
difficulty of evacuation or relocation relative to
population size. Vulnerability will be determined
by studying previous storm impacts and using
local knowledge to develop an estimate of future
effects.
The hazard and vulnerability scores for each asset
were assessed based on guidance from the New
York Department of State, combined with information
from the risk assessment tool, and augmented with
input from the NYRCR Freeport Planning Committee.

Assessment of Risk and Needs 51

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The risk assessment tool was also modified slightly
to reflect the facts that the Community does not have
significant beach-type coastal defenses and the
tool’s designated landscape attributes could not be
applied to individual assets. More information on the
New York State Risk Assessment Tool is contained
in the Guidance for New York Rising Community
Reconstruction Plans: A Planning Toolkit for CR
Planning Committees (2013).
Risk scores help to identify Community assets with
increased potential for storm damage and were
used to develop and identify projects for the NYRCR
Freeport Plan. It should be noted that Risk Scores
include some subjective analysis and rely on previous
experience to determine future risk. The Risk Score
calculated for each key asset represents risk relative
to other assets in the Community, and can range
from 1.5 (negligible) to 75 (severe). Table 05 presents
the condensed findings of the risk assessment, categorized by asset class. The location of at-risk assets
and their respective risk scores is in Figure 07.
Through the Community Public Engagement Events,
more than 60 key assets were identified, 29 of which
were categorized as being at greater than high risk.
Table 03 presents these assets, categorized by asset
class. Where assets are not at significant flood risk,
but are critical to the Community during emergency
events (e.g., fire departments, Power Plant I, certain
schools, the Freeport Library, and the Recreation
Center), additional resilience measures should be
considered, such as backup power generation.

Findings
While initially developed on the water as a hub for
fishing and maritime activities, today Freeport is
home to more than 43,000 people who enjoy that
same waterfront setting for commercial or recreational boating and other activities, such as dining,
walking in the park, or observing nature, all of which
make the Village a highly desirable place to live and
work. As a result, the Village is densely populated.
The dense development patterns, high number of
assets in flood zones, and age of the building stock
in the Village create risks for the range of Community
assets of concern in this NYRCR Plan.

52

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Flooding is a significant risk for much of the southern part of Freeport, especially south of Merrick
Road. This is a situation that is exacerbated by
the tributaries, canals, and variable elevations
that characterize the area and put development
at risk for flooding. Nearly 75% of the Village is
in a moderate, high, or extreme risk flood zone.
The Community has 4,000 assets in the high and
extreme risk areas, most of which are housing
structures, but also include assets such as the
Industrial Park, Power Plant II, the Department
of Public Works (DPW) headquarters and central
garage, three sewer lift stations, the the Nautical
Mile, Operation SPLASH, Sea Breeze Park, and
Guy Lombardo Marina. Freeport is fortunate that
the Downtown and area around the LIRR, where
the Village hopes to grow, is in a moderate risk
area. While the Industrial Park and Nautical Mile are
both in high or extreme flood risk areas, their locations are fixed. The Nautical Mile location adjacent
to the water is good for maritime related activities, local restaurants and bars, and essential for
the mission of Operation SPLASH. In these areas,
retrofit and redesign of buildings will help mitigate
flooding, avoid property loss, and facilitate a faster
return to operations. Design measures, guidelines,
and application of flood-proofing techniques will
help buildings in the area to become more resilient.
The Village’s DPW facility is at a much lower elevation in comparison to Power Plant II, which sits
adjacent to DPW. For this reason, while Power
Plant II had minimal damage, DPW was significantly affected and out of operation for two
months. Additionally, the roads towards DPW,
through the Industrial Park, are in high or extreme
flood risk areas, which further complicates matters.
Even if the DPW could be protected from flooding,
its accessibility would be compromised if the roads
were impassable.
Freeport Electric and Community members both
expressed concern about the cables crossing
the Freeport Channel from Power Plant II and the
subsequent vulnerability they face during flooding
events. The risk comes from untethered debris
or boats that move with floodwaters. The debris

Figure 06: Community Assets
Water Treatment
Plant
B

AB

YL

O

N

TP

K

E

Cell Tower
Caroline G
Atkinson School
N AVE
W SEAMA

ND

The Armory
Water Treatment
Plant

E
AV

IN
N MA

A

GR

ST

Freeport Public
Housing (100 Units)

Department of Labor
Unemployment Office
Freeport Mayor's
Office
Freeport
Water Treatment
Plaza West
Plant
Substation B

Freeport LIRR
Liberty Park
Apartments
Cablevision

Dodd Jr
High
School

D
ICK R

MERR

Freeport Health
Care Center

BROOKSID

Archer St
School

Moxie Rigby
Apartments

Freeport
Recreation
Center

L

RD

US Petroleum

Substation

Rev. Madden
Senior Housing

Hi Hello
Childcare
Center

Meadowbrook
Commons

Stop and
Shop

Compare
Foods
Verizon
Hub
Roslyn
Savings
Bank

Freeport Library
Bank of America

Bayview
Avenue
School Freeport
Kidney
Center

E HW

IL

Freeport
High School

Power
Plant I

US Petroleum
Y

SUNRIS

M

Substation 4F

Fire Department
Headquarters

Freeport
Transfer
Facilities

Department
of Waterways

Fire Department
Hose 1

Industrial
Park

Freeport Historical
Museum

E AVE

Cell Tower

IC AVE

T
ATLAN

DPW

Pump
Fire Department
Station
Training Facility

Fire Department
Hose 3
N
S OCEA

IEW

S MAIN ST

AVE

YV
S BA

John J
Randall
Park

Power Plant II

AVE

Pump
Station

Nautical
Mile

E
ON AV

Sea
Breeze
Park

HUDS

AVE

VE
LEFT A

WOODC

Sewer
Lift
Station

ARDO

OMB
GUY L

Operation
SPLASH

Cow
Meadow
Park

Pump
Station

Guy
Lombardo
Marina

0

Legend

New York Department
of State Risk Areas

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Parks /Precincts

Extreme

Long Island Rail Road

Retail /Commercial Corridor

High

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

Downtown Core

Moderate

Created March 2014

Identified Asset

0.5

1
Mile

Figure 07: Risk Assessment Map
Water Treatment
Plant
B

AB

YL
O

N

TP

K

E

Cell Tower
Caroline G
Atkinson School
N AVE
W SEAMA

IN ST
N MA

Freeport Public
Housing (100 Units)
Fire Department
Headquarters

Dodd Jr
High
School

Freeport Health
Care Center

Freeport
Recreation
Center

L

RD

US Petroleum

Substation

Rev. Madden
Senior Housing

BROOKSID

Hi Hello
Childcare
Center

Moxie Rigby
Apartments

IL

D
ICK R

Meadowbrook
Commons

Stop and
Shop

Compare
Foods
Verizon
Hub
Roslyn
Savings
Bank

MERR

Archer St
School

E HW

Freeport LIRR
Liberty Park
Apartments
Cablevision

Freeport Library
Bank of America

Bayview
Avenue
School Freeport
Kidney
Center

US Petroleum
Y

SUNRIS

M

Freeport
High School

Power
Plant I

E
AV

A

GR

Department of Labor
Unemployment Office
Freeport Mayor's
Office
Freeport
Water Treatment
Plaza West
Plant
Substation B
Substation 4F

ND

The Armory
Water Treatment
Plant

Freeport
Transfer
Facilities

Department
of Waterways

Fire Department
Hose 1

Industrial
Park

Freeport Historical
Museum

E AVE

Cell Tower

IC AVE

T
ATLAN

DPW

Pump
Fire Department
Station
Training Facility

Fire Department
Hose 3
N
S OCEA

IEW

S MAIN ST

AVE

YV
S BA

John J
Randall
Park

Power Plant II

AVE

Pump
Station

Nautical
Mile

N AVE

ARDO
AVE

VE
LEFT A

WOODC

Sewer
Lift
Station

O
HUDS

OMB
GUY L

Operation
SPLASH

Cow
Meadow
Park

Pump
Station

Sea
Breeze
Park

Guy
Lombardo
Marina

0

Legend

New York Department
of State Risk Areas

Asset Risk Scores

Data Sources

NYRCR Boundary

Extreme

Long Island Rail Road

High

Medium Risk Score (6-23)

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS

LIRR Station

Moderate

Residual Risk Score (<6)

Created March 2014

Downtown Core

Severe Risk Score (>53)
High Risk Score (24-53)

Asset Not Assessed

0.5

1
Mile

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

has the potential of impacting and downing support structures for the cables that provide power to
one-quarter of Community residents.
Cultural and natural resources are spread throughout the flood zone with Operation SPLASH, the
Freeport Historical Society, and the Recreation
Center in moderate to extreme flood zones.
Some of Freeport’s prized parks and open spaces
sit along the shore. Sea Breeze Park and Cow
Meadow Park are both in extreme flood risk while
John Randall Park, situated further away from the
shoreline, sits within an extreme risk zone due to its
elevation and adjacency to water.
Living on the shoreline is a part of the heritage and
culture of Freeport. Community members understand the risks they face, but also share the hope
that with the introduction of strategic infrastructure
measures, along with studies of conditions to find
other solutions and the introduction of additional
resiliency measures, the lifestyle and heritage of
Freeport can be maintained and improved.

Assessment of Risk and Needs 55

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 05: Key asset risk assessment
Asset Name

Risk Zone

Asset Class

Critical Facility

Community Value

Industrial park Inner Loop

High

Economic

No

Medium

Industrial park Outer Loop

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

Nautical Mile

Extreme

Economic

No

High

Schooner

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

Stop and Shop

Extreme

Economic

No

Low

Freeport Kidney Center

Moderate

Health and Social

Yes

High

Cablevision

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

Medium

Cell Tower - Ray St & S Main St

High

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Cell Tower - W Seaman & N Main St

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Dept of Waterways

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

DPW

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire Department 1

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire Department 3

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Fire Department Headquarters

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Freeport Fire Department Training Facility

High

Infrastructure

Yes

Medium

Freeport LIRR

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Freeport Transfer Facility

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Guy Lombardo Ave

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Guy Lombardo Marina

Extreme

Infrastructure

No

Medium

Operation SPLASH

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Power Plant I

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Power Plant II

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Pump Station - Howard & Guy Lombardo

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Pump Station - Ray & Sportsman Ave

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Pump Station Meister & Stirling

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Sewer Lift Station (Suffolk & Miller)

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

56

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 05 (cont’d) : Key asset risk assessment
Asset Name

Risk Zone

Asset Class

Critical Facility

Community Value

Substation - Mill Rd & South Main St

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

Transmission Cable

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

WTP

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

Medium

WTP (Prince Ave)

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

Medium

WTP (Sunrise)

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

Medium

Cow Meadow park

Extreme

Natural and Cultural

No

Medium

John J Randall Park

Extreme

Natural and Cultural

No

Low

Sea Breeze Park

Extreme

Natural and Cultural

No

Medium

Assessment of Risk and Needs 57

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
Freeport once is a thriving seaport and vibrant cultural
community, which in recent years has struggled in
recent years with declining industries and associated
job losses, high vacancy rates in retail and commercial uses, an aging infrastructure, and the challenges
presented by frequent storm damage. Hurricane Irene
and Superstorm Sandy have also brought to light
the increasing obligation to prepare for, respond to,
and learn from natural disasters. For many years, the
Village has sought ways to strengthen its Downtown
and Industrial Park, while preserving the treasured
and often-visited Nautical Mile. In the late 1990s and
early 2000s, Freeport participated in FEMA’s national
pilot program “Project Impact,” elevating a number
of homes and roads in flood-prone areas. This work
mitigated, but did not eliminate, flood damage from
the two major storms. The opportunity presented by
this NYRCR Plan has refocused these efforts and
given them new momentum.
Needs and opportunities were identified through a
combination of research, analysis, site visits, workshops with peer communities elsewhere, NYRCR
Planning Committee (Committee) feedback, and
Community member feedback from Committee
Meetings and Public Engagement Events. The plan
of action embodied in this NYRCR Plan (i.e., strategies and projects) is designed to address needs and
leverage opportunities.
These needs and opportunities are presented using
FEMA’s National Disaster Recovery Framework’s
Recovery Support Functions (Community Planning
and Capacity Building, Economic Development,
Health and Social Services Housing, Infrastructure,
and Natural and Cultural Resources).

58

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Recovery Support Functions
Needs and opportunities were categorized
in accordance with the six Recovery Support
Functions (RSFs) established by President
Barack Obama through the National Disaster
Recovery Framework (NDRF). The NDRF focuses
on how best to restore, redevelop, and revitalize
the health, social, economic, natural and environmental fabric of the community. The six RSFs are:
Community Planning and Capacity Building:
Addresses the Community’s ability to implement
recovery actions while planning for future storm
events, including public education and preparedness and building code and land use regulations
that may influence future rebuilding and recovery.
Economic Development: Addresses the needs
of local businesses and institutions to recover or
relocate following a storm event, and identifies
investment opportunities that can provide both
economic growth and greater resilience in the
community.
Health and Social Services: Addresses strategies and management measures needed to
ensure that health care facilities and essential
social services are accessible to all residents.
Housing: Identifies needs and opportunities
relative to housing in the Community, prioritizing
damaged and at-risk areas.
Infrastructure: Addresses the current needs
pertaining to the Community’s essential systems
and services, from energy supply and distribution
to transportation routes. Infrastructure opportunities focus on strategies to rebuild in a way that
decreases vulnerability to future impacts.
Natural and Cultural Resources: Addresses
damage to natural and cultural resources, and
the actions that should be taken to preserve,
rehabilitate or restore these assets or services to
their initial state. Natural systems also can provide offer significant environmental and commercial benefits such as stormwater management
and recreational opportunities.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Community Planning and
Capacity Building
Community planning and capacity building concerns
Freeport’s ability to implement recovery actions,
while planning for future storm events. It addresses
the need for public education and preparedness, legislative and regulatory reform, and building code and
land use regulations that reflect current vulnerabilities
and recent storm experience.
Community Planning and
Capacity Building Needs
Emergency communication and response issues
were frequently brought up in Freeport Public
Engagement Events. Although the local and county
governments rely primarily on media outlets to disseminate evacuation zone information and shelter
locations, Nassau County, the Town of Hempstead,
and the Village of Freeport have established independent emergency notification systems to deliver
information by email, phone, and text message to
individuals in affected areas. These notification systems are based on publicly listed telephone numbers
and require residents to register for text message or
email updates.
In addition to these systems, the Village of Freeport
disseminates information through ‘Code Red’ alerts,
annual mailings, and educational sessions. Even with
this program, many residents reported they were not
aware of emergency evacuation routes and shelter
locations within the Community, nor did they know
how to secure their properties against damage prior
to evacuation. Home and business owners did not,
and still may not, understand the degree to which
they are at risk from a disaster like Superstorm Sandy
or Hurricane Irene, and may not take the appropriate
measures to protect themselves and their property
in future storm events. This is evidenced not only by
stories shared at Public Engagement Events and at
Committee Meetings, but also by how the rebuilding
process was undertaken and what measures were
or were not followed to ensure a home or business
would be less flood prone in the future.

Community Needs
Community Planning and Capacity Building
• Better education and awareness of
emergency preparation and protocol;
• Better understanding of the dangers
and severity of sea level rise, coastal
surges, and hurricanes;
• Updated building code and planning system
that supports resilient design and promotes/
enables housing in low risk areas;
• More Community locations to obtain
warmth, information, communication,
and resources following disasters;
• Updated Emergency Management Plan;
• Improved communication and
enforcement of Mandatory Evacuation;
• Regulation to require security or
replacement of heating oil tanks;
• Improved way finding and directional
signage for post-disaster local travel; and,
• More frequent and improved
communication between disaster
recovery and response providers (Village,
Town, County, and nonprofits).

routes, with many residents leaving their homes
struggling to navigate darkened and flooded streets.
Warming, charging, communicating, and showering
centers in Freeport included the Freeport Memorial
Library and Freeport Recreation Center.55 The
Freeport Recreation Center operated as a FEMAdesignated Disaster Recovery Center (DRC) after
Superstorm Sandy.
Regular public education and a more robust and
unified emergency information system are needed
to minimize losses from future storms. This includes
dissemination of information and guidance for poststorm recovery resources and comfort.

At the time of Superstorm Sandy, residents who
did not adhere to the mandatory evacuation order
experienced local access issues to major evacuation

Assessment of Risk and Needs 59

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Community Planning and Capacity
Building Opportunities

Community Opportunities

The Village of Freeport responded quickly and in a
coordinated manner, which was facilitated by the local
control over its Office of Emergency Management
(OEM) and OEM’s integration with other municipal
agencies. It was acknowledged by OEM Director
that the Village was not fully prepared for Superstorm
Sandy, however, no Community was.56 Following
the Superstorm Sandy, OEM continued its strong
disaster planning by drafting Superstorm Sandy
After Action (2013), a list of recommendations for the
Village to undertake in order to be better prepared for
future storms.

Community Planning and Capacity Building

Community members are often the best resource
for local emergency response and coordination, but
are rarely used. For instance, Community members
may be critical in accounting for missing neighbors
or helping to navigate flooded homes. A program to
facilitate communication between these residents
and emergency responders could supplement existing outreach and coordination measures, facilitating
faster recovery.

• Expand capacity, building opportunity
with local environmental and community
benefit organizations by expanding their
function to include coastal resilience
education and awareness and create a
regional comprehensive public education
program to teach residents and business
owners about resilience, recovery,
and emergency preparedness.

A more comprehensive public education program
could help Community members identify the risks
they face during a storm event as well as the benefits of appropriate mitigation measures. Education
and outreach programs could include safety measures for property owners before, during, and after
major storm events, as well as the circulation of
maps containing risk zones and information on
potential evacuation, resource, and recovery zones.
These programs could also build neighborhood level
capacity, enabling residents to help one another during storms, and providing a point of contact between
communities and government officials.
Maintaining a more effective planning system yearround can also help mitigate the impact of disasters.
It was noted that home heating oil tanks caused large
spills and subsequent hazardous material cleanups,
which redirected valuable recovery and cleanup
resources.57
Freeport has a number of Community assets, such
as Freeport Memorial Library, Freeport Recreation
Center, and several public schools, which could be
adapted for emergency use. This entails designating

60

Assessment of Risk and Needs

• Leverage existing local communication and
social connectivity to improve the sharing
of resources and information between
local residents, public services, and private
entities during emergency events;
• Strengthen public education to teach residents
and business owners about resilience,
recovery, and emergency preparedness;
• Retrofit of Community assets for
Community assistance, resource,
and comfort provision; and,

these facilities as Community information and relief
facilities and outfitting buildings with permanent generators, digital information signage, and a stock of
emergency supplies. These facilities could also be
used as a site for public outreach and education
and a central location for resiliency-related information and services. The intention of these buildings
would be to provide comfort and assistance during
the immediate and extended recovery process. They
are not intended to act as emergency evacuation or
shelter locations.
Freeport has an existing asset that can be built
upon to expand coastal resilience education and
understanding. Operation SPLASH (Stop Polluting
Littering and Save Harbors), a nonprofit guardian of
the south shore bays, harbors, and estuaries, could
expand its programs to offer classes and exhibits on
the hazards of coastal living and emphasize resilient
approaches designed to minimize risks and enhance
the Community’s ability to recover. The Operation

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

SPLASH facility could become a Long Island-wide
center for capacity building and education, centered
on coastal resilience.

Community Needs

Economic Development

• Redevelopment of the Industrial
Park and downtown;

Economic Development

A disaster can severely disrupt economic and business activities and hinder the development of new
economic opportunities. This section reviews the
economic damage caused by Superstorm Sandy
and the associated needs and opportunities tied to
future economic prosperity and resiliency.

• Increased development in commercial
areas to increase the tax base;

Economic Development Needs

• Coordinated planning and development
to manage vacancy and blight; and,

The economy of Freeport was fragile before
Superstorm Sandy and the after effects of the storm
caused further damage in some areas, while opening
opportunity in others.
There is a widely held view on the Committee and
expressed at Public Engagement Events that the
Industrial Park is ready for reinvention and the downtown needs growth and development.
Small businesses have worked quickly to restore
operations and recover revenue flows along the
Nautical Mile, in the marinas, and in the Industrial
Park. Some businesses owners, after being damaged during Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy,
decided reopening was not an option. On site visits
and in discussions with local business owners, it was
clear that in the rush to rebuild consideration for resiliency measures was lacking. Rebuilding and redevelopment plans with a focus on mitigation activities
are necessary to protect Freeport’s commercial and
industrial sectors from future storm damage. These
plans would address incentives for flood protection
measures in new and existing properties, as well as
development policies that promote growth outside of
risk areas.
Retail, industrial, mixed-use, vacant commercial, and
vacant industrial uses constitute 1,072 of Freeport’s
non-residential parcels. While these properties represent 10.1% of all parcels within the Community, they
provide 30.2% of assessed land value and 26.3% of
total assessed value.

• Higher paying jobs and better
workforce training for residents;
• Job readiness training for local workforce
to ensure they are prepared to meet
the demands of local businesses;

• Protection of economic zones and/or
a transition of economic development
to less vulnerable areas.

The majority of the local workforce commutes in to
Freeport from elsewhere in the metropolitan area.
Only one in every five Freeport jobs is held by a
local resident (17.8%), with the single largest share
of workers (18.1%) coming from New York City. At
its recent peak in 2007, Freeport employed 14,475
workers, however employment has since steadily
declined to 12,597 workers, a difference of 13.5%.
Local jobs pay moderate wages and are dominated
by retail, health care and social services, and educational services, followed by manufacturing, construction, and wholesale trade. More than half the workforce (53.1%) is employed in the lower-paying service
sector. The trend of declining employment in higher
paying fields needs to be addresses.
Economic Development Opportunities
The Industrial Park is a unique feature of the local
economy and stakeholders within the Industrial Park
and the Village expressed an interest in reconceiving
the area. Members of the Committee met with leaders from the Brooklyn Navy Yard and learned about
strategies to redevelop areas along waterfronts in
industrial decline. Strategies like small or light industrial spaces, targeted outreach to potential companies, skills development in the local workforce, and

Assessment of Risk and Needs 61

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

partnership with surrounding communities were ideas
that resonated with the Committee. The Industrial
Park was also highlighted at the NYRCR Governor’s
Convention in Albany.
The Nautical Mile also represents an additional opportunity for potential new architectural features and a
resiliency center at Operation SPLASH. Outreach
and education about resilient design and service programs to support the health of natural areas could
generate more interest and foot traffic year-round as
people come and go from Operation SPLASH and
the resiliency center.
Downtown Freeport has benefitted from previous
planning activities in recent years, primarily the North
Main Street Corridor development project, “Building
a Better Freeport.” This plan included the incorporation of design guidelines and landscaping with
transit-oriented residential and mixed-use development. The first downtown redevelopment project
after the release of this plan is currently out for bid.
The Freeport Plaza West parcel, the high-profile location of the former Freeport Bank and once the tallest
building on Long Island, is attracting significant interest for mixed-use housing, hotel, office, and retail
development.
In addition to Freeport’s downtown core, commercial
corridors extend west to east along Merrick Road
and Sunrise Highway and north from the Freeport
Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) station along North Main
Street to the Roosevelt border. In these areas there
is potential for redevelopment that could include a
mix of uses, such as housing with ground floor retail,
which could provide an opportunity for diversification
of the tax base and housing options through compact development and without intruding into existing
low-density residential areas.
The Brooklyn Navy Yard was cited as an example to
be replicated in Freeport with a link to recovery and
resiliency efforts. Linking existing or new manufacturing activities to regional education and economic
development agendas will unlock new opportunity
in the Village. Committee and Community members
also hope a revitalized Nautical Mile and new development around the LIRR station will attract younger

62

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Community Opportunities
Economic Development
• Leverage existing redevelopment around
the Freeport LIRR station to expand and
diversify the commercial tax base;
• Catalyze development on underutilized
parcels in downtown Freeport;
• Redevelop of the Nautical Mile to increase
resilience and promote walkability;
• Integrate resilient designs into
businesses in vulnerable areas;
• Revitalize the Freeport Industrial Park to meet
contemporary business needs, combined
with resilience measures designed to protect
the site and adjacent critical assets;
• Workforce development initiatives guided
by Connect Long Island’s Strategic
Regional Implementation Plan;58 and,
• Create an economic development authority
to coordinate business needs with
commercial assets within the Community.

residents who wish to live and work in vibrant, walkable, transit oriented districts, as well as the businesses that cater to them.
A comprehensive economic development strategy
that links growth and development in job generating
activity with workforce training would help strengthen
the local economy, while also providing job opportunity for the young residents of the village. If the
Brooklyn Navy Yard, the City of Hoboken, and the
Glen Cove and Farmingdale redevelopment plans are
benchmarks, a focus on job growth that links it to
housing and development patterns to create walkable neighborhoods has the potential for greatest
benefit.
Economic development work should be coordinated
by a local authority capable of actively recruiting new
businesses to Freeport’s downtown core, Industrial
Park, and maritime assets, such as the Nautical Mile.
Any authority would have to be approved through
existing channels and would be subject to review.
Once approved, however, it could act as an economic development coordinator, working with local

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

business associations, the Village of Freeport, and
the Town of Hempstead to streamline the permitting process and ensure that commercial properties
of appropriate size are available to meet potential
demand. The development authority could potentially
acquire or hold land in the Industrial Park and work
with private landlords to subdivide larger buildings
into smaller spaces, which are currently in demand,
and to acquire tenants. Additionally, the organization
could work with Village engineers and external consultants to develop resilient design guidelines that
would decrease vulnerability to future storm events in
the Industrial Park and along the Nautical Mile.
Grant funding could be directed to local workforce
investment boards to continue support for skills training for under-employed and unemployed residents.
There is also an opportunity to integrate workforce
readiness programs with local schools and job training facilities and to work with local businesses, such
as those located in the Industrial Park, to facilitate job
placement. Workforce development initiatives should
be expanded to continue support for skills training
for under- and unemployed residents and socially
vulnerable populations throughout Freeport.

Health and Social Services
This section discusses the immediate and longterm needs of socially vulnerable populations and
individuals affected by previous disasters as well as
opportunities to promote health and well-being for
all members of the Community. Socially vulnerable
populations include residents who are especially susceptible to impacts of disasters or sudden changes
in their community. These vulnerabilities can include
speaking English less than fluently, age, economic
disadvantage, physical and mental disability, and/or
lack of access to a car.
Health and Social Services Needs
There are important gaps in disaster response and
recovery, especially as they relate to independently
living elderly populations, low-income residents,
non-English speaking residents, caregivers, developmentally disabled populations and their families, and
young people.59 60 In the aftermath of Superstorm
Sandy, senior and elderly populations, especially

Community Needs
Health and Social Services
• Improved access to health care and
social support services, including homecare and/or food access services for
independently living senior residents;
• Improved access to existing services
and information by addressing the
barriers to access, including language
for some low-income populations;
• Expanded awareness about available health
and social service resources and outreach
programs, especially among underserved
and storm-affected residents; and,
• Expanded investigation of post-storm health
issues, including occupational hazards among
construction and maintenance workers,
as well as home-environment scans.

those living independently, have persistently unmet
needs for accessing health and social services,
homecare, food, and social support.61 62 Local organizations also reported that there are several barriers
to accessing existing services, including loss of cars
for some Superstorm Sandy-affected adults, as well
as limited funding for in-home services.
Freeport has two divergent trends that create health
and social service needs in the Community:the population of residents over age 65 is growing, as are
younger households from minority populations. The
average household size in Freeport is 3.2 people with
up to 5.1 persons per household in the northeastern
section of Freeport. Freeport’s median household
income is also approximately $16,000 below the
Nassau County average, as described in Building a
Better Freeport (2010).63
Storm-affected low-income residents already face
unmet needs for health and social services. Freeport
has a relatively high level of poverty (12.7%), and has
a significant number of residents that are uninsured
(16.8%). These residents may find evacuation and
recovery from disasters more economically challenging. Additionally, language and cultural barriers, as
well as citizenship or legal status, can prevent affected

Assessment of Risk and Needs 63

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Community Opportunities
Health and Social Services
• Promote community centers and places
of worship for Community outreach and
education campaigns, and as local disaster
centers in emergency situations;
• Activate existing underutilized spaces for
Community gathering and recreation to
promote social connectedness; and,
• Increase programs to provide support and
assistance to elderly residents, who live
independently but need services to prevent
deterioration and promote well being.

important to expand Community awareness and
encourage Community members to obtain services,
especially if the need may not be readily apparent.
One such example of this is construction and maintenance workers with potentially higher likelihood of
exposure to toxic substances related to Superstorm
Sandy aftermath. The service organizations that were
interviewed also indicated that there might be a need
to screen individuals with Superstorm Sandy-related
toxin exposure. This could include the need to screen
for safe living environments, especially mold growth,
given increased reports of cases of unsafe living
environments, particularly among socially vulnerable
populations.64
Health and Social Services Opportunities

Community members from seeking support services.
Finally, given development in the Community has historical been tailored towards car-dependent populations, transportation can be a barrier to accessing
necessary services for low-income residents without
access to a car.
Improved public outreach and education is necessary to ensure that the health and social service
needs of Freeport are met. Many storm-affected
residents are not aware of the resources available
to them, despite the efforts of healthcare organizations to ensure effective outreach across all population groups. Sources of accurate information can
be difficult to identify and may be not be updated
regularly. Additionally, communication difficulties can
potentially affect the quality of care residents receive,
and a growing segment of residents do not speak
fluent English, (45.8% of Freeport households do
not speak English at home). Although public health
information is distributed in multiple languages, the
current lack of participation signifies that this information is not reaching its intended audience. In order
to strengthen outreach, there is a need to develop
stronger links with underserved communities through
their existing social networks, including, but not limited, to spiritual communities. Many entities created
service programs or expanded the reach and scope
of their exsiting services, after Superstorm Sandy, yet
some Community members still did not know what
services were available or how to access them.It is

64

Assessment of Risk and Needs

A key factor for building the resilience of health and
social services is adaptive capacity. Adaptive capacity has been defined as “the ability of a population
to adapt to an exposure/hazard, take advantage of
opportunities that enhance resilience or decrease the
impacts of exposure, and cope with the aftermath of
exposure.”65
Promoting health and social resilience moves beyond
preventing illness and adverse health outcomes to
focus on promoting health, community development,
and equity for all residents. Freeport should make
use of its existing public spaces, such as community
centers, libraries, parishes, and schools, to foster
activities that promote social interaction and education. These facilities can be used for Community
outreach and education campaigns, and appropriate sites can be repurposed for use as information
and resource centers. Outreach events should be
provided in multiple languages, and hosted at community centers and places of worship to increase
attendance and participation.
The organizations that were interviewed suggested
that there is opportunity to strengthen social connectedness, as well as physical activity in senior
populations through expanded senior-center programming. Social support programs to provide live
and/or telephone contacts and safety checks to
residents who live alone will be necessary to maintain the emotional and physical well-being of older
Community members.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Housing
This section considers the impact of recent storm
damage to housing stock and the trends or events
that may affect housing stock in the upcoming years.
The type and location of housing needs considers
current and expected demand, as well as the availability and range of housing units available to the
community relative to demographic factors, such as
age and income level. The effects of previous storm
events are also significant to the planning and identification of future housing opportunities.
Housing Needs
As FEMA aid is directed primarily to owner-occupied
properties, its estimates under represent housing damage because rental-housing stock is not
reflected. Freeport contains both private and public
multifamily housing, with a total of 4,590 rental units
comprising 33.2% of the community’s total housing stock. Of Freeport’s renting population, 58% are
low-income households.66 Nearly 556 rental units are
located in high and extreme risk zones, where inundation during Superstorm Sandy was highest. The 669
rental units that received FEMA aid for Superstorm
Sandy recovery represented only 20% of Freeport’s
FEMA assisted housing stock.67 It is not known how
many affected households relocated temporarily to
rental stock in Freeport, or left the community to stay
elsewhere during reconstruction.
The Freeport Housing Authority is responsible for 351
low-income and senior apartments in five locations
throughout the Village. Three of these sites sustained
significant flood damage from Superstorm Sandy.
More than $207,000 was spent by the Authority to
address the immediate repair needs of the Moxie
Rigby Apartments, South Main, and 100 North Main
Street facilities. Many of the systems replaced had
also been damaged in previous disasters and the
Housing Authority is currently seeking mitigation
assistance to elevate and relocate major systems to
avoid the potential costs of repair from future events.
In the year since Superstorm Sandy, the Freeport
housing market has seen a sharp decline in asking
prices, a rise in vacancies, an increase in housing foreclosures, and the demolition of 18 units due to storm
damage. Although some houses have been repaired

Community Needs
Housing
• Mitigate existing housing in flood risk
areas with an emphasis on multifamily
and affordable developments;
• Plan for housing development in
downtown and other areas of the
Village away from flood zones;
• Link housing development with
economic development activities;
• Existing and future residents need to
fully understand the financial risks and
limitations of private insurance and public
assistance associated with coastal living;
• More rental units and better housing options
for low- and moderate-income residents, as
well as young adult and elderly populations
are needed outside of flood risk areas; and,
• A diversified local economy is needed to
reduce financial strains on property owners,
especially those making housing repairs.

and others raised, many remain damaged and
uninhabitable. These units pose a risk to the health
and safety of residents and can negatively impact
neighborhood property values. The Community’s tax
base has lost value and residents have lost equity
in housing assets that, coupled with repair costs,
have severely constrained their budgets. It is clear
that with another storm event of Superstorm Sandy’s
magnitude, many homeowners would not have the
resources to recover again.
Freeport’s population is expected to grow slightly
over the next five years, increasing by less than 1%.68
An additional 125 households are anticipated, with
the strongest growth among residents aged 55 and
over. Gains are also expected in young adults aged
25 to 34 years. Despite its relatively large low-income
population, Freeport’s per capita income is expected
to increase in current dollars from $27,756 in 2013
to $32,668 by 201869.Freeport’s household and per
capital income levels are notably lower than the surrounding hamlets in the Town of Hempstead.These
trends reflect a continued need for mixed-income

Assessment of Risk and Needs 65

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

housing and a need to provide housing choices for
people of varying income levels and household types.
This would be consistent with historical trends in
development patterns and suggests that Committee
and Community Members stated interest in the redevelopment of downtown aligns with the needs and
market trends in the local Community.
Housing Opportunities
Freeport has opportunities to link housing development with economic development objectives in order
to obtain multiple returns on investments in public infrastructure in certain areas of the Community
where housing development can be joined with new
retail and commercial spaces supported by more
robust infrastructure systems. By offering housing
opportunity in low risk areas that also respond to the
diverse housing needs of the Community, people will
have options to choose to leave areas that too are
risky and live in areas where housing can safely be
developed. This would allow residents to relocate
away from risk, yet remain in the Community, without compromising their existing social networks and
family relationships. Planning should primarily identify
places within Freeport, like the downtown area, that
can absorb new residential development. Further,
by identifying areas for future resettlement, it is possible to develop a process for ecosystem restoration
through acquisition, which can improve disaster resilience for lower-risk areas, improve ecological habitats, and enhance overall resilience and enjoyment of
coastal living for Freeport residents.
As Freeport’s population of seniors over 65 continues to increase and seniors chose to live in easier
to maintain apartment options or facilities that offer
senior support services, single-family homes will
decrease. Prior to Superstorm Sandy, almost 900
households in extreme and high risk zones were
headed by older Community members. The impact
of Superstorm Sandy on these areas and the subsequent cost of recovery and repair not only weakened
financial resources, the physical challenge of remaining and pursuing reconstruction also posed a potential health risk to aging residents. Increasingly, elderly
households are moving to “continuing care” environments that combine healthcare-intensive amenities
with community facilities in a clustered development.

66

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Community Opportunities
Housing
• Existing redevelopment around the
Freeport LIRR station could be leveraged
to provide multifamily housing for lowincome residents, displaced coastal
residents, aging populations, and
the young commuter workforce;
• Additional funding options for repair and
reconstruction costs for housing not
covered by public disaster funding or
private insurance could be explored;
• Better education on coastal financial
risks could be incorporated into existing
education and outreach programs;
• Development of design guidelines to
protect housing in flood zones;
• A modified incentivized housing
acquisition program to acquire extreme
and high risk properties for coastal buffer
areas could be developed; and,
• Continuing care residential development
for elderly residents, located outside of
risk zones, and paired with incentivized
relocation services could be developed.

A relocation program as outlined above could be
coupled with incentives to develop diverse housing
options in upland low risk areas.
Nassau County currently has a housing acquisition program and participates in the federal HOME
Investment Partnerships Program (HOME) that
enables municipalities to buy and/or rehabilitate
homes to provide decent and affordable housing.70
71
However, the program could be amended to offer
acquisition of housing at above pre-storm values for
demolition of damaged structures and retention of
land as a coastal buffer zone. An additional incentive
to encourage the acquisition of clusters of contiguous properties could be included. These opportunities are likely to increase the flooding resilience of the
Community, while providing recreational and tourism

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

opportunities. In high risk zones, property acquisitions could be offered at pre-storm value for redevelopment as resilient green housing.
Low-income renters may need to be relocated from
storm-damaged apartments. There is an opportunity to build upon the existing proposal to develop
Freeport Plaza West, adjacent to the LIRR Freeport
station, which currently seeks to create 180 mixedincome apartments.72
For those who chose to remain in existing residential areas along the water, incorporation of resilient
designs can help reduce or eliminate potential damage threats. The Resiliency Education Center proposed in the Freeport NYRCR Plan can also be a
clearinghouse of information and provide workshops
to educate homeowners and building managers on
how to protect themselves from risk or reduce risks
during storm events.
Many rental units are occupied by low-income
residents, an unknown share of which were likely
impacted by Superstorm Sandy. Similar to the way
the HOME program requires beneficiaries to be
low- or moderate-income, priority could be given to
acquiring or repairing buildings, relocating households, and assisting the owners of buildings where
a disproportionate share of units are occupied by
low-income residents.73 If Low Income Housing Tax
Credits (LIHTC) are used in the construction of multifamily buildings, a fixed percentage of units will be
inclusionary or off-site in resilient housing for lowincome occupants.

Infrastructure
Infrastructure issues address the rebuilding and
recovery of essential infrastructure and services,
such as water, wastewater, energy transmission, and
transportation that were damaged or destroyed by
Superstorm Sandy. This includes both the needs to
strengthen and protect critical infrastructure assets
in risk areas and to meet the Community’s current
and projected demand in a way that encourages
resilience and economic growth.

Infrastructure needs
Flooding in Freeport is not limited to major storm
events. It is a regular occurrence during heavy rainfall and/or high tide in many areas south of Merrick
Road. Although drainage outflow check valves are
installed on storm drain outfalls to mitigate backflow into the storm sewer system, the valves require
additional maintenance to ensure they are working
properly. A portion of the system, Milburn Creek, is
under the jurisdiction of Nassau County and is not
covered by Village maintenance work. The large area
of impervious surfaces in Freeport prevents stormwater from infiltrating the ground naturally, creating the need for storm sewers to manage flooding.
During heavy rainfall events, storm sewers are often
overwhelmed, causing stormwater to accumulate
and, ultimately, flood the area. These situations are
exacerbated when trash and debris blocks stormwater from entering the system.
Strategies for increasing surface permeability are
needed to help mitigate stormwater flooding issues.
In low-lying areas, streets can become impassable
during regular storm events, impeding the transportation of people and goods and limiting local parking capacity. In major events like Superstorm Sandy,
flooded roadways prevent emergency responders
from helping residents in need and leave evacuating
residents stranded. Freeport is predominantly autooriented, with residents relying primarily on their cars
for transportation. Effective evacuation routes and
safe parking areas are needed to prevent damage
and ensure the safety of Community members.
Although bulkheads are not designed for flood control, the condition of deteriorated or non-functional
bulkheads exacerbates flooding issues in Freeport.
Many bulkheads in the Village have exceeded their
maximum lifespan and some older bulkheads are
too low, allowing water to pass over them and cause
damage to adjacent properties. Many of these older
bulkheads have not been raised to current code
requirements, causing significant erosion, property
damage, and increased flood levels in Long Creek,
Swift Creek, and the surrounding marshes. Height
regulations are typically enforced when bulkheads are
new or replaced, but uniform enforcement is needed
to make bulkhead structures effective at mitigating
flood and erosion effects in the future.
Assessment of Risk and Needs 67

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

In 2003, the Village commenced a pilot program to
assist property owners with the replacement of deteriorated bulkheads on private property, in compliance with the local code height requirement of seven
feet above mean sea level. The Village’s Engineering
Department provides technical assistance for applicants and obtains the required permits from Federal,
State, and local government departments. In addition, permit fees are waived. While bulkheads are a
common coastal property application on the south
shore, these structures are not flood control structures and can have negative long-term impacts on
coastal environments and littoral systems. Improved
education on various approaches to shoreline management, as well as emphasis on the importance
of maintaining the resilience of natural systems, is
needed.
Unmanaged trees around streets and power lines
can damage energy and transportation infrastructure during major storms. Wind-damaged and
felled power lines result in outages,and can create
hazardous environments if still energized. Currently,
only 4% of Freeport’s power lines are underground.
Customers in affected areas must wait for damaged assets to be identified and serviced before
their power is restored, a process that typically takes
up to several days. Likewise, streets can become
blocked and impassable until municipal and/or private repair crews can clear the way. Road and utility
rights-of-way in Freeport are owned and managed
by a number of private and public entities across
multiple jurisdictions. Identifying and contacting the
party responsible for maintenance in a specific location is unnecessarily challenging and can substantially impede repair work.
Freeport Electric currently owns two power plants,
totaling almost 90 Megawatts (MW) in capacity. The
utility’s Power Plants I and II use diesel generators,
built in 1898 and 1895, respectively. The two diesel
plants are likely only used when necessary to supply power under peak load conditions, typically hot
summer days. The generators at both power plants
are currently not equipped with black start capability, which would allow the plant to start generating
electricity without external power. Without this, the
time required to restart generators and restore power
is increased. The newer generator at Power Plant II,

68

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Community Needs
Infrastructure
• Improved coordination and understanding
of roles between jurisdictions and
government agencies is needed to ensure
maintenance and repairs occur as needed;
• An investigation into low-lying streets and
proper management techniques is needed;
• More permeable surfaces are needed to
enable stormwater infiltration and reduce
runoff in commercial and downtown areas;
• Improved oversight of the consistency and
longevity of private bulkheads, and improved
education on their ineffectiveness as a
coastal protection measure are needed;
• The transportation system needs to
be diversified to improve accessibility
for socially vulnerable populations and
improve post-storm accessibility; and,
• Upgraded electric infrastructure is needed
to replace aged and vulnerable assets.

which came online in 2004, employs a gas turbine for
generation. Based on 2012 reports, the plant has a
capacity factor of less than 12% with a net generation of 47,423 MW hours in 2011, and alone is insufficient to meet the energy needs of the Community.74
Because of this, a majority of power in Freeport is
delivered to customers by external purchases from
the statewide capacity market.
Power Plant II is highly vulnerable to coastal surges
due to its location at the southern edge of the
Industrial Park peninsula. Transmission lines run from
Power Plant II underneath Freeport Channel, which
is located in southeastern Freeport and sits between
the western boundary of the Industrial Park and the
eastern side of South Main Street. On the western
side of Freeport Channel, the electric tie lines emerge
from the sub-channel conduits in a boatyard right-ofway on Ray Street via one riser pole. Freeport Electric

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

staff, boatyard/marina operators, and Committee
Members reported that un-tethered vessels and
other floating debris struck elevated electric lines and
their support structures during Superstorm Sandy.
This is a key vulnerability during storm events for the
Village of Freeport’s electric grid. The electrical lines
located in the boatyard right-of-way on Ray Street
were tripped by floating debris several times, resulting in an overload and delaying system restoration
following Superstorm Sandy.
Infrastructure Opportunities
A coordinated roadway management plan can provide the structure for cooperation and accountability
across transportation jurisdictions, allocating responsibilities between State, County, and municipal governments for maintenance and disaster recovery
work. The plan could identify existing capabilities
among public entities and establish priorities to
best use shared resources in emergency situations.
Information sharing protocols could reduce overlap
and efficiency during regular operations by facilitating
communication and reducing redundant work, ultimately lowering tax and ratepayer costs.
To ensure Freeport’s southern neighborhoods are
accessible in storm conditions, critical roadways can
be elevated to reduce the impact of flooding on mobility. Raised roadways and drainage improvements
should be coordinated with local evacuation routes
and prioritized for debris removal following emergency weather events. These routes should also be
well-publicized to residents and be clearly marked,
offering connection to community resources, such
as safe parking areas, post-storm community assistance centers, and emergency shelters.
Transportation recovery and reconstruction efforts
should be coupled with street improvements to
make Freeport more accessible to pedestrian activities. Many streets in the Community including those
around the Freeport LIRR station, do not have sidewalks and are not well designed for pedestrian use.
Increasing sidewalk connections and introducing
traffic-calming measures, such as medians and curb
extensions, can improve driver and pedestrian safety
and make walking more attractive and enjoyable for
residents and visitors. Street improvements in downtown commercial areas can help local businesses

Community Opportunities
Infrastructure
• Existing regional examples for
improved resiliency of commercial
corridors could be leveraged;
• Further exploration into the raising of
key roadways could be explored;
• Structured parking facilities to reduce
impermeable surfaces and unlock valuable
land for development can be built, with the
added benefit of providing a safe location
to store vehicles prior to storms; and,
• Resiliency measures can be incorporated
into existing or planned street reconstruction
projects to reduce disruption and expenses.

attract more customers by increasing visibility and
access. There is an opportunity to study how commercial corridors could function better from a transportation, energy, lighting, and flood management
perspective. This would entail developing “Green
Street” guidelines, “Complete Street” guidelines, and
recommendations for energy security. Merrick Road
is an ideal candidate to study and implement pilot
projects in Freeport.
Freeport Electric is in the process of developing plans
to implement a microgrid system in Freeport’s downtown, which would include public assets, such as the
Police Department and Village Halls, schools, recreation centers, and a number of private businesses.
The utility’s Power Plant I would be retrofitted with a
16 MW dual fuel combustion turbine to replace the
current diesel generator, and a minimum of four new
underground circuits. A 150 kW solar array would be
installed on the plant’s rooftop, with an additional 100
kW of solar on the roof of Power Plant II and a 1 MW
wind turbine near the facility. Currently, there is a 50
kW solar array on the fire department headquarters
roof. Four new 250 kW fuel cells are also planned
for the Village’s main water pump house to supply
backup power in the event of an outage.

Assessment of Risk and Needs 69

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Natural and Cultural Resources
Natural and cultural resource issues concern the
impact of Superstorm Sandy on Freeport’s natural
systems and the services these systems provide.
They address the need for the repair and restoration
of both natural assets, such as dunes and tidal wetlands, and cultural amenities, such as public beaches
and parkland. Additionally, these issues present
opportunities to use natural systems to reduce vulnerability and foster increased Community resilience.
Natural and Cultural Resources Needs
Approximately 284 acres of tidal wetlands have been
lost along Nassau County’s south shore over the
past five decades.75 Increased development and infill,
along with hardening and bulkheading of shorelines,
have caused, and continue to cause, coastal wetland loss. The popularity of waterfront homes peaked
after World War II, when hundreds of acres of marshland were filled and developed. However, Freeport is
an older community and much of its waterfront wetlands were drained, dredged, and developed around
the turn of the 20th Century. With the passage of the
Water Quality Act of 1965, the Town of Hempstead
stopped granting permits for shoreline development,
but the damage had been done. Extensive building
left little space for waterfront parks and public spaces
and the loss of tidal wetlands left the Community
without an important natural barrier against coastal
flooding. The creation of the Sea Breeze Park in
2009, located on the southern end of the Nautical
Mile, is a step in the right direction.
Waterfront development in the Industrial Park presents a significant risk to Freeport’s natural resources.
The Freeport Hazard Mitigation Plan identifies 189
US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulated sites in Freeport, in addition to four hazardous waste sites. The four hazardous waste sites are
located within the high and extreme risk zones. In
the instance of coastal flooding, these sites can leach
hazardous materials into the waterways and cause
contamination of wildlife habitats.
These development patterns have also resulted in
an increase of overland flooding, as the storm sewer
system is unable to manage the increase in stormwater runoff from parking lots and roadways. Impervious

70

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Community Needs
Natural and Cultural Resources
• Mitigation and cleanup of contaminated
and hazardous waste sites;
• Protection of ecological systems, as well as
restoration and reconstruction of streams,
wetlands, and storm water basins;
• Increase wetlands and softer shorelines;
• Increase the quantity of pervious
surfaces and infiltration areas to improve
stormwater management; and,
• Monitoring of impacts of storm protection
measures on ecological systems.

surfaces stop stormwater from infiltrating the ground
naturally, preventing groundwater recharge. As
stormwater runs over these surfaces, it collects pollutants, such as gasoline and motor oil and excess
nutrients from fertilizers, before being channeled into
sewers and eventually the bay. Regular cleaning and
system maintenance is needed to keep storm drains
free from trash and debris, which can cause storm
water to back up and ultimately flood the landscape.
Natural and Cultural Resource Opportunities
Natural systems can provide soft solutions to storm
management and can include restoration and expansion of wetlands, such as tidal marshes. It is estimated
that an acre of wetland can store approximately 1
million gallons of water, equal to about three-quarters
of a football field covered in three feet of water.76
Vegetation in wetland areas helps to slow the speed
of floodwater, resulting in lower flood heights and,
ultimately, less flood damage.
Wetlands in coastal areas are especially important
from a storm-protection perspective, as the flat
coastal terrain leaves land and property exposed to
hurricanes and other storm events. Coastal wetlands
protect these assets from storm surge and provide
a sustainable buffer against storm-generated wave
action.77 The EPA has stated that wetland preservation, along with other natural flood control measures, provides more effective and less costly flood

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Community Opportunities
Natural and Cultural Resources
• Explore the potential to acquire damaged
or vacant properties for flood mitigation,
stormwater management and wildlife habitats;
• Increase awareness and education around the
importance of natural systems for resilience
through local community organizations;
• Explore storm protection measures
that enhance, rather than degrade,
the local ecological system; and,
• Explore opportunities to protect green
space for stormwater management.

protection than engineered defenses.78 Traditionally,
bulkheads, rip-rap, or other engineered structures
have been used to control coastal erosion and protect property from storm damage. However, these
measures can potentially increase erosion in adjacent areas. Wave energy from boat wakes, wind,
and storm events creates scouring in front of these
structures, resulting in the loss of vegetated shallow areas to open water. Tidal marshland protection
not only provides erosion control, it improves water
quality, creates or restores habitat, and increases the
aesthetic value of the property, typically at reduced
cost to the landowner.79

Green Infrastructure approaches, which use engineered systems that mimic natural processes to infiltrate, evaporate, retain and reuse stormwater runoff,
can be employed in areas like the Industrial Park to
strengthen and protect the surrounding natural environment. This includes the use of stormwater ponds
and constructed wetlands to contain and naturally
treat runoff on a large scale, as well as localized
installations, such as bioswales, that naturally filter
sediment and pollutants from stormwater as it enters
the ground. Materials like permeable paving can also
be used to capture pollutants and improve runoff
quality. These approaches can mitigate flood issues
by diverting stormwater from Freeport’s already overloaded storm sewers. Green Infrastructure can be
implemented on public or vacant land or in areas that
are subject to routine flooding. Additionally, smaller
systems can be implemented on private properties to
help contain stormwater on site and increase capacity of the public drainage system.

Restoration and protection measures should be
pursued to further preserve and enhance the function of Freeport’s natural and cultural resources.
Seagrasses or submerged aquatic vegetation restoration is a relatively economic and environmentally
beneficial way to improve water quality and stabilize
sediment, while providing a buffer against wave and
storm surge energy. Seagrass restoration entails
either the transplant of adult shoots from existing
meadows or the seeding of previously damaged seagrass beds. The Town of Hempstead Department of
Conservation and Waterways is also currently studying the use of Mollusk bed restoration as a means of
protecting shoreline areas from erosion. In addition to
these measures, the use of green infrastructure presents an opportunity for Freeport to increase resilience
while enhancing the Community’s cultural resources.
Assessment of Risk and Needs 71

Section III : Reconstruction
and Resiliency Strategies
The first two sections of the NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
(NYRCR Freeport Plan) provide an overview of NYRCR Freeport (Community)
and identify its risks, needs, and opportunities. This section presents the
strategies for reconstruction and resilience, which were developed based
on the information and insights collected during the planning process. The
strategies provided below lead to the projects that can be implemented in
the near-term to address the identified needs and opportunities in the most
expedient manner possible. Longer term actions are identified and described
under additional resiliency measures.
A strategy is a plan of action designed to achieve a major goal. Each strategy
herein outlines the key considerations for implementation including project
names and descriptions, cost, start and completion dates, and target areas.
There are three reasons it is critical that the Community have a strong plan
of action with a rapid implementation schedule at this time. First, there are
areas in the Community still significantly degraded by Superstorm Sandy.
Second, there is the potential for another significant storm event that could
negatively impact the Community since many areas remain degraded and
new preparedness, protection, and mitigation measures have not yet been
fully instituted. Finally, the Community has the opportunity to jump-start the
implementation of some of the projects proposed in this plan through the
NYRCR Program.

Facing image: Freeport’s 9/11 Memorial (source: Joe Mabel)

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

A. Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
Understandably, resiliency in the face of storm
events, changing weather patterns, and sea level rise
is forefront in the minds of many Community members. Residents of Freeport are long familiar with the
vicissitudes of living by the ocean and along bays and
inlets but Freeport, like other coastal communities,
must come to terms with stronger storm events and
higher sea levels. Given the immediate needs of the
Community, there is an emphasis in the NYRCR Plan
on strategies that protect critical assets in the Village.
A particular focus is on stormwater management
and drainage improvements. Related projects seek
to minimize flooding and flooding impacts, protect
critical assets, and increase energy stability. There is
also a focus on projects that presume and prepare
for significant impacts from future storm events such
as undertaking a public communication and education gap analysis, studying of potential Lifeline corridors, developing of Community Assistance Centers,
and improving lighting and signage on key recovery
corridors.
At the same time that the strategies address impacts
of storm events, there are other economic, demographic, social, and built and natural environmental
challenges and opportunities that this NYRCR Plan
addresses. The project Modernize the Industrial Park
Study will identify strategies to make the Industrial
Park more resilient and modernize its facilities with
the intent to attract new investment. The Business
Project Types
Proposed Projects: Projects proposed for
funding through Community Development Block
Grant (CDBG-DR) funding.
Featured Projects: Innovative projects where an
initial study or discrete first phases of the project
is proposed for CDBG-DR funding but additional
funding is required, an importantproject where
other identified funding exists, and regulatory
reforms and other programs that do not involve
capital expenditures.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations:
Resiliency projects and actions the Committee
would like to highlight that are not categorized as
Proposed or Featured Projects.

74

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Continuity Program will arm small business owners
with tools and ideas to reduce the financial impact
of future disruptions. Studying transit oriented development, parking and accessibility opportunities
can unlock new, lower-risk, economic development
potential, create housing for all types of Community
members, and increase transportation options for
moving about the Community. Developing neighborhood preservation guidelines will ensure that existing
neighborhoods that experience flood damage regularly are not negatively impacted by house raising
and other residential mitigation measures.
There are five Reconstruction and Resilience
Strategies for the Community that include a total of
26 projects. The strategies are as follows:
• Invest in Resilience Enhancements
for Critical Assets;
• Establish Programs and Policies for
Resilient Planning and Design;
• Improve Transportation and
Communication Connectivity;
• Plan for Business Continuity and Growth; and
• Improve Stormwater Management
and Drainage Systems.
Each strategy, and its related projects, fulfills one or
more of the Recovery Support Functions (RSFs). The
strategies’ projects deal with the needs and opportunities described in the previous section and also
resolve the Community’s critical issues that were
articulated through the NYRCR planning process,
including energy infrastructure; flooding and drainage; housing in high risk areas; information, communication, and resources; rebuilding and recovery;
regional connections; resilient planning, design, and
construction; and shoreline protection. The projects
also support, to the extent possible, vulnerable populations in the Community.
A description is provided for each strategy, followed
by tables presenting Proposed Projects and Featured
Projects (see sidebar for definitions) that would contribute to its implementation. A full description of
each project can be found in Section IV: Proposed
and Featured Projects; Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are included in Section V.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Invest in Resilience Enhancements for Critical Assets
Investing in resilience enhancements for critical community assets will help the Community withstand and
recover quickly from future disaster events. Strengthening energy infrastructure throughout the Community will
help ensure the reliable availability of power during future storm events. Developing monitoring and maintenance systems will help the Freeport Electric, Freeport Department of Public Works (DPW) and Freeport Office
of Emergency Management (OEM) monitor and respond to issues and public safety concerns more quickly. It
will also allow Freeport Electric to restore power with more confidence, when it appears safe to do so. This, in
turn, will allow DPW and OEM to quickly respond to needs after a major weather event or other disaster. After
Superstorm Sandy, it took approximately three days to fully restore the network after which individual residential and business needs could be addressed.81
Resilient design is another critical issue relevant to Community assets. The Village of Freeport is currently
engaged in resilience upgrades to four of its sewer lift stations located in FEMA Special Flood Hazard Areas
(SFHAs). The addition of permanent backup natural gas generators to these assets would ensure continued
operation through prolonged power outages. The Freeport DPW is also located in a flood risk zone. Relocation
or resilience enhancements for the DPW and other vulnerable Village-owned facilities should be assessed and
implemented to enable safe and secure access in future storm or disaster events.

Table 06: Strategy: Invest in Resilience Enhancements for Critical Assets
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Relocation Feasibility
Analysis: Move
Freeport Department
of Public Works
Away from Extreme
Risk

Study opportunities to relocate DPW out of
the SFHA while minimizing impact on existing
neighborhoods - provide concept design for
recommended solution and possible site acquisition.

$3,000,000

Proposed

N

Freeport Electrical
Cable Channel
Crossing
Improvements

The project would extend the buried portion of the
cables beyond the boat yard to protect the lines
from freed boats and debris during storm surges.

$3,000,000

Proposed

N

Outage
Management
System

The system upgrade creates a web-based reporting
and response system for outages or issues with
essential services (power, water mains, gas). It
would link directly to existing systems and enables
asset protection before an event, incident mitigation
during an event, and faster incident management
and service restoration after an event.

$265,000

Proposed

N

Protection for
Freeport’s Power
Plant II: Phase I:
Study, Design, and
Proof of Concept

This project would seek to study protection options,
design flood protection, and identify further funding
from NYS and US grant programs to implement and
construct the design. A proof of concept would be
constructed along the most vulnerable portion of
the site.

$1,750,000

Proposed

N

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

75

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 06 (cont’d) : Strategy: Invest in Resilience Enhancements for Critical Assets
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Downtown Microgrid
Phase I: Financial
and Engineering
Feasibility Study

This project seeks to identify funding and financing
methods for the development of the microgrid
- including State and Federal grant programs,
capital budgeting and contributions from benefitting
private entities. In addition, it will explore preliminary
engineering feasibility concepts for the development
of the microgrid, examine costs and identify
necessary construction.

$750,000

Proposed

N

Downtown Microgrid
Phase 2: Redundant
Energy Supply at
Power Plant I

This project would purchase a dual-fuel (diesel/
natural gas) generator with black-start capability and
replace an outdated diesel generator at Freeport
Power Plant I.

$5,000,000

Proposed

N

Backup Power for
Sewer Lift Stations

This project seeks to install permanent backup
natural gas generators at each of the Village of
Freeport’s three sewer lift stations located in a
SFHA.

$150,000

Proposed

N

Downtown Microgrid
Phase 3: Redundant
Distribution
Surrounding
Microgrid

Phase 3 of the Downtown Microgrid project involves
the installation of four new underground circuits
on the streets that border of the microgrid. These
circuits increase redundancy and replace outdated
circuits, while increasing capacity.

$30,500,000

Featured

N

Protection for
Freeport Electric’s
Power Plant II Phase
2: Construction

This project would seek to construct the
recommended design of protection options from
Phase 1 of the Protection for Freeport Electric’s
Power Plant II project. Further funding from NYS
and US grant programs for construction is required.

$10,000,000 20,000,000

Featured

N

Street Tree
Maintenance and
Guidelines

This project seeks to recommend policy changes to
identify roads for tree trimming, maintenance and/or
replacement with more resilient trees.

$100,000

Featured

N

Downtown Microgrid
Phase 4: Power
Plant I and II,
Recreation Center,
North Freeport
Pump Station

Phase 4 of the Downtown Microgrid project involves
the installation of distributed renewable energy
sources to diversify generation resources and add
capacity and redundancy to the power supply.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

Lifeline Corridor
Implementation:
Flood Valves

Establish a program to regularly inspect and
maintain and replace flood valves located along
identified Lifeline roads.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

Lifeline Corridor
Implementation:
Underground Utilities

Use planned roadway improvements as an
opportunity to bury overhead utility lines along
identified Lifeline roads.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

76

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Establish Programs and Policies for Resilient Planning and Design
Resilient planning and design initiatives include programs and policies that support and incentivize resilient
building and reconstruction. This strategy addresses the Recovery Support functions of Infrastructure, Housing,
and Economic Development. As some of the projects for implementing this strategy will require coordination
with the Town of Hempstead and Nassau County, they highlight the need for a regional approach to effectively
solve issues shared between south shore communities.
Building codes and zoning should be revised to incorporate or amend regulations to support resilient building measures, and provide guidelines and models for future commercial and residential development. This
includes exploring innovate techniques for flood mitigation design, and creating new opportunities for growth
in areas outside of flood risk zones. These initiatives would not only increase community resilience, but also
create a more robust and diversified local economy by attracting and retaining new businesses and residents.
Specific design issues must also be addressed with targeted policies for resilience. Many bulkheads on public
land are in need of repair, and their deterioration puts the Community’s open space and recreational areas at
risk for flooding and erosion. The Village was allocated $200,000 from the Regional Economic Development
Council for bulkhead repairs at Waterfront Park, however, it is not sufficient to cover the extent of repair work.82
Fuel oil tanks also pose a threat to properties in flood risk areas. Regulations for residential fuel oil use and storage could prevent damage from spills and dislodged tanks, and can be coupled with incentives for converting
to natural gas heating.

Table 07: Strategy: Establish Programs and Policies for Resilient Planning and Design
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Operation SPLASH:
Resilience Education
Center

This project seeks to fortify and protect Operation
SPLASH with innovative flood protection design and
infrastructure (two passive self-closing flood barriers,
sewage back flow preventers and personnel door
barriers).
In addition, partnerships with Nassau County
higher education institutions will be sought to raise
awareness of climate related risks on the South
Shore and promote environmental stewardship.
Finally, surveillance cameras will be installed at high
points along the coast and the video feeds will
be displayed at Operation SPLASH as a scientific
monitoring, community awareness, and educational
tool.

$1,100,000

Proposed

N

Convert Home
Heating to Natural
Gas in Extreme and
High Risk Areas

This project will develop policy recommendations
and an incentive program to convert home heating
oil to natural gas in extreme and high risk areas.
Temporary regulations to require proper anchoring
of tanks in risk areas will be developed and
incorporated.
A deadline for all structures in extreme, high and
moderate risk areas to convert to Natural Gas and/
or other heat/hot water supply will be established.

$50,000

Featured

N

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

77

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 07 (cont’d) : Strategy: Establish Programs and Policies for Resilient Planning and Design
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Public Bulkhead
Repair

Publicly-owned bulkheads will be replaced at an
appropriate height and with modern materials that
are more resilient to erosion and wind.
The reconstruction of the bulkheads will provide
coastal protection in public areas, helping to
maintain Freeport’s open space and recreational
areas. In addition, the bulkheads can reduce
flooding impacts on local streets, helping to
maintain access during and after flood events.

$950,000

Featured

N

Regional
Transit Oriented
Development,
Access and Parking
Study

This study will identify opportunities to combine
parking areas and develop structured parking
facilities in key areas, and provide recommendations
on their best use based on community need.
Guidelines for the design of resilient, sustainable
and aesthetically pleasing parking structures will be
identified.
This study will also develop a concept for local
public transportation that connects Freeport’s key
business, retail and recreational areas.

$500,000

Featured

N

Neighborhood
Preservation
Guidelines

This project seeks to undertake a planning study
and make recommendations to revise Freeport
zoning, planning and building code regulations for
resilient design.
The study will work with Freeport planning and
building agencies to ensure that needs specific to
the community’s rebuilding efforts are not omitted or
overlooked.

$250,000

Featured

N

Develop a Strategic
Adaptation Plan

Develop a plan to identify long-term retreat and
resilience options for Freeport to protect future
residents and businesses from more frequent and
more intense storms.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

Regional Energy
Action Plan

This project proposes the development of an
energy action plan using a collaborative, regional
approach. The many stakeholders involved in
energy generation, distribution, and use will be
brought together to identify options for distributed
generation, microgrids, and smart grid technology
integration along the South Shore and in the
broader Nassau County area.

$200,000

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

Y

78

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Improve Transportation and Communication Connectivity
Storm damage during Superstorm Sandy resulted in flooding, loss of power and an impaired communication
and transportation system. Improved communication and access to resources is critical for building Community
resilience. During and after the storm, Community members that did not adhere to the mandatory evacuation
order had difficulty finding their way out of flooded neighborhoods and were left frustrated with the lack of
recovery information. Many residents did not know where to go for help and how to get there. This strategy
addresses the Recovery Support Functions of Community Planning and Capacity Building and Infrastructure
with projects that address emergency preparedness and immediate recovery needs.
Community member access to information should be assessed to identify and address any communication
deficiencies. The findings of this assessment should be used to guide the creation of a consolidated emergency information hub with real-time updates and Community involvement. Physical locations should also
be established for Community members to find information and assistance. These Community Assistance
Centers should function after emergencies to provide resources and relief to affected community members,
and operate within existing Community assets such as the Freeport Library. At other times they can be used
as public information and training sites, in addition to carrying out their normal Community functions.
Prolonged power outages after the storm left street lights and signals inoperable and made it difficult for
residents to navigate their way to safety. Street light retrofits targeting key intersections will ensure that critical
routes stay lit during power outages. Combined with wayfinding and destination signage, these upgrades
should direct residents to the Community Assistance Centers, and to Nassau County evacuation routes and
emergency shelters.

Table 08: Strategy: Improve Transportation and Communication Connectivity
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Community
Assistance Centers

Community Assistance Centers are places for
residents to gather information about emergency
preparedness under normal conditions. During and
after a storm, these centers would become a place
to gather, collect and distribute resources, charge
cell phones, access the internet/TV, and seek
comfort. This project would install backup power
generation, dynamic electronic notification and alert
signage, and additional charging and wifi capacity at
each center. In addition, a Local Disaster Recovery
Manager would be hired for two years.

$2,200,000

Proposed

N

Lifeline Corridor
Study and Pilot
Implementation:
Merrick Road
Corridor

Merrick Road is an important lifeline for many
people, businesses and institutions. Due to the
importance of the road, it is proposed that a
study and subsequent pilot projects to improve its
post-storm functionality take place. Based on the
findings and results, the Lifeline Project could then
be applied to additional streets that are critical at the
neighborhood and community level.
The study will identify best practices and develop
design guidelines for resilient streetscapes and
implement a pilot project.

$300,000

Proposed

Y

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

79

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 08 (cont’d) : Strategy: Improve Transportation and Communication Connectivity
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Key Intersection
Streetlight Retrofit
Pilot Project

This project seeks to provide solar powered lighting
with backup power leading to key intersections, to
ensure these roads always stay lit in the event of
a power outage and residents can follow these lit
streets toward safer areas and critical resources.
In addition to providing solar power and backup
energy for street lights, traffic signals at each of
these intersections will also be provided.

$520,000

Featured

N

Key Intersection
Signage

This project provides wayfinding and destination
signage to guide people toward critical assets,
assistance centers and information after storms and
during power outages. This will enhance route clarity
and orient residents toward streets that should be
used after future emergencies.

$60,000

Featured

N

Public
Communication
and Education Gap
Analysis

This project would begin with a gap analysis to
determine additional emergency community needs
in the region. Findings would guide the creation
of a central website with a community-driven
communication component, and eventually include
education and outreach activities.

$20,000

Featured

Y

Raise Guy
Lombardo Avenue
and South Long
Beach Avenue

Identify roads to raise based on highest risk of
flooding, start with previously identified key roads
from the Freeport Hazard Mitigation Plan.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

Community
Assistance Centers:
Emergency Backup
(Option 2)

Outfit proposed Community Assistance Centers
with solar PV systems and battery storage to reduce
energy costs and provide power during outages.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

Advocate for
Local Participation
in the Citizen
Preparedness Corps
Training Program

Take advantage of existing training and capacity
building programs in New York State to train
Freeport residents to be first responders in their
Community.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

Y

80

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Plan for Business Continuity and Growth
Business continuity and economic growth is a critical issue for the Community, which is home to diverse industrial, commercial, and retail businesses. While most business owners affected by Sandy were able to rebuild
and resume operations, the loss of revenue and cost of repairs represented a significant financial loss. This
strategy addresses the Economic Development Recovery Support Function through projects to increase the
physical and operational resilience of Community businesses.
Freeport’s Nautical Mile and Industrial Park are two major economic assets within the Community. The Nautical
Mile is an important regional leisure destination, and the Nautical Mile Buoyant Architecture Project was developed to maintain this status while reducing the risk of flooding and damage. The Freeport Industrial Park is
likewise an important component of the local and regional economy, and it is critical to the Community’s future
economic growth. It is suggested that a local development authority is created, in cooperation with the Nassau
County Industrial Development Authority (IDA) and local business owners, to help transform the Park into a
modern and resilient business center.

Table 09: Strategy: Plan for Business Continuity and Growth
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Nautical Mile
Buoyant Architecture

This project will design and construct a buoyant
building along the Nautical Mile to demonstrate
the ability to economically and resiliently maintain a
coastal economy.
In addition to improving resilience of coastal
structures, this allows buildings and neighborhoods
the ability to maintain their character, retain access
for elderly and disabled populations, prepare for
sea level rise and in some cases reduce the cost of
construction to comply with new building elevation
requirements.

$195,000

Proposed

N

Modernize the
Industrial Park Study

This project seeks to outline implementation steps
for the formation of a local nonprofit development
authority that is committed to transforming the
Industrial Park into a modern, environmentally
conscious and resilient business center.
The study will also propose design guidelines for
safe, affordable and environmentally conscious lightindustrial and commercial development. Short-term
and long-term goals, strategies, actions and design
concepts will be developed.

$500,000

Proposed

N

Business Continuity
Program

This program would help small businesses create
their own business continuity plans, and provide
a custom roadmap for businesses to continue
operations under adverse conditions. This includes
planning assistance and access to alternate spaces
and facilities and grant assistance.

$40,000

Proposed

Y

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

81

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 9 (cont’d) : Strategy: Plan for Business Continuity and Growth
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Enhance, Diversify,
and Protect the
Nautical Mile

Perform a study to investigate options to protect the
Nautical Mile from storm surge, sea level rise, and
coastal flooding. In addition, explore opportunities
to transform the Nautical Mile into a year-round
destination.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

Freeport Library
Digitization Center

Provide Freeport and surrounding communities with
a place to scan and store important documents to
prevent losses during flooding/fire events.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

Y

Clean Energy
Education and
Apprentice Program

Apply for and utilize New York Energy Research
and Development Authority (NYSERDA) funding to
develop a clean energy education and apprentice
program for high school students.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

82

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Improve Stormwater Management and Drainage Systems
Improvements to the Community’s stormwater management and drainage systems are critical to reduce future
flooding from tidal and rainfall events. This strategy addresses the both the Infrastructure and Natural and
Cultural Resources Recovery Support Functions by proposing a series of projects to assess current stormwater drainage systems and identify opportunities to implement green infrastructure or other stormwater management initiatives.
This strategy requires the modeling and analysis of the South Shore stormwater system, including a survey of
stormwater drainage infrastructure. This study would help to identify problem areas and evaluate solutions for
stormwater management, including management policies and capital projects. Specific projects have been
proposed to address known problem locations. Homes and businesses along the Community’s canals and
around East Meadow Pond and Freeport Creek experience frequent flooding, and can be used to site pilot
projects for stormwater management improvements.

Table 10: Strategy: Improve Stormwater Management and Drainage Systems
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Meadowbrook
Corridor Stormwater
System Modeling,
Analysis, and Pilot

This project would include the reconstruction of
five stormwater outfalls currently entering Freeport
Creek. And reconnecting the Creek with the natural
floodplain.
A floating wetland pilot and drainage study would
also be conducted for East Meadow Pond to
improve water quality and reduce future flooding.
A daylighting study for Freeport Creek would
examine the potential benefits of uncovering the
current underground portion of the Creek.

$650,000

Proposed

Y

Regional Stormwater
Drainage Cleanout,
Survey, and
Verification

This project seeks to clean out all storm drains in
the Freeport area. While they are being accessed,
it is recommended that a comprehensive survey
is conducted to document and verify all missing
stormwater infrastructure from the local data
inventory.
The data collected will feed into the hydraulic and
hydrologic model to analyze the current drainage
system and identify critical drainage projects.
This will include the implementation of green
infrastructure projects and will quantify the benefits
of green infrastructure solutions.

$4,800,000

Featured

N

Green Infrastructure
Plan

This Plan seeks to identify green infrastructure
opportunities based on feasibility, level of impact,
funding and street reconstruction schedules.
Opportunities to manage stormwater on public
and private properties will also be identified and
recommended.

$500,000

Featured

N

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

83

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 10 (cont’d) : Strategy: Improve Stormwater Management and Drainage Systems
Project Name

Project Description

Cost Estimate

Category

Regional

Green Infrastructure
Plan Implementation:
Main Street
Improvements

This project builds on the existing "Building a
Better Freeport" plan - which recommends street
improvement projects along North Main Street. This
project would operate in tandem with the proposed
improvements, ensuring that any pedestrian
improvements incorporate bioswales or open
channel infiltration areas, to the extent possible. It
also recommends reconstruction of areas along
South Main Street that have been improved recently
but missed opportunities to incorporate green
infrastructure.

$790,000

Featured

N

Green Infrastructure:
JW Dodd
Middle School
Demonstration
Installation (Option 1)

This option involves the installation of a green roof
to detain rainwater and reduce runoff. Dodd School
serves as an ideal location for a green infrastructure
demonstration project due to its high profile location
and ability to educate students on an emerging
technology and employment generator. Green
infrastructure here can also offer flood mitigation for
a proposed Community Assistance Center.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

Green Infrastructure:
JW Dodd Middle
School Pilot
Installation (Option 2)

This option involves the installation of a of a
retention pond on the school grounds to capture
and store stormwater runoff. Dodd School serves
as an ideal location for a green infrastructure
demonstration project due to its high profile location
and ability to educate students on an emerging
technology and employment generator. Green
infrastructure here can also offer flood mitigation for
a proposed Community Assistance Center.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

Lifeline Corridor
Implementation:
Stormwater System
Upgrades

Install bioswales, permeable pavement and other
stormwater system improvements during regular
street maintenance and reconstruction projects
along identified Lifeline roads.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

Flood Diversion and
Control

Strategically locate structural and natural drainage
features to divert flood waters into designated
catchment areas. Commission a study and
determine overland flow patterns in flood-prone
areas to identify locations for drainage and
detention.

N/A

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N

84

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

This page intentionally left blank

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

85

Section IV : Implementation
– Project Profiles
The New York Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program has allocated to the NYRCR Freeport Planning Committee (Committee) up to $17.8
million. Funding is provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) program. While developing projects and actions for
inclusion in the NYRCR Freeport Plan (Plan), Planning Committees took into
account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the effectiveness of each
project in reducing risk to populations and critical assets, feasibility, and
community support. Planning Committees also considered the potential
likelihood that a project or action would be eligible for CDBG-DR funding.
The projects and actions set forth in the NYRCR Plan are divided into three
categories. The order in which the projects and actions are listed in the
NYRCR Plan does not indicate the Community’s prioritization of these
projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding through the Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding. Featured
Projects are projects and actions that the Planning Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in depth,
but has not proposed for funding through the NYRCR Program. Additional
Resiliency Recommendations (see Section V) are projects and actions that
the Planning Committee would like to highlight, but that are not categorized
as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in the NYRCR Plan exceeds NYRCR
Freeport Community’s (Community) CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental
review, HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation
of the projects and actions found in the NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in the NYRCR
Plan does not guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for
CDBG-DR funding or that it will be implemented.

Facing image: Historic home in Freeport being elevated to reduce flood risk (source: www.fema.gov)

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

This section provides a complete project profile for
each Proposed or Featured Project identified by
the Committee. Project profiles for the following
Proposed and Featured Projects include a description and information on two important elements to
evaluate the value of each project: a Cost-Benefit
Analysis and a Risk Reduction Analysis.
A full list of Proposed and Featured projects can be
seen in Table 11 on the following page. Table 11
includes a “Key” column that references the project
map in Figure 08, which provides the geographic
location of projects included in the NYRCR Plan
(note: project numbering is used for location purposes and does not indicate prioritization). Some
projects are not included on the map as they cover
a larger geographic area, or require additional analysis and study to determine the appropriate location.
When possible, project locations will be specified in
the individual project profiles.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
A cost-benefit analysis (CBA) is a tool used to calculate and compare the benefits and costs associated
with a project. The CBA provides decision-makers
with a framework for comparing different projects
(i.e., anticipated cost of implementation against total
expected benefits) and determining whether the benefits of a particular project outweigh the costs. More
specifically, the value of the CBA is two-fold: (1) To
inform the Committee as they consider projects for
implementation; and (2) to help municipalities prepare grant applications for funding.
Because the NYRCR Program is a communitydriven process, the CBA has focused on identifying
project costs and benefits that easily relate to the
Community. Committee and Community input –
informed by a true understanding of local conditions,
needs, and community values – plays a crucial role in
the selection of projects to be implemented. With this
in mind, the CBA has used a mix of both quantitative
and qualitative factors in its analysis.

88

Proposed and Featured Projects

Project Costs
Project Profiles include a capital cost estimate. The
cost-benefit analysis cannot, however, project costs
or benefits with complete certainty; rather, it provides
the Community with a practical understanding of the
potential estimated costs of project implementation
and the potential benefits accrued to the Community
with the particular project in place.
The cost of implementing a project is just one
aspect of the justification for funding these Proposed
Projects. Conversely, another important variable is
the future costs of not implementing these Proposed
Projects, which has the potential to negatively impact
the long-term viability of both the Community and its
neighboring south shore communities.
While these costs are more difficult to quantify, they
are no less important to our analysis, and are therefore addressed qualitatively. These costs include:
• Extensive, repetitive damage to personal
property, including vehicles and residences,
and public infrastructure resulting from frequent
recurring flooding and future storm events;
• Economic loss to residents and to
local and regional employers as a
result of the inability to work; and
• Hindrance in the provision of life safety and
emergency services, resulting in repeated
inability to access vast areas of the community.
For four Proposed Projects that are more regional in
scale, the Community is partnering with neighboring
NYRCR communities to fund these projects. When
the estimated project cost is a portion of a shared
project, it is noted in the Project Profile.

Project Benefits
The projects listed offer a number of benefits, which
have been grouped into the following categories:
• Risk Reduction: The extent to which a project
reduces the risk of damage to a Community
Asset from a future storm event (discussed
below under “Risk Reduction Analysis”).

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

• Economic Resiliency: The project’s potential
to help minimize economic costs and reduce
the time it takes the local economy to rebound
from a storm event. Economic data included,
where applicable, an estimate of permanent
jobs secured/added; relationship to, and/or furtherance of, Regional Economic Development
Plan goals; potential for additional economic
activity; and the net effect on local municipal
expenditures.

or scenarios (e.g., different levels of projected sea
level rise). A risk reduction score is then assigned to
each project scenario. This helps communities and
decision-makers understand the potential environmental, social, and economic outcomes associated
with each scenario.

• Health, Social and Public Safety Services:
Qualitative information was provided on the
overall population benefits of improved access
to health and social service facilities and public
safety services, type and size of socially vulnerable population secured, and degree to which
essential health and social service facilities are
able to provide services to a community during a
future storm or weather event as a result of the
project.
• Environmental Protection: Benefits include
the protection of crucial environmental assets or
high-priority habitat, threatened and endangered
species, migration or habitat connectivity; any
clean-up resulting from the action; and creation
of open space or a new recreational asset.

Risk Reduction Analysis
A Risk Reduction Analysis estimates the extent to
which Proposed and Featured Projects will reduce
storm damage (environmental, social, and economic)
and flooding risk to specific Community Assets when
the project is in place. (The extent to which a project reduced such risk is also considered as a benefit
in the Cost Benefit Analysis – see “Project Benefits”
above.) Risk “reduction” is different from the risk
“assessment” in the previous section in a very important way – risk assessment looks at storm and flood
risks to Community Assets before the project is
implemented; risk reduction looks at the reduced risk
after the project is in place.
The Risk Reduction Analysis uses a tool called
“Scenario Planning.” Scenario Planning measures
a project’s potential to reduce risk under a variety/
range of potential future environmental conditions

Proposed and Featured Projects

89

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 11: Project list and location key
Key

Category

Project Name

P1

Proposed

Relocation Feasibility Analysis: Move Freeport Department of Public
Works Away From Extreme Risk

P2

Proposed

Freeport Channel Crossing Electrical Improvements

P3

Proposed

Outage Management System

P4

Proposed

Protection for Freeport’s Power Plant II, Phase 1: Study, Design,
and Proof of Concept

P5

Proposed

Downtown Microgrid Feasibility Study, Phase 1: Financial and
Engineering Feasibility Study

P6

Proposed

Downtown Microgrid Phase 2: Redundant Energy Supply at Power
Plant I

P7

Proposed

Backup Power for Sewer Lift Stations

P8

Proposed

Proposed Project: Community Assistance Centers

P9

Proposed

Operation SPLASH: Resilience Education Center

P10

Proposed

Nautical Mile Buoyant Architecture

P11

Proposed

Modernize the Freeport Industrial Park Study

P12

Proposed

Business Continuity Program

P13

Proposed

Meadowbrook Corridor Stormwater System Modeling, Analysis and
Pilot

P14

Proposed

Lifeline Corridor Study and Pilot Implementation: Merrick Road
Corridor

F1

Featured

Downtown Microgrid Phase 3: Redundant Distribution Surrounding
Microgrid

F2

Featured

Protection for Freeport Electric’s Power Plant II, Phase 2:
Construction

F3

Featured

Convert Home Heating to Natural Gas in Extreme and High Risk
Areas

Not shown, Community-wide

F4

Featured

Regional Stormwater Drainage Cleanout, Survey, and Verification

Not shown, location TBD

F5

Featured

Street Tree Maintenance and Guidelines

Not shown, Community-wid

F6

Featured

Green Infrastructure Plan

Not shown, Community-wid

90

Proposed and Featured Projects

Notes

Not shown, Community-wide

Not shown, Community-wide

Figure 08: Proposed and Featured Projects

B

AB

IN
N MA

YL

N AVE
W SEAMA

N

TP

K

ST

P8

F9

O

E

F10

ND

E
AV

A

GR

P13

F7
E HWY

F12

SUNRIS

P6

P8

F1

F9

P8

F10

P8

F10

ME

P5

P8

SMITH

ST

F10

S MAIN ST

E AVE

P1

P2

P4 F2

N
S OCEA

IEW

AVE

YV
S BA

P10

AVE

F8

MILL RD

F10

P11

F9

E
TIC AV
ATLAN

F9

T
BEDELL S

BROOKSID

LOMBARDO AVE

P14

F10

GUY

RD
RRICK

F9

F9

P7

CLEFT

E
ON AV

WOOD

P7

HUDS

P9
F9
F8

AVE

P7

F8

0

Legend
NYRCR Boundary

Data Sources
Proposed Project

Long Island Rail Road

Proposed Project Area

LIRR Station

Featured Project

Refer to Table 11 for Project
list and location key

ESRI, NOAA,
US Census,
Nassau County,
NYS DOS
Created March 2014

0.5

1
Mile

This page intentionally left blank

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 11 (cont’d) : Project list and location key
Key

Category

Project Name

F7

Featured

Green Infrastructure Plan Implementation - Main Street
Improvements

F8

Featured

Public Bulkhead Repair

F9

Featured

Key Intersection: Streetlight Retrofit Pilot Project

F10

Featured

Key Intersection Signage

F11

Featured

Public Communication and Education Gap Analysis

F12

Featured

Regional Transit-Oriented Development, Access, and Parking Study

F13

Featured

Neighborhood Preservation Guidelines

Notes

Not shown, Community-wide

Not shown, Community-wide

Proposed and Featured Projects

93

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Relocation Feasibility Analysis: Move
Freeport Department of Public Works Away From Extreme Risk
EXISTING INDUSTRIAL
PARK

NEW DEVELOPMENT
OPPORTUNITIES

RESTORE AND REDEFINE
+ GREEN PARKS
Transportation improvements
to facilitate modern
Industrial Park

Distributed energy and
green roofs to reduce
grid demands

Smaller parcels
and footprints
to encourage
development

Keep existing
buildings and
uses and begin
to explore shared
ownership and
subdivision
DPW
facilities
Power
Plant II

Creation of
stormwater
capture and
infiltration
gardens
Restore natural
edge asbuildings
are relocated
Relocation of DPW
facilities to
secure location

Strengthened
edge to
protect Power
Plant II

Development program
incentivizes remediation
and restoration of wetlands

Strengthened
edge to
protect Power
Plant II

If the DPW is relocated from its existing location to an alternative site, options for reusing the existing site can be considered
such as new, more resilient waterfront development or the introduction of waterfront parklands and open space (source: Arup)

The Village of Freeport’s Department of Public Works
(DPW) site is currently located at the southern edge
of the Freeport Industrial Park peninsula, which falls
entirely within a FEMA designated Special Flood
Hazard Area (SFHA) and New York State Department
of State (NYS DOS) identified extreme and high risk
areas. The DPW provides a critical post-disaster
Community function, deploying, operating, fueling,
and repairing the Village’s emergency response and
cleanup vehicles and equipment. This proposed project will analyze the regulatory, financial, and engineering feasibility of relocating the DPW to another site
within the Community that is farther from the waterfront and outside of high and extreme risk areas,
enabling secure and safe access to DPW equipment
and facilities during major storms and other disaster
events.
This proposed project will ultimately recommend a
new location for the DPW site and provide potential
options for site layout and programming, building
design and massing, resiliency and urban design.
An accessibility plan will examine potential flood
and traffic risks and recommend upgrades that
may be needed to nearby infrastructure to maintain

94

Proposed and Featured Projects

continuous access to the site. Construction and
relocation phasing will be examined to ensure operability can be maintained throughout the relocation
process. The project will also provide a cost estimate
for the relocation and reconstruction and will identify
funding options for the proposal.
The Village of Freeport’s fuel depot, located at the
DPW site, is used to refuel police cars, fire trucks,
heavy equipment, and other Village vehicles. The
site also houses the Village’s vehicle repair garage
and provides storage for all of the storm recovery
and emergency response equipment (e.g., chainsaws and pumps), much of which was destroyed by
Superstorm Sandy. It is critical that the DPW’s vehicles and heavy equipment can be ready to remove
fallen trees, displaced boats, and other debris immediately after a storm to clear the way for police, fire,
and utility personnel.
During Superstorm Sandy, flooding made access to
the DPW’s isolated location impassible. The basement of DPW’s operations center was flooded and
its telecommunications system was destroyed. Other
buildings and the service garage sustained roughly
four feet of flooding. Village of Freeport staff members

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The DPW garage is responsible for the maintenance
and repair of all Village-owned vehicles (source: Arup)

and emergency responders were unable to access
response vehicles, fuel and equipment needed for
recovery. Many of the buildings at the DPW site have
sustained numerous incidents of flooding from previous storms. In total, damages, vehicle replacements,
and repairs resulting from Superstorm Sandy and
Hurricane Irene amounted to $1.7 million. While mitigations such as flood-proofing buildings and garages
would have some benefit, these strategies would not
fully protect the DPW site or its accessibility. The
Village acknowledges the vulnerability and risk associated with the current location and is opting for a
more strategic approach that would limit the potential
of recurring flood damages and offer long-term resilience for DPW and its equipment.
This proposed project will explore alternative sites
for the relocation, including but not limited to groupings of vacant/underutilized sites along North Main
Street or underutilized sites along the Long Island
Rail Road (LIRR) corridor. The relocation site will
need to accommodate DPW trucks, equipment,
fuel storage/pumps and telecommunication systems. Approximately 160,000 square feet (3.7 acres)
is needed for buildings, garages, storage, and fuel
pump space. Potential construction, reconstruction,
retrofitting, and rehabilitation of existing buildings on
any proposed site may be required.
Although relocation of the DPW is important to the
Community, the impacts and benefits of the move
on each of the proposed locations will need to be

High water mark from Superstorm Sandy at DPW
garage, approximately 4.5 ft. (source: Arup)

evaluated. This feasibility analysis will seek to identify opportunities to positively affect the surrounding
community by considering building and site design,
building orientation and materials, and landscape
features.
Estimated Project Cost
The total estimated project cost is $3,000,000.
Project Benefits
This proposed project supports the Recovery
Support Functions of Health and Social Services and
Infrastructure.

Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
This project would begin the process of moving a
number of critical disaster recovery assets out of
extreme risk. As a result, flooding and subsequent
public safety risk will be reduced to DPW’s employees, buildings, vehicles, garage, fuel pumps and
storage tanks, and equipment.
Economic Benefits
The reduced risk of flooding at the proposed DPW
site would yield economic benefits through the
reduced public expenditure on replacing flood
damaged equipment and repairing flood damaged

Proposed and Featured Projects

95

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Village-owned property, equipment, and communications systems will be reduced. Moreover, improved
access to critical public recovery services can reduce
the indirect costs of loss of life or serious injury, private property damage and loss, and business interruption. As such, the benefits of this proposed project will outweigh the costs.
Risk Reduction Analysis

Most of the DPW site sits significantly lower than
the adjacent Power Plant II site (source: Arup)

Relocation of the Village of Freeport DPW will result
in reduced risk to DPW personnel, buildings, equipment, and response vehicles. Freeport’s more than
43,000 residents and 1,800 businesses will also
be exposed to less risk during and following future
disasters. The Community’s natural environment will
experience less risk of pollution and contamination.

buildings. The Community’s businesses would also
benefit from quicker response and cleanup so that
they may resume operation more quickly following
future disasters.

General Timeframe for Implementation

Health and Social Benefits

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project

Once the DPW facility and equipment are fully moved,
the entire Community population of more than
43,000 residents and 1,800 businesses will benefit
from increased certainty and speed of response and
recovery in a future disaster. In addition, emergency
responders will be exposed to fewer dangerous
scenarios when attempting to access vehicles and
equipment in future disasters.

Initial funding for this proposed project only covers
the feasibility analysis and potential relocation, which
will not require permitting.

Environmental Benefits
As discussed, the relocation presents an opportunity
to design a modern, energy efficient and flood resilient facility. Consequently, the implementation of the
DPW move can result in improved air quality through
reduced energy use, containment and reduction of
stormwater, and decreased potential for fuel spills as
a result of flood damage.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
In total, damages, vehicle replacements, and repairs
resulting from Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane
Irene amounted to $1.7 million. By moving the DPW
site out of a flood risk area, the risk of damage to

96

Proposed and Featured Projects

This proposed project can be implemented within 12
months of project commencement.

Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport has jurisdiction over Freeport
DPW facilities.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Freeport Channel
Crossing Electrical Improvements

A artist’s impression showing the removal of the riser poles and buried tie lines from the channel (source: Arup)

This proposed project will replace a submarine electrical cable crossing under Freeport Channel that is
responsible for carrying 25% of Freeport Electric’s
utility load and serving 3,750 of its approximately
15,000 customers, many of which are located south
of Atlantic Avenue in extreme and high risk zones.
Freeport Channel is located in southeastern Freeport
and sits between the western boundary of the
Industrial Park and the eastern side of South Main
Street. On the western side of Freeport Channel, the
electric tie lines emerge from the sub-channel conduits in a boatyard right-of-way on Ray Street via a
single riser pole.
The project will replace the existing conduits and
tie lines that are buried below the Channel bed and
which were originally installed in 1967. The improvements will extend the buried portion of the tie lines
inland on the western side of the Channel. The project will remove seven existing riser poles and bury
the tie lines from the channel, through the right-ofway (where they currently emerge) and terminate at

The existing condition where submarine cable crossing
emerges in a private boat yard (source: Arup)

Proposed and Featured Projects

97

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

elevated electric lines and their support structures
during Superstorm Sandy. This is a key vulnerability during storm events for the Village of Freeport’s
electric grid. The electrical lines located in the boatyard right-of-way on Ray Street were tripped by
floating debris several times, resulting in an overload and delaying system restoration following the
storm. According to the 2013 Draft Freeport Hazard
Mitigation Plan, fire was partly responsible for $6 million in damage to vessels. Failure of this part of the
distribution network presents a significant fire hazard
to south Freeport in future storms.
Estimated Project Cost
The total estimated project cost is $3,000,000.
Loose boats struck riser poles and transmission
lines during Superstorm Sandy (source:
Dante Grover, High & Dry Boat Yard)

the intersection of Ray Street and South End Avenue.
Four new riser poles will be installed at Ray Street/
South End Avenue and Ray Street/Bedell Street to
diversify the exit locations of the tie lines.

Project Benefits
This proposed project supports the Recovery
Support Functions of Economic Development, Health
and Social Services, Infrastructure, and Natural and
Cultural Resources.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits

In addition to serving a quarter of Freeport’s residential and commercial buildings, the electrical cable
serves critical Community assets, including three
flood sirens, two firehouses, two sewer pump stations, and two schools. It distributes power to the
Nautical Mile, the heart of the Village’s boating, fishing, tourism, nightlife, and recreational economy.

The Community will benefit from reduced risk of
power loss or interruption during or after future storm
and flooding events. Subsequently health and safety
risks to residents, businesses, emergency responders, and technicians will be reduced due to the
reduced chance of electrocution or fire.

Freeport Electric, the Village of Freeport’s power utility, owns and maintains power generation and distribution infrastructure throughout the Village. Freeport
Electric serves a population of more than 43,000
people and is the largest of three municipal-owned
electric utilities on Long Island (the others include
Rockville Centre and Greenport Villages). The Utility’s
infrastructure in some areas is more vulnerable to
damage from coastal inundation than others. The
tie lines proposed for replacement in this project are
vulnerable to damage and destruction from floating
debris and untethered vessels during coastal surges
and storms.

Economic Benefits

Freeport Electric staff, boatyard/marina operators,
and Committee members reported that vessels that
became untethered and other floating debris struck
98

Proposed and Featured Projects

The electrical cable improvements will improve certainty and reliability of service for the businesses
along the Nautical Mile and private boat storage facilities and marina operators in the area. Future costs
of maintenance and disaster recovery by Freeport
Electric may be reduced with the extension of the
buried portion of the cables to points further from
floodwaters and potential floating and fire hazards.
Health and Social Benefits
This proposed project will make Freeport Electric’s
south Freeport service area (primarily customers
south of Atlantic Avenue) and approximately 3,750
customers more resistant against power outages

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

during future storm events. In addition, the whole of
southern Freeport will be more protected from the
advent of electrical fire, which is important in areas
with large numbers of vessels as they catch fire
quickly and the resulting fires are difficult to contain.
The increased protection for the distribution network
can increase the likelihood of a quicker recovery following future storms and disasters. The Community
can benefit from emergency response resources and
efforts that can be allocated elsewhere when needed.
Residents of Freeport’s coastal area may also benefit
from the improvements due to the increased reliability of electricity service. In a post-disaster scenario,
residents will be able to maintain or restore power to
their homes quicker and move about the Community
with a greater certainty of public safety, provided traffic signals and streetlights maintain power.

Risk Reduction Analysis

Environmental Benefits

This project seeks to reduce the risk of damage to
two of Freeport Electric’s substations and a critical
distribution network link across Freeport Channel
by extending the buried portion of the transmission
tie lines further west and inland from the Channel.
This reduces risk and allows for greater resiliency
and energy security by removing the tie lines from
the vulnerable and hazardous boatyard area and
by diversifying the exit locations of the lines further
inland via four new riser poles. Diversifying the exit
locations reduces the risk of total power failure
should one of the poles be damaged or destroyed.
This will reduce the chances that electricity will be
interrupted to critical services including flood sirens,
firehouses, sewer pump stations, and schools. The
project will also reduce the risk of fire hazards and
energy vulnerabilities for more than 10,000 residents
and 450 businesses.

Vessel fires that may result from a small electrical fire
can spread quickly and cause widespread environmental impacts. If the possibility of these fires can
be reduced, then the natural environment can benefit
from reduced air pollution from burning fuel and toxic
vessel finishes, as well as from reduced debris and
fuel spills into waterways and wetlands.

The project also reduces fire and damage risk to
private boats and private properties due to downed
lines and distribution equipment, increasing social
and economic resilience in the process. The reduced
risk of a boat fire in boatyards and marinas surrounding the project location will improve the chances of
business continuity following a storm.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

General Timeframe for Implementation

Superstorm Sandy heightened Freeport Electric’s
and the Community’s awareness of the risk of electrocution and fire-related injury and damage during
and after extreme weather events. It also reminded
the Community of the vulnerable portions of Freeport
Electric’s distribution system. For a cost of approximately $3 million, power distribution can be better
protected for more than 10,000 residents and 450
businesses in Freeport. The benefits of less frequent
power disruptions and lowered potential for electrical
and vessel fires that can damage personal property
and place human life and safety at risk justify the estimated project cost. In addition, future maintenance
and disaster recovery costs for Freeport Electric may
be reduced, creating an additional financial benefit
for the utility and its ratepayers.

This proposed project can be implemented within 12
months of project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
This project may require permits and/or coordination
with NYS Department of Environmental Conservation,
NYS Department of State (NYS DOS), U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, and U.S. Coast Guard. NYS
DOS Coastal Consistency approval may be required
for any activity within the coastal zone.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport and its power company
Freeport Electric, the U.S. Department of Interior
(including the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service), and potentially the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation
& Historic Preservation (SHPO) have jurisdiction over
this project.
Proposed and Featured Projects

99

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Outage Management System
This proposed project will provide for the purchase
and installation of an outage management system, a
reporting and response system for outages or issues
with essential utility services. Freeport Electric will
be able to monitor electricity outages from a central location and shut off buildings or portions of the
electric grid remotely to contain the scope of outages
and enable quicker repairs. The System will consist
of a software upgrade to Freeport Electric’s existing
customer information and geographic information
systems. The project will also provide for training of
staff using the system.
Freeport Electric, the Village of Freeport’s power
utility, owns and maintains power generation and
distribution infrastructure throughout the Village.
Currently, when an outage occurs, labor-intensive
field verifications of the outage location must occur

prior to repairs and service restoration. Installation of
an Outage Management System will enable system
operators to monitor outages from a central command center.
Due to the absence of this technology in Freeport
during Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy when
electrical network outages occurred across the
Community, it was impossible to monitor the outages from a central location. According to comments
received by the Committee and in Public Engagement
Events, this forced Freeport Electric staff and emergency responders to conduct field verifications after
the storms. Responders and technicians were put
into risky situations and system restoration was
delayed to customers in the service area.
Estimated Project Cost
The total estimated project cost is $265,000.
Project Benefits
This proposed project supports the Recovery Support
Functions of Economic Development, Health and
Social Services, and Infrastructure.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
Emergency responders, residents, and businesses
benefit from a reduced risk of electrocution or exposure to electrical fire in the event of a future incident, malfunction or disaster. Residents throughout
Freeport, especially socially vulnerable populations,
benefit from reduced risk of communication loss
and resultant social isolation. The use of the Outage
Management System will increase the resiliency of
the essential utilities serving Freeport by reducing
and containing outages and reducing the chance of
widespread disruptions.
Economic Benefits

An Outage Management System would enable Freeport
Electric to monitor conditions from the control room prior
to sending technicians into potentially unsafe conditions.

100

Proposed and Featured Projects

By being able to safely and remotely isolate and
power down portions of the service area, the lifespan
of Freeport Electric’s infrastructure can be extended.
This translates to a cost-savings over the life of
equipment, and a reduction in the number of laborintensive feild verifications required after an outage.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

In addition, better outage management will enable
improved business continuity during and after future
disasters.

reducing risk to all of Freeport’s more than 43,000
residents and 1,800 businesses through faster emergency response.

Health and Social Benefits

General Timeframe for Implementation

Buildings and homes throughout the community will
have a greater chance of retaining electricity and
remaining habitable, reducing the need for immediate
emergency response or shelter. Freeport Electric will
be able to protect key assets before an anticipated
event, manage incidents more efficiently during an
event, and restore service more quickly after a storm
or disruption. Responses will be more targeted and
reduce the amount of time lost searching for damage. Freeport Electric technicians and emergency
responders will be able to enter impacted areas and
perform their duties with a greater level of certainty
and security.

This project has the potential for implementation
within 12 months of commencement, including
purchase of equipment, installation, and training of
Freeport Electric staff.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements needed to
implement this proposed project.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport and Freeport Electric are the
entities with jurisdiction over this project area.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Freeport Electric’s disaster preparation, response
and recovery following Superstorm Sandy were
highlighted by Committee and Community members throughout the NYRCR Program. Nearly 98%
of Freeport Electric’s customers had their power
restored within three days of the storm. However,
lessons learned from the response and recovery
from Superstorm Sandy displayed the high risk of
electrocution technicians and emergency responders experienced due to the uncertainty to the extent
of outages and status of circuit breakers. For a
small investment, this proposed project will reduce
chances of electrocution, minimize future infrastructure replacement costs, and minimize business
interruptions by increasing the certainty and speed
of Freeport Electric’s future disaster and disruption
response and recovery.
Risk Reduction Analysis
Implementing an outage management system will
reduce health risks to emergency personnel by
asserting better control of assets. By limiting the
spread of outages, emergency response facilities
will have a greater chance of remaining operational,

Proposed and Featured Projects

101

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Protection for Freeport’s Power Plant
II, Phase 1: Study, Design, and Proof of Concept

Resiliency measures for Freeport’s Power Plant II can be combined with resiliency
measures and ecosystem restoration (source: Arup)

This project will develop, analyze, and design flood
protection options for either critical assets at the
Plant or the entire power plant site depending on
the results of the analysis of vulnerability. The preferred design will be constructed in a future phase.
Recognizing the immediate need to protect the most
vulnerable and hazardous portion of the Plant’s site,
the fuel storage tanks. This phase of the project will
implement a proof of concept protective feature or
implementation of a proven best-practice technique
to monitor and demonstrate local appropriateness.
Finally, the project will identify funding from NYS and
Federal grant programs to implement and construct
the design.
This project leverages other resiliency activities being
taken by the Village to protect Power Plant II. A
National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF) grant is
currently being sought to restore the natural coastline
and ecosystem immediately to the east of the plant,

102

Proposed and Featured Projects

which will also provide a layer of natural protection
around Power Plant II. Should the NFWF grant be
secured, the grant work will be coordinated with
this proposed project to ensure the designed flood
protection contemplated is compatible with and
enhanced by the protection afforded by the natural
system.
Freeport Electric, the Village of Freeport’s power utility, owns and maintains power generation and distribution infrastructure throughout the Village. Power
Plant II is one of two Freeport Electric’s power plants
and is the primary power generating facility for the
more than 43,000 residents and 1,800 businesses
in Freeport. It is capable of producing up to 87% of
Freeport’s total electrical power output.
Power Plant II is highly vulnerable to coastal surges
due to its location at the southern edge of the
Industrial Park peninsula. Though major damage
was not sustained during Superstorm Sandy and

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

During Superstorm Sandy the fuel tank
containment pool filled with water and shifted
the tanks on their bases (source: Arup)

Hurricane Irene, many components of Power Plant II
could be destroyed with the advent of a slightly larger
storm surge, potentially creating floating hazards and
fuel spills. According to the Freeport Electric Director
and staff, who led a site visit with Committee members, State planning officials, and the Consultant
Team, floodwaters reached the control center door
and fuel tanks were shifted on their bases (despite
being bolted down) by the large volume of water from
Superstorm Sandy’s surge.
Nearly 98% of Freeport Electric’s customers had
their power restored within three days of Superstorm
Sandy. Because power was returned so quickly,
many people from surrounding communitys came to
Freeport to use the Library and other public facilities
to charge mobile phonces, make calls, and access
the internet.
The risk assessment presented in the 2013 Draft
Freeport Hazard Mitigation Plan states that a
Category three or four hurricane could damage or
destroy all power generation equipment at the Plant,
including generators, motors, transformers, and
cooling towers, and could tear fuel storage tanks
from their foundations, contaminating waterways
and creating floating hazards in the process.
Estimated Project Cost
The total estimated project cost is $1,750,000.

Despite being bolted down, the large volume
of water from Superstorm Sandy’s storm surge
was able to move the tanks (source: Arup)

Project Benefits
The benefits of implementing a proof of concept
around the fuel tanks can immediately benefit
Freeport Electric, residents of southern Freeport and
businesses in the Industrial Park and along the
coast. This proposed project supports the Recovery
Support Functions of Infrastructure, Health and
Social Services, and Natural and Cultural Resources.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
Freeport Electric reduces its risk of losing fuel, power
generation potential, and sustaining damage to other
portions of the site due to a potential floating hazard
in future storms. Residents and businesses are at
a reduced risk of sustaining loss of life, injury, and
property damage from floating and contamination
hazards.
Economic Benefits
Freeport Electric benefits economically by protecting
key assets and reducing the potential foregone costs
of replacing fuel, generation equipment, and repairing buildings. Depending on the protection measures
selected, the designed full project could also offer
protection for the adjacent Equus Freeport Power
Plant, which supplies power to the Long Island
Power Authority / Public Service Enterprise Group
grid, as well as the broader Industrial Park peninsula,
Proposed and Featured Projects

103

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

which is a key local economic driver. By performing an analysis, design, and proof of concept phase
first, Freeport Electric can develop a full protection
system with greater confidence that it will perform
adequately for future storms and floods, minimizing
the potential for future expenses of retrofitting and
rehabilitating the system.
Health and Social Benefits
By having a stable energy supply, emergency
response facilities will have a greater chance of
remaining operational, reducing risk to the population
through faster emergency response. Buildings and
homes throughout the Community will have a greater
chance of retaining electricity and remaining habitable, reducing the need for immediate emergency
response or shelter.
Environmental Benefits
The bays, marshes, wetlands, and wildlife will be
better protected from contamination hazards in the
event of a stronger storm surge dislodging one or
more of the fuel tanks.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
By protecting the most vulnerable and hazardous
portion of Power Plant II, a significant economic
benefit can be realized in the event of a future storm
surge. The costs of an environmental cleanup and
repairs to private properties or businesses would
outweigh the costs of the design and proof of concept, as well as the implementation of full protection,
when funding becomes available.
Risk Reduction Analysis
The proof of concept portion of this proposed project may reduce the risk of catastrophic loss of key
Freeport Electric fuel storage assets, which are critical in a post-disaster scenario, due to storm surgerelated flooding. The study and design portion of the
project will create a process by which the risk of asset
loss across the Power Plant II site can be reduced.
Implementation of the study and the pilot project will
reduce flood risk to the oil tanks and, through implementation in the longer term, enhance energy security
for tens of thousands of residents, and businesses
104

Proposed and Featured Projects

and key Community facilities. Environmental risk of
contamination from leaking oil tanks and inundated
machinery and equipment will be reduced.
General Timeframe for Completion
This proposed project can be implemented within 12
months of project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
This project may require permits and/or coordination
with NYS Department of Environmental Conservation,
NYS Department of State (NYS DOS), U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, and U.S. Coast Guard. NYS
DOS Coastal Consistency approval may be required
for any activity within the coastal zone.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport and its power company,
Freeport Electric, have jurisdiction over this project
area.

Caroline G
Atkinson School

The Armo

Antenna
Freeport Public
School Admin
Building

t

Water
Well 3

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Northea
Well Fie

Antenna

Columbus
Avenue
School

Proposed Project: Downtown Microgrid Feasibility Study,
Phase 1: Financial and Engineering Feasibility Study
Northeast Park
(Recreation)

Public Park
Recreation

Village Hall

Fire Department
Exemps Hall
Power
Plant 1

Glacken Park

Fire Department
Headquarters
Ambulance

NYS Department o
(Highway Garages

Village
Green
Freeport LIRR

Fire
Department
Hose 4

eeport
gh School

John W. Dodd
Middle School

Freeport
Memoral
Library

Meadowbrook
Care Centre

Mo
Ho

US Postal
Service
Fire Department
Truck 1

Freeport
Kidney Centre

South Shore
Nursing Home

Meadowbrook
Commons Free
Pub
Athl
(Rec

Woodward
Children’s
Centre
Freeport Health
Care Centre

Freeport
Recreation
Centre

Microgrid Boundary

Baview
Avenue
School

TOH
Department
Fire
of Waterways
Department
Hose 1
Freeport
Historical
enables powerMuseum
continuity

Location of the proposed Downtown Microgrid Feasibility Study (source: Arup)

Freeport Electric, the Village of Freeport’s power
Archer Street wider electricity grid. This
School
authority, owns and maintains power generation
and
in critical areas when power outages and service
distribution infrastructure throughout the Village. As
disruptions affect the wider grid. Downtown Freeport
a Village-owned utility, Freeport Electric is commithas been identified by Freeport ElectricAntenna
as an ideal
Sewer demonstration project.
ted to providing reliable and affordable energy, and
location for a microgrid
Pump Station
Church
investigating innovative ways to maintain these
posiOf The
This proposed project will investigate the engineerNazarene
Fire Department
tive features of living
and doing business in Freeport.
Benevolent Office
ing and financial feasibility of installing the following
Department
After Superstorm Sandy, Fire
nearly
98% of Freeport
Hose
3
power generation and transmission components of
Electric’s
Milburn
Pond customers had their power restored within
the microgrid:
Park
three days. Because power was returned so quickly,
many people from surrounding communitys came to
• Replace an outdated diesel generator at Freeport
Freeport to use the Library and other public facilities
Power Plant I with a dual-fuel (diesel/natural gas)
Leo F. Giblyn with “black-start” capability, which is
to charge mobile phonces, make calls, and access
generator
Elementry V
School
the internet.
the
toJ restart a generator after a blackICAL ability
John
NAUET
Randall
MIL out without
Park the use of external electrical power
An emerging trend for small scale and contained
inputs.
(See
Microgrid Phase 2 project)
energy distribution is the development of ‘microgrids.’
Car Park
A microgrid is a small-scale version of the central• Four new underground circuits around the borized electricity system that includes all the necessary
der of the microgrid.
components to operate in isolation of the centralized
grid. Microgrids operate independently allow for the
• Four 250 kilowatt (kW) fuel cells at Freeport’s
import or export of electricity when connected to the
potable water pump station.
Sewer Pump
Station

Car Park

Proposed and Featured Projects

Prospect
Park

Car Park

105

Car Park

Fire Department
Training Ground AH

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

• One 1 megawatt (MW) wind turbine near Freeport
Power Plant II.
• Solar farms at Freeport Recreation Center 1 MW,
Power Plant I (150 kW) and Power Plant II (100
kW).
The project will identify funding for implementing the
microgrid, including State and Federal grant programs and capital budgeting.
Downtown Freeport has a high concentration of critical assets, infrastructure, and facilities instrumental
to disaster response and recovery. Critical assets
include Verizon Wireless (telecommunications provider); the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) Freeport
station and associated substation that provides
power to the LIRR Babylon Branch; the Village Hall
and police headquarters; three firehouses including
the headquarters; four public schools; the Freeport
Memorial Library; and numerous health and community services and businesses that serve post-disaster
functions (e.g., supermarkets, banks, gas stations).
All of these facilities are essential to the economic
and social well-being of the Community. The Freeport
Memorial Library and the JW Dodd School, both
located within the microgrid project area, are proposed to serve as Community Assistance Centers
(see project description below) after disasters.

During Superstorm Sandy, heavy winds and flooding
caused damage to Freeport Electric’s power distribution network, resulting in outages lasting multiple
days. Critical facilities that lacked sufficient backup
power were adversely affected. As a result, residents
and business owners experienced delays in obtaining critical life supporting supplies such as food, fuel,
and pharmaceuticals.
The 2013 Draft Freeport Hazard Mitigation Plan
and other Village of Freeport planning documents
cite Downtown as an important area for continued
economic growth and the certainty of power supply will allow businesses and community services to
quickly reopen after storm events and spur economic
growth.
Estimated Project Cost
The proposed project will cost an estimated
$750,000.
Project Benefits
This proposed project supports the Recovery
Support Functions of Infrastructure, Health and
Social Services, Natural and Cultural Resources,
Community Planning and Capacity Building, Housing,
and Economic Development.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
Developing a central location with a cluster of essential services that can effectively avoid power loss during and after an event is valuable to Community residents and businesses. Reducing the risk of power
loss through diversifying energy sources and creating
redundancy within the distribution network provides
greater certainty to residents and business owners,
allowing them to move about the Community and
access resources and businesses safely with the aid
of well-lit streets and functioning traffic signals.
Economic Benefits

The Downtown Microgrid could leverage existing
public facility investments in renewable energy,
such as the installation of this solar panel atop the
Freeport Fire House’s garage (source: Arup)

106

Proposed and Featured Projects

Economically, a microgrid provides an opportunity to
reduce loads on the existing Freeport Electric grid,
reducing costs to Freeport Electric and public expenditures by the Village. Business continuity can also
be improved and more quickly restored after a disaster, thereby reducing losses to business revenues.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Increasing energy capacity will better allow for redevelopment of Freeport’s downtown, which can create
new job opportunities and tax revenue.

General Timeframe for Implementation

Health and Social Benefits

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project

Increasing the energy capacity of Freeport’s downtown enables residents and business to relocate from
vulnerable areas to upland areas. Finally, this project
will provide an important educational benefit as an
innovative pilot project that can be demonstrated at
the Operation SPLASH Resiliency Education Center.

As the proposed project is a feasibility study, no government regulatory approval or permitting is required
for this phase of the project.

Environmental Benefits

As a study, this proposed project can be fully carried
out in approximately 12 months.

Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport and Freeport Electric are the
entities with jurisdiction over this project area.

Increasing the use of cleaner energy, through the
implementation of renewable sources, such as solar
and wind, and lower emitting sources, such as fuel
cell and natural gas, create the environmental benefits of reduced emissions and improved air quality.
Cost–Benefit Analysis
The multitude of potential benefits discussed above,
and ability to support each of the Recovery Support
Functions justifies the cost of examining the feasibility of a microgrid in Downtown Freeport. Through
a phased implementation of the various microgrid
components, many more indirect benefits will be
realized.
Risk Reduction Analysis
Providing redundant power and on-site generation
will enhance energy security and resilience for key
community facilities, businesses, and residents.
However, there is a risk that the project will not be
implemented in a way that maximizes benefits, and
unintended negative impacts are possible. By carrying out a comprehensive feasibility analysis, significant risks and uncertainty of implementation can be
reduced.
By having a stable energy supply, emergency
response facilities will have a greater chance of
remaining operational, reducing risk to the population
through faster emergency response. Buildings and
homes throughout the community will have a greater
chance of retaining electricity and remaining habitable, reducing the need for immediate emergency
response or shelter.
Proposed and Featured Projects

107

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Downtown Microgrid Phase 2:
Redundant Energy Supply at Power Plant I
Freeport Electric, the Village of Freeport’s power
authority, owns and maintains power generation and
distribution infrastructure throughout the Village. As
a Village-owned utility, Freeport Electric is committed to providing reliable and affordable energy, and
investigating innovative ways to maintain these positive features of living and doing business in Freeport.
Nearly 98% of Freeport Electric’s customers had
their power restored within three days of Superstorm
Sandy. Because power was returned so quickly,
many people from surrounding communitys came to
Freeport to use the Library and other public facilities
to charge mobile phonces, make calls, and access
the internet.

POWER/ENERGY SUPPLY

An emerging trend for small scale and contained
energy distribution is the development of ‘microgrids.’
A microgrid is a small-scale version of the centralized electricity system that includes all the necessary
components to operate in isolation of the centralized
grid. Microgrids operate independently allow for the
import or export of electricity when connected to the
wider electricity grid. This enables power continuity

Solar
Photovoltaic

Fuel Cell

Dual-fuel
Generation

Onshore
Wind

Micro
Wind

ENERGY DEMAND

Domestic
Appliances

Lighting

Elevator

The power generation and transmission components
of the microgrid include:
• Replace an outdated diesel generator at Freeport
Power Plant I with a dual-fuel (diesel/natural gas)
generator with “black-start” capability, which is
the ability to restart a generator after a blackout without the use of external electrical power
inputs.
• Four new underground circuits around the border of the microgrid.

• One 1 MW wind turbine near Freeport Power
Plant II.
Data
Storage

Household
Electronics

Heating
Telecommunication
and Cooling

Light
Industry

Information and
Communication
Technology

Secure & Reliable
Microgrid
technology uses renewable energy sources and
Affordable & Profitable
battery storage to provide a secure, reliable, and redundant
Sustainable & Low Carbon
energy supply to meet a variety of demands (source: Arup)

108

Phase 1 of the Downtown Microgrid (described in the
previous project) will investigate the engineering and
financial feasibility of implementing power generation and transmission components of the proposed
microgrid. This proposed project will take the first
step necessary in developing the microgrid by installing a new 3 megawatt (MW) dual-fuel (diesel/natural
gas) generator with “black-start” capability to replace
an outdated diesel generator at Freeport Power Plant
I, where the average age of existing generators is 59
years. Power Plant I will be the main power supply for
the microgrid area and is the only Freeport Electric
power plant located outside of the NYS DOS identified risk areas in Freeport.

• Four 250 kilowatt (kW) fuel cells at Freeport’s
potable water pump station.

Battery
Uninterruptible
Storage and Power Supply
Back-up

Water
Supply

in critical areas when power outages and service
disruptions affect the wider grid. Downtown Freeport
has been identified by Freeport Electric as an ideal
location for a microgrid demonstration project.

Proposed and Featured Projects

• Solar farms at Freeport Recreation Center 1 MW,
Power Plant I (150 kW) and Power Plant II (100
kW).
Downtown Freeport has a high concentration of critical assets, infrastructure, and facilities instrumental
to disaster response and recovery. Critical assets
include Verizon Wireless (telecommunications provider); the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) Freeport
station and associated substation that provides
power to the LIRR Babylon Branch; the Village Hall
and police headquarters; three firehouses including

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

the headquarters; four public schools; the Freeport
Memorial Library; and numerous health and community services and businesses that serve post-disaster
functions (e.g., supermarkets, banks, gas stations).
All of these facilities are essential to the economic
and social well-being of the Community. The Freeport
Memorial Library and the JW Dodd School, both
located within the microgrid project area, are proposed to serve as Community Assistance Centers
(see project description below) after disasters.
During Superstorm Sandy, heavy winds and flooding
caused damage to Freeport Electric’s power distribution network, resulting in outages lasting three days.
Critical facilities that lacked sufficient backup power
were adversely affected. As a result, according to
Village employees, there were delays in obtaining
critical supplies such as fuel, food, and pharmaceuticals, which may be essential to socially vulnerable
populations including elderly and disabled residents.

Power Plant I would be the heart of the proposed
Downtown Microgrid (source: Freeport Electric)

The installation of a new “black-start” generator
was cited by Freeport Electric as the most immediate need as it will enable them to “kick-start” the
other generators at Power Plant I and II if a blackout
occurs or there is a system shutdown. In addition,
the “black-start” generator provides redundancy
within the power generation system by allowing electricity to be generated by either oil or natural gas.
Finally, it diversifies and modernizes the fuel source
for Freeport Electric’s generation equipment, reducing harmful emissions associated with traditional diesel generators.
Estimated Project Cost
The proposed project will cost $5,000,000.

A critical first step of building a Downtown Microgrid
would be the provision of ‘black-start’ capability
at Power Plant I (source: Freeport Electric)

Project Benefits
This proposed project supports the Recovery
Support Functions of Infrastructure, Health and
Social Services, Natural and Cultural Resources,
Community Planning and Capacity Building, Housing,
and Economic Development.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
Developing a central location with a cluster of essential services that can effectively avoid power loss
during and after an event is valuable to Community
Proposed and Featured Projects

109

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

residents and businesses. Reducing the risk of power
loss through diversifying energy sources and creating
redundancy within the distribution network provides
greater certainty to residents and business owners,
allowing them to move about the Community and
access resources and businesses safely with the aid
of well-lit streets and functioning traffic signals.
Economic Benefits
Economically, a microgrid provides an opportunity to
reduce loads on the existing Freeport Electric grid,
reducing costs to Freeport Electric and public expenditures by the Village. Business continuity can also
be improved and more quickly restored after a disaster, thereby reducing losses to business revenues.
Increasing energy capacity will better allow for redevelopment of Freeport’s downtown, which can create
new job opportunities and tax revenue.
Health and Social Benefits
Increasing the energy capacity of Freeport’s downtown enables residents and business to relocate from
vulnerable areas to upland areas. Finally, this project
will provide an important educational benefit as an
innovative pilot project that can be demonstrated at
the Operation SPLASH Resiliency Education Center.
Environmental Benefits
Increasing the use of cleaner energy, through the
implementation of renewable sources, such as solar
and wind, and lower emitting sources, such as fuel
cell and natural gas, create the environmental benefits of reduced emissions and improved air quality.
Cost–Benefit Analysis
The multitude of potential benefits discussed above,
and ability to support each of the Recovery Support
Functions justifies the cost of examining the feasibility of a microgrid in Downtown Freeport. Through
a phased implementation of the various microgrid
components, many more indirect benefits will be
realized.

110

Proposed and Featured Projects

Risk Reduction Analysis
Providing redundant power and on-site generation
will enhance energy security and resilience for key
community facilities, businesses, and residents. By
having a stable energy supply, emergency response
facilities will have a greater chance of remaining operational, reducing risk to the population through faster
emergency response. Buildings and homes throughout the community will have a greater chance of
retaining electricity and remaining habitable, reducing the need for immediate emergency response or
shelter.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This proposed project can be implemented within 12
months of project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Approval may be required from NYS Department of
Environmental Conservation.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport and Freeport Electric are the
entities with jurisdiction over this project area.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Backup Power for Sewer Lift Stations
The Village of Freeport Sanitary Sewer Department
operates and maintains 103 miles of collection and
conveyance infrastructure, three sanitary sewer lift
stations and one pump station. The three Villageowned sewer lift stations, located on Howard Avenue,
South Bayview Avenue, and Suffolk Street, are also
located in the Special Flood Hazard Area designated
by FEMA, and NYS DOS high and extreme flood risk
areas. This proposed project seeks to leverage the
Village’s ongoing mitigation efforts at the lift stations
and increase resiliency by providing backup power
generation at each station.
Sewer lift stations are a necessary part of the sewage
conveyance system, ensuring that sewage can flow
when elevation and gravity alone are not enough.
Freeport’s sewage is processed at the Nassau
County Cedar Creek Water Pollution Control Plant
(WPCP) located beyond Community boundaries.
Sewer lift stations are critical pieces of infrastructure
that must be protected and kept operating to ensure
that sewage does not overflow back into community
facilities, businesses, and homes. The lift stations
serve homes and businesses including those along
the Nautical Mile, which is identified as the heart of
Freeport Village and an important economic generator for the Community. All of the Community’s residents and businesses depend on these lift stations
for conveying sewage to the WPCP.

All three sewer lift stations were damaged by
Superstorm Sandy when the electrical panels,
pumps, and compressors were submerged and
destroyed. In response, the Village of Freeport has
embarked on a number of flood mitigation efforts that
include replacing and raising motors, compressors
and electrical panels; bricking over windows; and
installing dam doors.
However, if the power distribution system is disrupted, the sewer lift stations will be rendered inoperable, potentially causing a sewage overflow into several residential neighborhoods in southern Freeport.
Backup power will help to ensure that this does not
happen in future storms. This project proposes the
installation of permanent backup natural gas generators at each of the three sites.
Estimated Project Cost
This project will cost approximately $150,000.
Project Benefits
This project supports the Recovery Support Functions
of Infrastructure, Health and Social Services, and
Natural and Cultural Resources.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
The additional of backup power at the Community’s
sewer lift stations will reduce the risk of a service
disruption that could potentially cause a sewage
overflow into several residential neighborhoods in
southern Freeport.
Economic Benefits
The project reduces the risk of costly sewer overflowrated damage to Village infrastructure, private residential property, and coastal businesses, such as the
Nautical Mile.
Health and Social Benefits

One of Freeport’s vulnerable sewer lift stations, located
on Howard Avenue (source: Village of Freeport)

Residents and businesses would benefit from
increased protection against sewage overflow and
resultant sanitary and health impacts. The ability to
safely use residential and commercial sanitary sewer

Proposed and Featured Projects

111

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

systems during and after future disasters would benefit the approximately 10,000 people who live south
of Atlantic Avenue.
Environmental Benefits
Environmental benefits may be realized by preventing
sewage from contaminating land, groundwater, and
bay water in future flooding or disaster scenarios.
The use of natural gas generators over conventional
diesel generators will reduce the release of harmful
emissions in the event of prolonged generator usage.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
The certainty of continued operation of the sanitary
sewage conveyance system during and after disasters or other causes of power loss, will prevent significant damage to homes, businesses, the natural
environment, and Village infrastructure, justifying the
cost of purchasing and installing the generators.
Risk Reduction Analysis
Maintaining a constant flow of sewage out of the
low-lying areas of the Community will minimize public
health risks by allowing community facilities, businesses, and homes to remain operational and habitable during and after a storm event.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This proposed project can be implemented within 12
months of project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Approval may be required from NYS Department of
Environmental Conservation.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport Department of Public Works
and Department of Water are the entities with jurisdiction over this project area.

112

Proposed and Featured Projects

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Community Assistance Centers
This project proposes to establish five Community
Assistance Centers (CACs) as places that can provide emergency preparedness information to residents before storms or disasters, and which can
provide resources, information, and comfort after
storms. These CACs potentially may include the
Freeport Memorial Library, Freeport Recreation
Center, Freeport High School, JW Dodd School, and
Atkinson School. Four of these facilities are located in
a NYS DOS moderate risk zone, the lowest identified
risk zone. The exception is Atkinson School, which is
located out of any designated risk zone. These locations are also centrally located within the Community,
making it easier for both residents and suppliers to
access them. After a storm, CACs will become a
place to gather, collect, and distribute information
and resources including emergency supplies (not
funded by this project) and to access to electricity
and the Internet. The CACs are not intended to serve
as emergency shelters during a storm.
This project will include an assessment of the current infrastructure at each location, the installation of
an emergency backup natural gas generator, additional electricity outlets, wireless Internet access,
and electronic dynamic public notification signage.
Prior to, and during a storm or disaster, the electronic dynamic signage will provide status updates
in the Community, updates from the Freeport Office
of Emergency Management, and will list resources
available at the CAC. Finally, this project proposes
the employment of a Local Disaster Recovery

Freeport Memorial Library (source: Joe Mabel)

Manager, working 20 hours per week for the Village
for two years. Responsibilities of the Local Disaster
Recovery Manager are defined as:
• Develop a Resiliency Education Program that
provides preparedness training sessions geared
towards businesses and community members.
• Provide yearly Community workshops on the
types of assistance that will and will not be available in pre-disaster and post-disaster phases.
• Ensure all preparedness information is accessible and understandable to all residents (including non-English versions and audible materials).
• Establish a list of resiliency features to be added
to the CACs and implement them (not funded by
this project), such as toiletries, water, food, and
supplies.
• The generators for the identified CACs, should
they be deemed appropriate, are proposed to
have the following capacities:
• Freeport Memorial Library: 50 kW generator
• Freeport Recreation Center: 150 kW generator
• Freeport High School: 200 kW generator
• JW Dodd School: 100 kW generator
• Atkinson School: 100 kW generator
The Freeport Memorial Library was selected as it
served as a resource center during Superstorm
Sandy recovery. The Freeport Recreation Center
was used as a charging and warming center during
Superstorm Sandy recovery. The Recreation Center
features the ability to serve a large number of people,
has a large parking lot (for vehicle storage and as a
distribution location), and is in a well-known, central
location. The schools were chosen as they offer a
broad reach across the Community and are accessible from other areas of Freeport. The community
is familiar with the schools, their locations are on or
near County designated evacuation routes or key
local streets, they are located in moderate or lower
risk areas, and they suffered little or no damage during Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene.

Proposed and Featured Projects

113

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The project will assess the existing building infrastructure and if there are any funds saved on preexisting infrastructure, including Wi-Fi capability
or high capacity charging stations, the budget will
be reallocated towards increasing the size of the
emergency backup generator and/or the Resiliency
Education Program.
During Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene, there
was a lack of clarity on where residents could get information, comfort, and relief services. The Community
expressed frustration with lack of information on what
to do, where to go for help, and how to get there following the storm. Residents were unable to access
basic resources such as food, warm clothing, charging centers, and Internet service. It was also mentioned that many emergency support services provided by nonprofit groups and hosted by the Town of
Hempstead did not distribute resources in Freeport.
The Freeport Memorial Library was utilized by Village
residents as well as those from neighboring communities to charge phones, use the Internet, watch TV,
and seek warmth. The Library was overstressed as it
was physically unable to accommodate the needs of
every resident and visitor.
Major concerns after Superstorm Sandy included
a lack of safety, lack of access to potable drinking water, communication access, social isolation,
and access to food resources. In addressing these
needs, a number of opportunities have been identified to enable the Community to recover after a
storm, including being better prepared for hurricane
season and future disasters; having more information
after storms; having access to computers, Internet
access, and cellphones; and having stockpiles of
food, water, and clothing for places that provide support after disasters.
Estimated Project Cost
This proposed project will cost approximately
$2,200,000.
Project Benefits
This proposed project seeks to establish locations
within the Community for residents to learn about
disaster preparation and response, as well as obtain
resources and information after a future disaster. This

114

Proposed and Featured Projects

project addresses the Recovery Support Functions
(RSF) of Community Planning and Capacity Building,
Health and Social Services, and Infrastructure.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
The installation of natural gas generators with battery
backup reduces the risk of power failure, providing
resiliency and continuity benefits to the CACs.
Economic Benefits
The project provides an economic benefit by reducing disaster relief and recovery costs through utilization of Federal and State-level public grants for preparation costs, as well as creating part-time positions
through the creation of the LDRM roles.
Health and Social Benefits
Many residents at Public Engagement Events cited
the need for improved access to information about
happenings in the region as well as improved connectivity to family and friends. The CACs address
urgent human needs after a major storm event by
providing information and communication support
within local areas. The CACs will provide a year-round
educational benefit by increasing the Community’s
access to, and understanding of, emergency procedures and responsibilities. After an event, each CAC
will directly provide basic health and social services,
including food, water, electricity, and communication
services.
Dynamic signage will provide updates and information, keeping the public informed. In turn, once basic
needs are met, people will be able to turn their attention to recovery, using information and communication services available at the Centers to minimize time
needed to rebound from a storm event. This project
will also reduce the risk of power loss by equipping
each Center with a backup generator.
Socially vulnerable populations will benefit from the
employment of the LDRM, who will ensure that all
residents, despite English literacy, reduced mobility,
or diminished ability, understand disaster preparation
and recovery protocols. In addition, these residents,
who may be more likely to have insufficient access
to post-disaster comforts and necessities, will have
these resources available in the Community.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Cost-Benefit Analysis
The funding for this project provides an opportunity
for people who are in the local areas – storm-affected
or not – to learn how to be prepared before, and
how to respond during and after, an event. People
are more informed by the community education programs supported by the CAC. This leads to a greater
awareness of preparedness; builds support for following directives from local, State, and Federal officials; ensures people are ready to act when a storm
is approaching; and, helps homes or businesses
in the local area formulate a response plan. It also
reduces the possibility that Community members will
not know what to do and, therefore, stay behind.
After an event, the CAC provides a one-stop-shop
for information about important matters, such as
the suitability of drinking water and the availability of
power, fuel, food, and medicines. This helps protect
Community health and well-being. In the case of a
significant event, such as Superstorm Sandy, it also
offers the opportunity for Community needs to be
communicated to support functions outside the area
if clean drinking water, medications, food, or other
supplies are needed locally. The CACs can tabulate
the needs and issue requests for support to the local
areas.
Local expenditures for disaster preparedness and
response will be reduced through the identification of
grant monies. In addition, an educated Community
can reduce the potential for loss of life or injury to
Community members and
Village emergency
responders, and the loss of emergency equipment.
This project cultivates preparedness in the local
area and allows a more informed population to take
appropriate actions before and after events occur.
The benefits of a more informed Community and the
potential for this information to prevent injury, illness,
or loss of life justify the cost of the project.
Risk Reduction Analysis
Lack of information was cited as a major issue in
the Community and a problem requiring a response
in this NYRCR Plan. The educational programming
associated with this project reduces risks by creating
a more educated and prepared public. Preparation
before a crisis occurs ensures people will be more

likely to respond appropriately when a disaster happens. On a day-to-day level, the CAC will distribute
information about preparedness.
If downed communication lines or loss of power
restricts access to television, radio, or the Internet
during or after a storm, there is currently no method
of informing Community members of appropriate
actions or necessary activities. A CAC can be an
information clearinghouse, providing information
to the local population so they can make informed
and safe choices. It also provides an opportunity for
local populations to communicate news and needs
outward to friends, family, and support organizations. The CACs can offer information about health
and safety risks and approved repopulation zones,
as well as dispense necessary supplies and provide
communication links between local populations and
family or friends further away. This reduces the risk
that people will enter into dangerous areas or engage
in potentially hazardous behaviors, such as drinking
unsafe water or entering an unstable home, before
knowing whether it is safe to do so.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This proposed project can be implemented within 24
months of project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory approvals required for this
project, however, consent to use school and other
public facilities as CACs will be required.
Jurisdiction
The Freeport School District owns the educational
facilities and the Village of Freeport owns the Library
and Recreation Center. Coordination with Nassau
County and the Town of Hempstead on the communication of emergency information will be necessary
to ensure consistency of information and that postdisaster responsibilities are complementary and not
duplicated.

Proposed and Featured Projects

115

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Operation SPLASH:
Resilience Education Center
FLOODPROOF BUILDINGS
+ RESILIENT STREET DESIGN

EXISTING
NAUTICAL MILE

Operation SPLASH (Stop Polluting, Littering and
Save Harbors) is widely regarded as the pre-eminent
environmental non-profit community and regional
outreach organization on Long Island’s western
south shore. Operation SPLASH helps maintain
the health of the bays and waterways through environmental education and advocacy and waterway
cleanup efforts, using its vessels, which are moored
at six locations including at its headquarters in
Freeport. SPLASH’s volunteer network of nearly
3,500 members allows it to reach a wide crosssection of regional residents. The continued operation of Operation SPLASH during and after storms is
an essential regional need due to its commitment to
environmental protection and storm cleanup, as well
as year-round debris removal. The SPLASH building, owned by Freeport Community Development
Agency (CDA), is located in Freeport at the heart of
the Nautical Mile. The building was inundated with 16
inches of water during Hurricane Irene and 4.5 feet of
water in Superstorm Sandy, and sustained building
damage in both storms.
The Nautical Mile, located along one of Freeport’s
developed peninsulas, is identified as the heart of
the Community’s cultural maritime identity and the
driver of the Village’s tourism economy as the main
waterfront retail, nightlife, and restaurant district. The
Because of this, it is an ideal location to host a community education and outreach center.
This project seeks to fortify and protect the Operation
SPLASH building with innovative flood protection
design and infrastructure consisting of two passive
self-closing flood barriers, sewage backflow preventers, and personnel door barriers, which prevent
water from entering through doors.
The proposed project will also create a full-time position at Operation SPLASH for two years to expand
the scope of Operation SPLASH to become a
Resilience Education Center that offers education
and outreach programs related to coastal and community resilience. This expanded offering will complement Operation SPLASH’s long-standing roles of
environmental protection and advocacy. This project will help fund partnerships with Nassau County
higher education institutions to raise awareness of

116

Proposed and Featured Projects

Operation SPLASH

Operation SPLASH
Resilience Education
Center

Floodproofing measures and resilient street design
at Freeport’s Nautical Mile (source: Arup)

regional risks from sea level rise, climate change, and
the risk of living on the coast, in addition to promoting
environmental stewardship.
The final component of the proposed project will be
the installation of three high-definition, controllable
surveillance cameras along Freeport’s waterfront.
The cameras will be mounted at high points and will
enable storm monitoring by the Freeport Department
of Public Works (DPW), and the feeds will be on public display at the Operation SPLASH headquarters
building to be used as a public awareness and education tool. Waterfront Park, Power Plant II and Guy
Lombardo Marina are identified as possible camera
locations. The DPW will be able to monitor storm
impacts, damages, and water recession following
a storm which will improve emergency management and recovery operations. In addition, scientific
researchers will be able to monitor the effectiveness
of different coastal defense systems, including ones
proposed in this program (Protect Power Plant II,
Nautical Mile Buoyant Architecture, Public Bulkhead

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Repair) and elsewhere, including the proposed
coastal improvement project as part of the National
Fish and Wildlife Foundation grant application.
Estimated Project Cost
The proposed project would cost an estimated
$1,100,000.
Project Benefits
This project supports the Recovery Support Function
of Community Planning and Capacity Building.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
Flood protection measures will protect the critical
community function that Operation SPLASH provides, and will serve as a model for resilient design
to other buildings in high and extreme risk areas.
The surveillance cameras help improve emergency
response by providing instantaneous information
about environmental conditions. An added benefit of

the cameras will be enabling better scientific monitoring and data collection following the implementation
of coastal improvements. These strategically placed
cameras will enable scientific researchers and government agencies the ability to evaluate the effectiveness of coastal improvement projects and quickly
address any issues that may occur.
Finally, displaying the camera feeds and storm footage at a prominent community center like Operation
SPLASH will provide Community members with
greater awareness of what happens during coastal
surges and hurricanes. This can be a powerful tool
in increasing Community understanding of the risks
and responsibilities of coastal living and help build
capacity for more ambitious coastal resilience strategies, such as planned retreat.
Economic Benefits
Economic development benefit will be provided
by enhancing partnerships with universities and
research facilities.
Health and Social Benefits

Waterfront businesses are vulnerable to flooding
from storm surge and high tides (source: Arup)

The educational component will enable Operation
SPLASH to widely broadcast the importance of resilient design, the responsibilities that come with living
in a coastal region, and the important role that ecosystems have in storm protection, pollution mitigation and quality of life. Linking with educational institutions and schools will enable Operation SPLASH to
offer a contemporary and innovative education to a
wide audience.
This proposed project will have a social benefit by
promoting interest in and building capacity for environmental and resilience-focused jobs.
Environmental Benefits
Environmental protection is achieved through
reduced risk of pollution and littering in Freeport’s
waterways due to SPLASH’s protection, cleanup,
education, and outreach function.

Design strategies such as self-closing flood barriers
can reduce the risk of flood damage (source: Arup)

Proposed and Featured Projects

117

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Cost-Benefit Analysis
The benefits of increased community awareness of
storm risks and the importance of resilient communities, increasing the potential of Operation SPLASH’s
headquarters to remain habitable during and after
future storms, and the increased ability to monitor
storm conditions justify the cost of this project.
Risk Reduction Analysis
This project will reduce flood risk to a key community
asset, the Operation SPLASH building. Environmental
protection is achieved through reduced risk of pollution and littering in Freeport’s waterways due to
SPLASH’s protection, cleanup, education and outreach function.

A statue along Woodcleft Ave demonstrates
the importance of Operation SPLASH's work
in the local community (source: Arup)

During a storm, improved monitoring ability will help
reduce risk to population and assets by providing
information useful to directing response efforts. In
normal conditions, the monitoring data may be used
to evaluate the effectiveness of coastal improvement
projects, reducing flood risk by helping to improve
the design of protection systems.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This proposed project can be implemented within 24
months of project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Approval may be required from the Village of Freeport
Buildings Department.
Jurisdiction

A closeup of a plaque that demonstrates the
importance of Operation SPLASH's work in
the local community (source: Arup)

118

Proposed and Featured Projects

The Freeport CDA is the owner of the Operation
SPLASH building. The Village of Freeport and the
Town of Hempstead have jurisdiction over the public
facilities where cameras will be installed.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Nautical Mile Buoyant Architecture
‘Buoyant architecture’ allows residents and businesses to have greater flexibility to respond to future
flooding events while maintaining existing access.
The goal is to implement systems that add buoyant
displacement to existing structures without raising
the living or public space. Different structures allow
for varying levels of buoyancy either directly underneath, around the perimeter, or a combination of
both. This enables the building to go up and down
with the rising waters.
This project will provide for the design and construction of a buoyant building along the Nautical Mile to
demonstrate the ability to resiliently maintain a coastal
economy in a cost-effective way. Existing examples
from across the U.S. and preliminary investigations
into local implementation appear to indicate the ability to convert a building to enable buoyancy for less
than the cost of adequately raising it. Developing
a proof of concept for buoyant architecture on the
Nautical Mile will allow the Village to maintain this
vision while reducing risk to the businesses in the
district and reducing or eliminating damage during
future events.
The Nautical Mile, located along one of Freeport’s
developed peninsulas, is identified as the heart of
the Community’s cultural maritime identity and the
driver of the Village’s tourism economy as the main
waterfront retail, nightlife, and restaurant district. The
Nautical Mile sustained widespread damage during
Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene as homes
and businesses were inundated by the storm surge
and roads became impassable. According to the
2013 Draft Freeport Hazard Mitigation Plan, two commercial buildings burned down and three commercial properties experienced significant damage that
required closures for reconstruction. The Operation
SPLASH building was inundated with 16 inches of
water during Hurricane Irene and 4.5 feet of water in
Superstorm Sandy, and sustained building damage
in both storms. In addition, certain businesses, such
as the Schooner restaurant, were unable to recover
financially from repeated damage and have not been
able to reopen after Superstorm Sandy. The closed
Schooner building now sits damaged and unoccupied on the Nautical Mile, detracting from the pleasantness of the area and creating an element of blight.

FLOODPROOF BUILDINGS
+ RESILIENT STREET DESIGN

EXISTING
NAUTICAL MILE

Elevate John J.
Randall Park and
agglomerate
Nautical Mile
parking underneath

Restrict vehicle
access on Woodcleft
Avenue to circulator
trolley and deliveries

Select buoyant
buildings amongst
restored coast

Many surface
parking areas
interspersed
with development

Floodproof
all buildings
Building line set
to South
Ocean Avenue

Many waterfront
businesses directly
exposed to surge

Shift Woodcleft
Avenue to old
property line

Buoyant architecture for the Nautical Mile (source: Arup)

The economic health of the Nautical Mile is important
to the Community and the Village of Freeport is committed to maintaining a presence on the waterfront
and sustaining the Nautical Mile. The two primary
options for recovering storm-damaged residences
and businesses, raising or relocation, are not sufficient to meet everyone’s needs. For some business owners, relocation would be detrimental to the
success of their business. Homeowners may be living in their current house primarily because of their
waterfront location, despite the risk associated with
this location. The other option, raising buildings, is
typically a costly endeavor, and creates accessibility complications for customers and residents. While
raising homes provides significant protection from
storm surges or other flooding, substantial changes
in building height can disrupt existing neighborhood
character and impact close neighbors. Furthermore,
static building raising is designed to respond to one
future condition while no one is certain how high the
next storm surge will be.

Proposed and Featured Projects

119

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Estimated Project Cost
The proposed project will cost an estimated
$195,000.
Project Benefits
This project supports the Recovery Support
Functions of Economic Development and Housing.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
In addition to demonstrating the ability to achieve
resilience of coastal structures, this project may
enable buildings and neighborhoods the ability to
maintain their character, retain access for elderly and
disabled populations, prepare for sea level rise, and
in some cases reduce the cost of construction to
comply with new building elevation requirements.
Economic Benefits
Property owners may benefit if the cost of retrofitting
a building to buoyant architecture standards is less
expensive than raising it to a certain required height.

Illustration of buoyant architecture (source: Arup)

Health and Social Benefits

General Timeframe for Implementation

This project will provide an important educational
benefit as one of the innovative pilot projects that
would be highlighted at the Operation SPLASH
Resiliency Education Center.

This proposed project can be implemented within 12
months of project commencement.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
For the limited cost of one demonstration project, this
project can provide business owners an alternative
to raising buildings that would enable the Nautical
Mile to better retain its character as waterfront commercial district. This prototype has the potential for
regional implementation, benefiting other Long Island
communities.
Risk Reduction Analysis
This project will serve as an innovative example of
reducing flood risk to the target building. Additionally,
should the demonstration project prove effective, it
will provide a cost-effective flood mitigation option for
businesses, enabling them to retain their waterfront
location and reduce the risk of abandonment and
decline of the Nautical Mile.
120

Proposed and Featured Projects

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Approval may be required from the Village of
Freeport Buildings Department, Town of Hempstead
Department of Conservation and Waterways, and
the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation.
Jurisdiction
This project will be under the jurisdiction of the Village
of Freeport, either on a Village-owned property, or
through an agreement with a private landowner.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Modernize the Freeport Industrial Park Study

A artist’s impression showing the economic potential of specialized, adaptable shop areas. (source: Arup)

The Freeport Industrial Park is a unique and important
asset to Freeport’s economy and the regional economy as a whole, as it is one of only several industrial
areas in Nassau County. It is located on a peninsula
near the head of Freeport Creek and is entirely within
the FEMA-designated Special Flood Hazard Area.
The Park is primarily in the high and extreme NYS
DOS risk zones, yet it has the potential to be central
to the economic resiliency of the Village.
Due to its waterfront location and peninsular geography, it is vulnerable to coastal inundation and storm
damage. It is also the only developed peninsula in
Freeport with large, continuous segments of nonbulkheaded and natural coastline. Bulkheads are
primarily used for erosion control, although inconsistency between bulkhead heights on adjacent
properties can complicate coastal flooding issues.
Furthermore, soils contaminated by industrial chemicals can be detrimental to aquatic ecosystems when
inundation and runoff carries those chemicals into
local waterways.

The existing condition of the industrial park (source: Arup)

Proposed and Featured Projects

121

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The Industrial Park’s building repertoire is outdated
and does not reflect the demands of modern industrial businesses. Large floor plate buildings are not
as desirable to smaller, specialized industrial businesses, which have proven to be successful in the
challenging industrial business environment of the
United States of America. The market appetite for
industrial space has shifted over time to favor more
specialized uses and smaller, more adaptable shop
areas.
As one of the region’s key economic assets, the
Industrial Park faces the challenge of protecting
properties from storms and limiting environmental
damage while attracting market investment. These
factors highlight an important Community need and
unique opportunity to re-vision the Industrial Park.
Re-visioning includes exploring ways to offer a competitive, safe, and environmentally conscious environment for local industrial businesses.

The Industrial Park (source: Arup)

Two examples of recent flood damage on the Industrial
Park site include Freeport Electric’s Power Plant II,
which was inundated during Superstorm Sandy, and
Freeport Village’s Department of Public Works facility,
where most of the buildings have flooded repeatedly.
In addition, there are several buildings and sites containing fire, explosion, and contamination hazards.
This project will outline steps for the formation of a
local nonprofit development organization committed
to transforming the Industrial Park into a modern and
resilient business center. The main objective of the
development organization is to revitalize the Industrial
Park by addressing the amount of vacant and underutilized space, attracting innovative and complementary businesses, developing and maintaining a longterm vision and plan for the Park, acquiring property
for restoring the coast and creating natural storm
defenses, and for redeveloping vacant or underutilized buildings into attractive spaces for new tenants.
The study will kick-off with a ‘brand-storming’ session, in which existing businesses, prospective tenants, interested community members, and governmental stakeholders identify potential ‘brands’ or
themes of the Industrial Park. New and innovative
uses could include a clean energy education center,
job training and production center, a flood-defense
system manufacturing and training center, or, to

122

Proposed and Featured Projects

The Industrial Park (source: Arup)

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The Industrial Park can leverage its waterfront location to simultaneously attract
new tenants and improve the natural environment (source: Arup)

recall the rich cultural history of Freeport, a theatrical
set production and ancillary performance hub, or an
innovative combination of different complementary
sectors.
This project will fund a study to propose design
guidelines for industrial and commercial development in the Industrial Park. Short-term and long-term
goals, strategies, actions, and design concepts will
be developed to guide future development so that it
is built to be safe and resilient, protected, affordable,
and environmentally-sensitive.
As a part of the development of this project,
Committee members met with the Brooklyn Navy
Yard, an established industrial park that has benefitted from proactive planning and resilient design, and
are seeking to replicate the success of that remade
industrial park into a modern green facility. As communicated on the tour, the redevelopment has been
successful to the point where the Brooklyn Navy Yard
is currently at capacity and expanding in southern
parts of Brooklyn. This encouraged Committee members to explore the potential of proposing a further
expansion of the Brooklyn Navy Yard to Freeport, so
the industrial parks together can offer a wider range
of building types, and more importantly, lease prices.
This study will first assess the site to determine what

infrastructure changes are needed to make the park
more resilient to flooding and how to allow for future
development in a manner that is market responsive
and in harmony with the local environment. The
study will assess the market and environmental context and recommend a series of short, medium, and
long-term goals, strategies, and actions to allow the
park to be reborn in a more economically and environmentally healthy fashion.
Estimated Project Cost
The proposed project will cost an estimated
$500,000.
Project Benefits
This project supports the Recovery Support
Functions of Economic Development and Natural
and Cultural Resources.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
Resiliency design guidelines will educate existing and
future businesses in the Industrial Park about how to
build or retrofit structures in a resilient manner, reducing the risk of property damage during future storm
events.

Proposed and Featured Projects

123

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Economic Benefits
A successful Industrial Park has the potential to
attract employment, economic activity, and a nonresidential tax base to Freeport. A dedicated development organization will be able to focus attention
on improving the economic viability of the Industrial
Park as the need for resilient and modern adaptable
buildings increases in order to accommodate changing industrial demands, sensitivity to the natural environment, and more powerful storm events.
This project offers benefits to Freeport and to
Nassau County by reinventing an important area and
expanding its industrial and commercial job base.
An increase of jobs in the Industrial Park would have
a multiplier effect of creating additional retail jobs to
support the Industrial Park workers, and may stimulate other businesses in the supply chain.
An increase in new local jobs may reduce the need
for local social services provided by the Village and
will reduce costs associated with unemployment
benefits.
Health and Social Benefits
Social benefits of the project include additional jobs
created by new businesses in the Industrial Park,
which can provide increased employment for local
residents.
Environmental Benefits
With the incorporation of resilient design techniques into structures within the Industrial Park, the
risk of pollution to local waterways during flooding
events from environmental contaminants stored in
businesses will be lessened. Incorporating green
infrastructure measures into site plans and building
designs will reduce the amount of pollutants reaching
the waterways from stormwater drainage.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
This project is the critical first step in creating a vibrant
commercial and industrial business district that provides local jobs and stimulates the Village’s economy
as a whole. Increased business revenues and new
jobs will increase local tax revenues. Constructing
new buildings and retrofitting existing buildings in
a resilient manner will decrease the risk of damage
124

Proposed and Featured Projects

from future storm events. The considerable economic, social, and environmental benefits associated
with a successful Industrial Park justify the modest
cost of this initial study.
Risk Reduction Analysis
This project will identify ways to reduce flood risk
and damage to properties throughout the Industrial
Park, including business property, machinery, and
equipment.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This proposed project can be implemented within 12
months of project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements associated with
this project.
Jurisdiction
Village of Freeport

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Business Continuity Program
Superstorm Sandy significantly impacted Community
businesses. Some were flooded and suffered substantial physical damage; others were indirectly
affected by public misperception that businesses
were closed when they were, in fact, open. Working
hours were reduced in many cases, causing financial
hardship to employees. Businesses are crucial to the
fiscal health of the Village, as they make up 10% of
all parcels in the Community but provide more than
30% of assessed land value.
According to data from the U.S Small Business
Administration, 234 Freeport businesses, representing 1,035 employees, applied for disaster management assistance after Superstorm Sandy. These
applications represented claims totaling $14.7 million in real property damage, $8.3 million of machinery damage, an inventory loss of $2.4 million and
a leaseholder improvement loss of $2.2 million. Of
these applications, 49 (21%) were approved for an
amount totaling just under $6.7 million, roughly onequarter of the $27.6 million in verified damage assistance applied for.
Business continuity planning ensures that businesses have the capability to maintain essential
functions during a range of potential emergencies.
The assistance provided by a Business Continuity
Program would include planning assistance, access
to alternative spaces or facilities, communications
provisions, and provisions for vital records backup
and management. At the base of this program is the
creation of a part-time Business Continuity Program
facilitator responsible for educating the local business community in south shore Nassau County on
crisis preparedness and management, organizational
structure, and policies and procedures, as well as the
following roles and responsibilities:

The program proposes working with Adelphi
University and the Business Continuity Institute to
lead training sessions for local business owners.
Through ongoing coordination with the Freeport
Chamber of Commerce (and those of neighboring
or nearby hamlets) and/or related business organizations, the Business Continuity Program facilitator
would help small businesses to create their own plans
for continuing operations under adverse conditions,
such as a major storm, as well as be responsible for
identifying and assisting businesses in the pursuit of
future funding opportunities. The Program will help
business owners identify their backup power needs
in advance of an emergency, which will allow owners
to procure emergency power generation supplies.
Estimated Project Cost
The NYRCR Communities of Baldwin, Bellmore/
Merrick, Seaford/Wantagh, and Massapequa intend
on cooperating with NYRCR Freeport on this project.
This project will cost the Community approximately
$40,000, with similar contributions from neighboring
NYRCR Communities.
Project Benefits
This project addresses the Economic Recovery
Support Function (RSF). As it is a shared project
across multiple NYRCR areas, the Community
receives the full benefits of the program at a lower
level of cost than if the project were fully undertaken
solely at the direction of the local Community.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits

• Educational sessions for the business community,

The benefit to local business will be reduced interruption of normal business following future storms and
disasters.

• Creation of a Risk Assessment
Checklist and audit assistance,

Economic Benefits

• Individualized business continuity
plan assistance, and
• Maintenance and monitoring through annual
exercises and continuous improvements.

The Community’s commercial sector is largely comprised of retail businesses, but also contains a notable and historically significant industrial sector. When
these businesses close, even for a short period of
time, it is disruptive to the local economy and affects
wholesalers and other businesses in the supply
chain. Loss in sales across a number of businesses

Proposed and Featured Projects

125

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

can lead to considerable lost sales tax revenue for
Nassau County. When employees are laid off or
hours are reduced, income taxes are affected at
both the State and Federal level. In addition, better
preparedness and education can lead to a reduction
in post-disaster claims for financial assistance from
State and Federal programs.
For many Community businesses owners, damage
caused by Superstorm Sandy was a serious financial
burden, and one that owners could not rebound from
if it happened again. A business continuity plan would
assist business owners in knowing what the best
resiliency-related investments would be and how to
plan for their future. Program staff would also help to
connect business owners to grants, incentives, and
other funding sources, helping to strengthen the local
economy.
Health and Social Benefits
Businesses such as supermarkets, drug stores, and
gas stations are essential to the Community for the
supply of food, medicines, and fuel on a day-to-day
basis. If these essential businesses cannot reopen
quickly enough after a storm, Community members
can be severely affected. The impacts are even more
severe for the local senior population and those without access to a car, who may have more difficulty
in traveling a farther distance to get prescriptions or
food.

A Business Continuity Program can help small
businesses plan better and bounce back quicker
after a disruption or storm (source: Arup)

against risks their business may present to local
areas should flood waters intrude the property or
building, such as securing fuel tanks, raising sensitive
chemicals to higher floors, or dry- or wet-floodproofing their operations.
The revenue losses to local, State, and Federal governments when businesses are closed, even temporarily, are significant. The benefit of educating businesses to better prepare for storm events, thereby
reducing closure times and lost business revenue, far
outweighs program costs.

Environmental Benefits

Risk Reduction Analysis

For businesses that handle environmentally hazardous material, flooding can cause widespread environmental damage. Better education about the risks
of flooding and how to plan for storm events can help
to prevent this type of environmental damage from
occurring. Businesses that store hazardous materials
will receive guidance on safe storage that removes
the risk of contaminating floodwaters.

Ensuring a stable economic base reduces the risk
of loss of jobs and loss of identity along commercial
corridors.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project

As this is a shared and programmatic project, the
costs are relatively low at $40,000, yet the benefits
can be tremendous in getting businesses back in
operation faster after a storm. Benefits are realized
when businesses owners understand and mitigate

There are no regulatory requirements associated with
this project.

126

Proposed and Featured Projects

General Timeframe for Implementation
The implementation of this project will take approximately 24 months from commencement.

Jurisdiction
None

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Meadowbrook Corridor
Stormwater System Modeling, Analysis and Pilot
The Meadowbrook Corridor is a large tributary system running south from Westbury to Hempstead’s
Middle Bay. The Corridor’s tributaries and system of
retention ponds were originally part of the Brooklyn
Water Works reservoir system, which was a water
conveyance system built to provide drinking water
to the rapidly growing New York City Borough of
Brooklyn. Today, the corridor conveys stormwater
from the Freeport Creek watershed out into Merrick
Bay. The Corridor is divided by the Meadowbrook
State Parkway elevated roadway, which also serves
as the border between the hamlet of Merrick and
the Village of Freeport and is a County designated
evacuation route serving the Community and the
barrier islands. There are more than 200 stormwater
outfalls draining into the Meadowbrook Corridor and
its sensitive fresh and tidal wetlands.
The Corridor is vulnerable to flooding from storm
surges due to its low elevation and connection with
the bay. The high number of stormwater outfalls
combined with runoff from the Meadowbrook State
Parkway leads to severe flooding. During and following Superstorm Sandy, south Freeport, Merrick,
and Bellmore residents were restricted from using
Merrick Road where it meets the Parkway as Merrick
Road received floodwaters from the Corridor. In addition, on the Freeport side of the Corridor, the storm
surge and the stormwater runoff converged between
Sunrise Highway and Merrick Road, exacerbating
flood damages in the area, including building damages sustained at the Freeport Housing Authority
Moxie Rigby Apartments.
The area is very low lying, only two to four feet
above the water table, and the soil types are mainly
Udipsamments wet substratum, Ipswich mucky peat,
Udorthents, refuse substratum at south end and
Atsion loamy sand at north end. Within the Corridor,
the East Meadow Brook to the north of Freeport
and Merrick is polluted with pathogens from urban
and stormwater runoff. The Freeport Reservoir and
East Meadow Pond, located in Freeport and Merrick,
respectively, are polluted with chlordane from contaminated sediments, which are currently carried into
Merrick Bay.
Information about the existing stormwater infrastructure within the Freeport Creek Watershed is limited
and a better understanding of how surface and

subsurface water moves through the area will be
used to provide insight about the most effective solutions to best water management approaches along
the Corridor. Therefore, this project includes both a
comprehensive analysis of the existing system, as
well as the identification and implementation of five
pilot projects using “green infrastructure” methods to
help mitigate flood risk and improve water quality.
The project includes will undertake the following
phases:
Phase 1: Key stakeholder engagement
The location of the Meadowbrook Corridor and
Freeport Creek Watershed requires coordination
across several jurisdictions and with numerous stakeholders. An initial phase of key stakeholder meetings
will be used to collect and collate existing drainage
sets from Nassau County, the Village of Freeport, the
Town of Hempstead, and NYS DOT. Other stakeholders may include NYS DEC, NYS DOS, and the
Town of North Hempstead.
Phase 2: Development of a hydrologic and
hydraulic model
This phase includes gathering data on the existing stormwater system within the Freeport Creek
Watershed and the development of a hydrologic and
hydraulic (“H&H”) model to provide a detailed picture
of where the runoff is coming from, how much there
is, whether the current system has adequate capacity and what improvements could be made.
A proportion of the drainage will be surveyed to inform
the model. The survey will include manhole inspections and connectivity surveys to give level, size, line,
and condition of the pipes. The survey assumptions
include one manhole every 300 feet, a drainage length
assumption of 195,288 feet, and 651 manholes. The
building and verification of an integrated catchment
model will be undertaken to determine the contributors to flooding and the most appropriate solutions
and the outfalls with the greatest discharges into the
impaired water bodies. Using the most current LiDAR
(Light Detection and Ranging) ground surface data
available, this stage will involve processing the data,
building and calibrating the model and installing and
collecting data from four stream gauges.

Proposed and Featured Projects

127

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

This model will be capable of:
• Determining the causes of localized flooding
issues across the catchment and identifying
measures to prevent the flooding;
• Determining which outfalls are contributing the
most urban stormwater run-off to the impaired
watercourses, lakes and estuaries and identifying outfalls for the implementation of green infrastructure to reduce and treat stormwater runoff;
and,
• Locating green infrastructure solutions to provide
the most effective investment to reduce surface
water flooding.
Following development of the model, it will be used,
in combination with a GIS mapping study of the
physical ground conditions, to determine the most
appropriate location for green infrastructure in terms
of maximizing water retention, infiltration, and additional water quality benefits and choosing the most
appropriate green infrastructure solutions for the various sites.
Phase 3: Pilot Projects
Upon completion of the model and corresponding analysis, pilot projects will be built to study and
monitor various methods of managing and treating
stormwater runoff. A few pilot projects have been
conceived though an initial assessment of existing
conditions and issues and, contingent upon verification of benefits using the H&H model, will involve the
following five interventions:
• Regenerative storm conveyance retrofits at five
locations within Merrick. This involves moving
the storm drainage outfalls further away from
the road and constructing a staggered regenerative storm conveyance system that retains and
cleans storm water. The following outfall retrofits
have been identified:
-- Babylon Turnpike: 180 foot
long conveyance system;
-- Webster Avenue: 93 foot long
conveyance system;
-- Camp Avenue: 99 foot long
conveyance system;
128

Proposed and Featured Projects

-- Michalicki Place: 171 foot long bio-swale
along one side of the highway with three
crossing points for driveways and 158
foot long conveyance system; and,
-- Reid Avenue: 274 foot long bio-swale
along one side of the highway with
three crossing points for driveways and
108 foot long conveyance system.
• Creek Restoration: This project entails reconnecting the creek with the natural floodplain
using a wetland seepage regime to reduce wetweather velocities, prevent further erosion and
improve flood plain wetland area. The restoration
will involve filling the incised channel (5,250 feet
long) with sand and gravel to raise the stream
bed elevation and constructing a series of shallow pools and riffle grade weir controls to encourage seepage.
• East Meadow Pond Drainage Study: This study
will seek to understand the capacity of the two
East Meadow ponds and the operation of existing flow controls at the outlets of the ponds.
Additionally, it will investigate whether any drain
down regimes can be implemented at the ponds
to prevent flooding in these areas.
• East Meadow Pond Floating Wetlands
Restoration: Restoration of wetland along
Meadowbrook Corridor Pilot Project: This pilot
project will demonstrate the ability of a modular
floating wetlands system to remove excess nutrients from the pond that are carried by stormwater runoff entering the pond and improve the
aesthetic quality of the pond.
• Freeport Creek Day-lighting Study: Freeport
Creek currently runs through a culvert under
industrial and retail properties between East
Meadow Pond and Mill Road for a length of
one-half mile. Creek day-lighting is the redirection of a below-ground stream culvert into an
above-ground channel, typically with the goal of
restoring the stream to a more natural state. This
study will assess whether day-lighting the creek
is feasible, and assess the costs and benefits of
this project.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

This project will be funded and carried out in partnership with the neighboring NYRCR Bellmore/
Merrick Community, which is located to the east of
the Meadowbrook Parkway Corridor and is partially
contained within the Freeport Creek Watershed.
Estimated Project Cost
The total project cost is approximately $2,500,000.
However, the cost would be shared with the neighboring NYRCR Bellmore/Merrick and, given the
weighting of benefits toward Merrick, will cost the
Community an estimated $650,000.
Project Benefits
This proposed project will improve stormwater management for NYRCR Freeport and NYRCR Bellmore/
Merrick and supports the Infrastructure, Natural and
Cultural Resources, and Health and Social Services
Recovery Support Functions (RSFs).
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits

Flooding along the Meadowbrook Parkway
in 2011 (source: Merrick Patch)

the Village of Freeport and the Town of Hempstead,
as it can guide agencies toward projects that are
more cost-effective, resilient, and that bring about
the most co-benefits such as increasing recreational
space and adding new green spaces to commercial
areas.

This project will yield several risk reduction benefits
for the Communities and the natural environment.
As noted, flooding is exacerbated in the Village of
Freeport and the hamlet of Merrick due to the volume of upstream stormwater that drains through
these areas. Through the proposed improvements,
stormwater runoff will be better managed in the vicinity of the Communities and subsequently reduce the
risk of flooding impacts for adjacent property owners.
Flooding in these areas also impacted Merrick Road
and Sunrise Highway during Superstorm Sandy
and Hurricane Irene. Reducing stormwater runoff
impacts will also reduce the risk of Merrick Road and
Sunrise Highway being impassable during and after
future storms and flooding events. This benefits residents and business owners who rely on these roads
to access goods and services, and to access the
Meadowbrook Parkway, which is a regional gateway
for freight deliveries and emergency services.

Health and Social Benefits

Economic Benefits

The proposed project will create a system to retain
stormwater within the Meadowbrook Corridor so
that it can be filtered before it enters the South Shore
Estuary. The Estuary will benefit through improved
water quality and subsequently, ecosystem health.

Owners of businesses adjacent to the corridor will
benefit through reduced recovery costs following
future flooding events. The model that will be constructed will provide future cost-savings benefits to

Through reducing the impacts of stormwater runoff,
the proposed project will enable emergency and
disaster response resources to be allocated to other
areas in future storm and flooding events. In addition,
the improvements can decrease flood damages and
increase the aesthetic value of existing green spaces.
The improvements can create an opportunity in the
future to develop pedestrian and bicycle paths along
the Meadowbrook Corridor. These recreational and
aesthetic improvements can increase property values for residents and businesses. Flooding impacts
can also be reduced at the ball fields owned by
Freeport School District. Finally, socially vulnerable
populations living at the Moxie Rigby Apartments will
also benefit from reduced occurrence and severity of
flooding impacts.
Environmental Benefits

Proposed and Featured Projects

129

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The Creek Restoration pilot project will improve the
quality of wetlands and restore a portion of the natural systems which have been heavily damaged. Birds,
fish, and other fauna as well as several florae will benefit from the restoration. By expanding green space
and reducing the use of hard infrastructure, air quality,
emission reduction, and air temperature benefits may
also be realized. Finally, the proposed model can help
demonstrate the value of green infrastructure solutions, furthering the justification for improvements to
the natural environment in the future.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Modeling and analysis is necessary to help identify
solutions for stormwater management, which include
initiatives for capital projects, updated maintenance
requirements, regulatory improvements, public
awareness programs, and other property owner
assistance measures. These initiatives will improve
the functionality of the stormwater system and
reduce flooding issues in the region, reducing damage to buildings due to flooding and increasing the
chance that buildings will remain habitable.
This project will improve access to critical assets
and facilities during storms and improve access for
fast and safe evacuation. By reducing the amount
of standing water on roadways, vehicle operation
becomes safer during all types of inclement weather,
and road congestion will be reduced. During major
storms, improved drainage will increase the amount
of time that roads are available to emergency services at the storm’s outset, and can return a flooded
road to service more quickly.
Green infrastructure projects will help to clean stormwater before it reaches the estuary, reducing pollution effects on wetlands, which when healthy, provide
a natural barrier and help to filter stormwater before
it enters the estuary and help attenuate storm surge.
Additional benefits of green infrastructure projects
include localized air quality improvements, habitat
restoration, aesthetic improvements and potential
savings of capital and maintenance costs of expensive traditional infrastructure improvements. The pilot
projects offer a local opportunity for public education and job training for an emerging field, in addition
to a local example of best stormwater management

130

Proposed and Featured Projects

practices and resilient infrastructure, to be displayed
and discussed at the proposed Operation SPLASH
Resiliency Education Center.
Risk Reduction Analysis
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy brought the
Communities’ attention to the various causes of flooding and flood damage. NYRCR Freeport and NYRCR
Bellmore/Merrick now understand that they can
improve the way stormwater runoff from upstream
areas is managed in order to more effectively protect
their Communities from flood risk. These initiatives
will increase the capacity of the stormwater system
and reduce flooding issues in the region. This reduces
risk to population and private and natural assets. The
various components of the proposed project will help
Communities reduce the risks of flooding to homes,
businesses, parks and open spaces, civic institutions, and infrastructure systems. The ability to keep
roads operating under more severe circumstances
in the future will also enable more effective disaster
management, response, and recovery, reducing the
risks to public health and safety in the Communities.
General Timeframe for Implementation
The implementation of this project will take approximately 24 months.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Coordination on approvals and permitting will
be required with NYS DOT and Nassau County
Department of Public Works. This may also involve
the NYS DEC, USACE and CZM consistency concurrence (NYS DOS).
Jurisdiction
The majority of drainage is under the jurisdiction of
the Town of Hempstead, Nassau County, New York
State Department of Transportation (NYS DOT) and
the Village of Freeport.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Project: Lifeline Corridor Study and
Pilot Implementation: Merrick Road Corridor

A artist’s impression of Merrick Road with new high-efficiency LED street lights powered by solar panels,
underground power lines, and additional green infrastructure improvements (source: Arup)

Throughout NYRCR Communities of Baldwin,
Freeport, Bellmore/Merrick, Seaford/Wantagh, and
Massapequa post-storm conditions on various roads
compromised life safety and impeded the ability
of first responders and residents to access certain
destinations. Issues, such as lack of power to traffic
lights, lack of street lighting, flooding, downed power
lines, damaged trees, and debris all contributed to
disruptions to the local and regional road network.
By strategically focusing infrastructure investments to
key streets within the five areas, a “Lifeline Network”
would provide maximum accessibility in and out of
residential neighborhoods, as well as in and out of
the area in general. This network of State, County,
and local streets would integrate streetscape design
such as redundant power and improved drainage
systems so that they would be more resilient to
storm events and better serve first responders and
residents before, during and after a storm.

Existing condition along Merrick Road (source: Arup)

Proposed and Featured Projects

131

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The project includes a study to determine the location and specific objectives of the Lifeline Network
streets, followed by the creation of guidelines for
increasing the resiliency of Merrick Road and Sunrise
Highway which traverse all five NYRCR Communities
in east-west orientation, and north-south streets in
each Community.
This study seeks to accomplish the following:
• Coordinate the needs and efforts of all relevant
jurisdictions and agencies;
• Identify a network of “Lifeline Corridors;” and,
• Develop guidelines for street improvements to be
made to Lifeline Corridors.
The study will identify best practices and develop
design guidelines for resilient streetscapes. The
guidelines will include opportunities for:
• “Green Street” design (stormwater management
and green infrastructure);
• Redundant and safe power distribution (standalone lighting and signaling, undergrounding
power lines);
• Resilient street trees (trees more resilient to wind
and saltwater); and,
• “Complete Streets” design (flexible lanes, bicycle
capacity, sidewalk width, treatment and amenities, and appropriate transit provision).
The guidelines will also include cross-section designs
for Merrick Road, Sunrise Highway, and a northsouth street in each Community that integrates the
resilient streetscape methods listed above.
Merrick Road Green Infrastructure Design
Following the guideline development phase, a pilot
project which tests the application of the guidelines
for each NYRCR Community will be designed and
recommended for implementation.
In Freeport, the pilot project will be green infrastructure improvements on Merrick Road between Buffalo
Avenue and the Meadowbrook State Parkway ramps
to reduce flooding and improve stormwater management during and after significant storm events.
132

Proposed and Featured Projects

As a commercial arterial corridor, Merrick Road provides access to many important community assets
in each of the NYRCR Communities. These include
pharmacies, medical offices, gas stations, supermarkets, restaurants, banks, pet hotels, libraries,
and government institutions. Access to these assets
is essential in a post-storm scenario. Further, many
higher density housing developments are prevalent
along Merrick Road, some of which serve socially
vulnerable populations, including seniors, non-English speaking residents and low income populations.
Merrick Road also provides access to critical links
to north-south transportation connectors, including
Ocean Avenue, the Meadowbrook State Parkway,
the Wantagh State Parkway, the Seaford-Oyster Bay
Expressway and Hicksville Road and is a primary
corridor for Nassau Inter-County Express (NICE) bus
service – an important service for non-automobile
owning populations. Access to these regional connectors is essential for safe transportation after a
storm has struck.
Merrick Road is an important lifeline for many people,
businesses and institutions. Due to the importance of
the road, it is proposed that a study and subsequent
pilot projects to improve its post-storm functionality
take place. Based on the findings and results, the
Lifeline Project Corridor guidelines will be applied to
additional streets that are critical at the neighborhood
and community levels.
Estimated Project Cost
Each NYRCR Community’s contribution to the shared
project will be $300,000. Developing streetscape
design guidelines that incorporate resiliency features,
green infrastructure, and complete streets principles
will provide the Communities with the information
needed to refit critical roads to function better in case
of major storm events.
Project Benefits
This project addresses the Infrastructure Recovery
Support Function (RSF). Developing streetscape
design guidelines that incorporate resiliency features,
green infrastructure, and complete streets principles
will provide the Communities with the information
needed to refit critical roads to function better in case
of major storm events.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits

Environmental Benefits

Green street design will improve stormwater drainage and reduce the amount of standing water on
roadways, allowing for safe vehicle operation during
all types of inclement weather. Managing/trimming
street trees will enhance energy security for NYRCR
Communities by removing threats to the electrical
distribution system.

The volume of stormwater being released into the
South Shore Estuary will be reduced and the water
that does reach the estuary will be filtered of toxins.
Tree trimming guidelines will enable the Community
to maintain the environmental benefits of trees,
including surface water retention, decreased soil erosion, shade, and air quality improvements. Complete
street guidelines can reduce the use of private automobiles, reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the
process.

Economic Benefits
This project also reduces government expenditures
by reducing the cost of power supply to public facilities. Enhancement of roadway corridors in this manner will increase the attractiveness of more areas in
the Community. This will provide economic benefit
by diversifying the less risk-prone areas locations to
which waterfront landowners could relocate within
the community.
Health and Social Benefits
Introducing more tolerant and resistant street trees
will reduce the occurrence of downed trees and
limbs that may block roadway access.
By maintaining a stable energy supply along key
roads, emergency response facilities will have a
greater chance of remaining operational during storm
events, reducing risk to the population through faster
emergency response. Buildings and homes throughout the Community, including those housing vulnerable populations, will have a greater chance of retaining electricity and remaining habitable, reducing the
need for immediate emergency response or shelter.
Solar power and battery backup systems for streetlights will improve public safety at night. Access to
critical assets will be secured, including key routes
from coastal areas to Community Assistance
Centers. Recovery efforts can be accomplished
at night, improving the pace at which access to
roadways and properties can be restored, which
has multiple benefits including improving access to
community facilities, reducing roadway congestion,
improving travel time and fuel efficiency, and improving local economic recovery. Complete streets will
improve walking, cycling, and transit infrastructure by
offering viable alternatives to automobile travel and
improving access for vulnerable populations.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
The design guidelines represent a small investment
with multiple returns by changing how roads and
corridors are designed. These guidelines can be
integrated into normal maintenance, operations, and
capital programming activities. When applied to subsequent projects, the guidelines will transform singlepurpose roads into Community Assets serving multiple functions and offering local benefits, as described
above. The guidelines can also be used in an efficient
manner without disrupting normal operations for the
Village. Once developed, they can be applied during
standard maintenance cycles and as they become
manifest in the built environment, the Communities
that sit along them will become more resilient and
robust. Once installed, the new street designs will
increase the safety and reliability of the roadway system during and after any storm event, as the lighting
system will be independent from local power supply,
allowing for quick restoration of access after a storm.
Green infrastructure will enhance the attractiveness
and livability of the Community, while reducing and
filtering stormwater. Enhanced Community attractiveness and livability will help bolster home values
and attract new residents. These functions, in turn,
protect public and private assets throughout the
Community by reducing flood risks and reserving
stormwater capacity to move excess water that cannot be stored or absorbed locally out of the area.
The public and private assets span all asset classes
throughout the vulnerable areas of the Community
and such systems will improve overall population
protection.

Proposed and Featured Projects

133

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Risk Reduction Analysis
Developing the design guidelines will reduce the risk
that future roadway improvements will leave Merrick
Road and other commercial corridors vulnerable to
flooding, which would block transportation access,
and debris, which may interfere with the electrical
distribution network. Independent streetlight power
sources, proposed for the pilot project, will improve
public safety along the road at night, reducing risk
to population. Developing mechanisms to improve
transportation access and options can reduce the
risk of social isolation, which is exacerbated after
disasters, for socially vulnerable populations.
General Timeframe for Implementation
The implementation of this project will take approximately 24 months from commencement.
Regulatory requirement related to the project
The implementation of this project in the Village
of Freeport would involve the New York State
Department of Transportation, Nassau County
Department of Public Works, and the Town of
Hempstead Highway Department. This may also
involve the NYS DEC, USACE and CZM consistency
concurrence (NYS DOS).
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport and Nassau County have
jurisdiction over this project.

134

Proposed and Featured Projects

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Green Infrastructure Plan
Implementation - Main Street Improvements

An artist’s impression of green infrastructure such as rain gardens, and landscaping help reduce stormwater
runoff along South Main Street as part of the Green Infrastructure Plan (source: Arup)

As described in the Green Infrastructure Plan project,
green infrastructure helps to alleviate flooding issues
by diverting and/or delaying stormwater from entering the drainage system. Examples of green infrastructure include permeable paving, bioswales and
green roofs, and stormwater ponds.
This project proposes a pilot implementation of
green infrastructure concepts along Main Street in
Freeport. This project builds on the existing Building
a Better Freeport plan, which recommends street
improvement projects along North Main Street. This
project would operate in tandem with the proposed
improvements, ensuring that pedestrian improvements are accompanied by stormwater improvements such as bioswales or open channel infiltration
areas, to the extent possible. This project will also

Existing condition along South Main Street
(source: Arup)

Proposed and Featured Projects

135

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

fund reconstruction of areas along South Main Street
that have been improved recently, but missed opportunities to incorporate green infrastructure.
The pilot project includes the construction of 1,800
square feet of bioswales on Main Street between
Seaman Avenue and Mill Road, in accordance with
proposed pedestrian safety improvements, 400
square feet of bioswales in existing pedestrian bumpouts – or curb extensions at pedestrian crossings to
reduce crossing distances – on South Main Street,
and 6,000 square feet of rain gardens in the public
plazas at the intersection of South Main Street and
Smith Street.
Estimated Project Cost
The proposed project will cost an estimated
$790,000.
Project Benefits
This project supports the Recovery Support
Functions of Natural and Cultural Resources,
Infrastructure, Health and Social Services, and
Economic Development.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
By diverting or delaying stormwater from entering the
drainage system, green infrastructure helps reduce
the risk of flooding of community assets, homes, and
businesses. Often, green infrastructure projects can
be combined with regular road maintenance or utility
maintenance projects to realize cost savings.

Health and Social Benefits
Green infrastructure systems also create opportunities to improve social resilience and cohesiveness by
creating open spaces for residents to recreate and
interact with one another. Public health can also be
improved through enhancing local air quality and providing places throughout communities for residents
to exercise and enjoy the outdoors.
Environmental Benefits
The environmental benefits of green infrastructure
are vast and varied depending on the improvements
made; however, the benefits of the proposed bioswales and rainwater gardens can include groundwater recharging through facilitating absorption of
stormwater, pollutant reduction in bays and wetlands
by reducing the amount of runoff generated, air quality improvements through increasing carbon-absorbing foliage, and lower summer temperatures through
increasing reducing the footprint of contiguous heat
absorbing materials such as steel, concrete and
pavement.
Cost–Benefit Analysis
Implementation of green infrastructure improvements
along Main Street can bring about the economic,
environmental, and social benefits outlined above.
Through the implementation of these projects, the
full benefits of green infrastructure in the Village can
be realized.

Economic Benefits
Investments in green infrastructure have been proven
to reduce capital costs of installing expansive and
expensive grey infrastructure components (pipes,
drains, outfalls). In addition, the aesthetic value that
green infrastructure provides can encourage economic development along the Main Street corridor
in Freeport, which has been identified in previous
Village planning documents as an area for economic
growth, beautification, and infrastructure investment.

136

Proposed and Featured Projects

0.1-0.3m Ponding Depth
0.3-0.9m Soil Media Layer
0.15m Stone Drainage Layer
Underdrain and Overflow System

Example of a cross section of a bioswale
(source: Arup)

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Risk Reduction Analysis
This featured project would reduce asset risk due to
flooding to infrastructure, housing, businesses, and
parks and open spaces. It will also reduce the risk of
ecosystem loss through pollution carried to wetland
areas – which serve a storm protection function –
and waterways through the stormwater system.
General Timeframe for Implementation
The development of a Green Infrastructure Plan will
take approximately twelve months to complete from
project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Coordination on approvals and permitting may be
required with Nassau County and NYS DOT.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport Department of Public Works
has jurisdiction over the implementation of this
project.

Proposed and Featured Projects

137

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Regional Transit-Oriented
Development, Access, and Parking Study
This project comprises a study of the following: (1)
Redevelopment potential of Downtown Freeport,
particularly within a half mile of the Long Island
Rail Road (LIRR) station, (2) Access to local public
transportation connecting Downtown Freeport, the
Nautical Mile, and the Freeport Industrial Park, and (3)
Optimization of parking within Downtown Freeport,
the Nautical Mile, and the Freeport Industrial Park.
The area around the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) station in Downtown Freeport presents an opportunity
for commercial and residential development outside
of extreme and high risk areas. The study will make

recommendations for enhancing the Downtown area
into a thriving, pedestrian-friendly Community core
with a mix of housing and commercial businesses at
an appropriate scale, and which leverage their proximity to the LIRR station. Currently, there are several
underutilized parcels in the Downtown area, several of
which are devoted to surface parking lots. The study
will identify opportunities to redevelop these parcels
to create a more cohesive, attractive street environment. The potential for the consolidation of parking
spaces within a parking structure will be explored,
as a centrally located parking structure would also

Radius
Mile
0.5

FREEPORT LIRR

Potential Development Sites
Nassau Infill Redevelopment
Feasibility Study
Downtown Study Area
Building A Better Freeport

The area around the Freeport LIRR station presents an opportunity for transit-oriented development (source: Arup)

138

Proposed and Featured Projects

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Local transportation access is also an important element of a resilient community. This study will also
develop a concept for local public transportation
circulator that connects Freeport’s key businesses,
retail, and recreational areas to each other. Key stops
and corridors could include the Nautical Mile, LIRR
Freeport Station, the Industrial Park, North Main
Street, Merrick Road, Atlantic Avenue, and Guy
Lombardo Avenue. This service can also serve as a
form of transportation for socially vulnerable populations and aid post-disaster mobility, when private
vehicle and fuel access may be limited.
Estimated Project Cost
The proposed project will cost an estimated
$500,000.
Project Benefits
This project addresses the Recovery Support
Functions of Infrastructure, Community Planning and
Capacity Building, and Economic Recovery.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits

Freeport Plaza West is future of mixed-use
transit-oriented development (source: Arup)

offer shoreline residents a place to store their vehicles during storm events. Guidelines for the design
of resilient, sustainable, and aesthetically pleasing
parking structures will be developed and strategies
for financing parking structures will be identified.
There is also a need to optimize the parking supply near the Nautical Mile and Freeport Industrial
Park. At the Nautical Mile, the street façade is interrupted by small, individual parking lots that detract
from a pedestrian-friendly environment. The study
will explore options for increase parking supply at
peak periods, while maintaining the character of the
area. Like other older industrial areas, the Freeport
Industrial Park has unique parking needs and vehicle
access needs that are not necessarily reflected in the
built form today. This study will evaluate the parking
needs for the Freeport Industrial Park and recommend appropriate solutions.

In the study of potential development opportunities, lower-risk options for housing and commercial
space that would assist in the potential relocation of
residents or business from higher risk areas will be
evaluated.
Economic Benefits
The redevelopment of underutilized parcels, including existing parking lots, in the Downtown area will
provide opportunities for waterfront landowners
to relocate out of high and extreme risk areas, as
well as attract new residents and business owners
to Freeport. Increased residential and commercial
development will allow Freeport to maintain and
enhance its tax base. The access and parking studies will improve and optimize the local transportation
system, which can bring more customers to businesses in the Downtown, Nautical Mile, and Freeport
Industrial Park.

Proposed and Featured Projects

139

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Health and Social Benefits
A revitalized Downtown that serves as a Community
destination will helps to strengthen social ties. A
focus on transit-oriented development in close proximity to the LIRR station facilitates walking and provides a public health benefit. Safe storage of vehicles
provides a health benefit by reducing the owner’s
anxiety that his or her car will be destroyed by flooding, and reduces the risk that vehicles will be swept
away during a heavy flooding event and block access
to key roads.
Environmental Benefits
Storing cars in a protected structure out of an
extreme or high risk zone reduces the risk of gasoline
leaking into waterways during a flooding event. By
consolidating parking and allowing for redevelopment of parcels, the amount of impervious surfaces
could be reduced, providing the environmental benefit of increasing stormwater capture and reducing
the amount of environmental contaminants reaching
local waterways.
By concentrating redevelopment near a transit hub,
trips formerly taken by cars can be replaced with
walking, bicycling, or mass transit. This reduces
greenhouse gas emissions, and requires less space
for car parking, which in turn lessens the amount of
impervious surface and improves stormwater runoff
performance.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Planning for future resiliency, economic development, public transportation, and parking optimization
in the Community’s key commercial areas would cost
approximately $500,000. In the creation of opportunities for growth, development, and possible relocation to less risky areas, the plan and subsequent
development can reduce the exposure to harm and
the potential need to rebuild by creating opportunities
to relocate within the Community to areas of greater
safety. The development that results from the plan
will generate construction jobs during the building
phase and local jobs at retail or commercial establishments after the project(s) are built. Finally, green
infrastructure can reduce or eliminate the costs of
future stormwater drainage infrastructure by dealing

140

Proposed and Featured Projects

with stormwater on site. The additional tax revenue
that can be generated from attractive commercial,
industrial, and residential development, and the subsequent increase in local spending, can also help to
justify the project cost.
Risk Reduction Analysis
This development, access and parking study will help
to reduce population risk by identifying areas suitable
for relocation of businesses and residents, including
vulnerable populations, from high risk areas to areas
of lower flood risk. The implementation of parking
structures in lower risk areas may also help reduce
risk of flood damage to vehicles that would otherwise
be located in high risk areas.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This featured project can be implemented within 12
months of project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
As the output of the project is a plan, there are no
regulatory requirements related to this project.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport has jurisdiction over the project area.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Downtown Microgrid Phase 3:
Redundant Distribution Surrounding Microgrid
Freeport Electric, the Village of Freeport’s power
authority, owns and maintains power generation and
distribution infrastructure throughout the Village. As
a Village-owned utility, Freeport Electric is committed
to providing reliable and affordable energy, and investigating innovative ways to maintain these positive
features of living and doing business in Freeport. An
emerging trend for small scale and contained energy
distribution is the development of ‘microgrids.’ A
microgrid is a small-scale version of the centralized
electricity system that includes all the necessary
components to operate in isolation of the centralized
grid. Microgrids operate independently allow for the
import or export of electricity when connected to the
wider electricity grid. This enables power continuity
in critical areas when power outages and service
disruptions affect the wider grid. Downtown Freeport
has been identified by Freeport Electric as an ideal
location for a microgrid demonstration project.

The power generation and transmission components
of the microgrid include:

Phase 1 of the Downtown Microgrid project (described
in a proposed project above) will investigate the
engineering and financial feasibility of implementing
power generation and transmission components of
the proposed microgrid. Phase 2 (described in a
proposed project above) proposes the purchase of a
‘black-start’ – the ability to restart a generator after a
blackout without the use of external electrical power
transmission – generator at Power Plant I, the heart
of the proposed microgrid. This project proposes the
implementation of Phase 3, which involves the installation of four new underground circuits on the streets
to create the border of the microgrid. These circuits
increase redundancy and replace outdated circuits,
while increasing capacity.

Downtown Freeport has a high concentration of critical assets, infrastructure, and facilities instrumental
to disaster response and recovery. Critical assets
include Verizon Wireless (telecommunications provider); the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) Freeport
station and associated substation that provides
power to the LIRR Babylon Branch; the Village Hall
and police headquarters; three firehouses including
the headquarters; four public schools, the Freeport
Memorial Library; numerous health and community
services; and businesses that serve post-disaster
functions (e.g., supermarkets, banks, gas stations).
All of these facilities are essential to the economic
and social well-being of the Community. The Freeport
Memorial Library and the JW Dodd School, located
within the microgrid project area, are proposed to
serve as Community Assistance Centers (see project
description below) after disasters.

• Replace an outdated diesel generator at Freeport
Power Plant I with a dual-fuel (diesel/natural gas)
generator with “black-start” capability, which is
the ability to restart a generator after a blackout
without the use of external electrical power inputs.
(See Microgrid Phase 2 project, following)
• Four new underground circuits around
the border of the microgrid.
• Four 250 kilowatt (kW) fuel cells at
Freeport’s potable water pump station.
• One 1 megawatt (MW) wind turbine
near Freeport Power Plant II.
• Solar farms at Freeport Recreation
Center 1 MW, Power Plant I (150 kW)
and Power Plant II (100 kW).

During Superstorm Sandy, heavy winds and flooding
caused damage to Freeport Electric’s power distribution network, resulting in outages lasting multiple
days. Critical facilities that lacked sufficient backup
power were adversely affected. As a result, residents
and business owners experienced delays in obtaining critical life supporting supplies such as food, fuel,
and pharmaceuticals.

Proposed and Featured Projects

141

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The 2013 Draft Freeport Hazard Mitigation Plan
and other Village of Freeport planning documents
cite downtown as an important area for continued
economic growth and the certainty of power supply will allow businesses and community services to
quickly reopen after storm events and spur economic
growth.
Estimated Project Cost
This project will cost approximately $30.5 million.
Project Benefits
This featured project supports the Recovery
Support Functions of Infrastructure, Health and
Social Services, Natural and Cultural Resources,
Community Planning and Capacity Building, Housing,
and Economic Development.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
Developing a central location with a cluster of essential services that can effectively avoid power loss during and after an event is valuable to Community residents and businesses. Reducing the risk of power
loss through diversifying energy sources and creating
redundancy within the distribution network provides
greater certainty to residents and business owners,
allowing them to move about the Community and
access resources and businesses safely with the aid
of well-lit streets and functioning traffic signals.
Economic Benefits
Economically, a microgrid provides an opportunity to
reduce loads on the existing Freeport Electric grid,
reducing costs to Freeport Electric and public expenditures by the Village. Business continuity can also
be improved and more quickly restored after a disaster, which can offset losses caused by a reduced
customer base. Increasing capacity for anticipated
downtown/transit-oriented
development
(TOD)
growth, characterized by mixed-use residential
development in close proximity to a transit station,
can create new job opportunities and tax revenue.

142

Proposed and Featured Projects

Health and Social Benefits
Increasing capacity for TOD also enables relocation of residents and business from vulnerable areas
to upland areas. Finally, this project will provide an
important educational benefit as one of the innovative
pilot projects that can be described at the Operation
SPLASH Resiliency Education Center (described
above).
Environmental Benefits
Increasing the use of cleaner energy, through the
implementation of renewable sources such as solar
and wind and lower emissions sources such as fuel
cell and natural gas create the environmental benefits
of reduced emissions and improved air quality.
Cost–Benefit Analysis
The multitude of potential benefits discussed above,
and ability to support each of the Recovery Support
Functions justifies the cost of examining the feasibility of a microgrid in Downtown Freeport. Through
a phased implementation of the various microgrid
components, many more indirect benefits will be
realized.
Risk Reduction Analysis
Providing a redundant distribution network around
the microgrid will enhance energy security and resilience for key community facilities, businesses, and
residents. By installing the four circuits, instead of
two, there is reduced risk that anticipated future
demand will exceed capacity, and reduced risk that
power cannot be distributed, should a problem arise
with one set of circuits.
By having a stable energy supply, emergency
response facilities will have a greater chance of
remaining operational, reducing risk to the population
through faster emergency response. Buildings and
homes throughout the community will have a greater
chance of retaining electricity and remaining habitable, reducing the need for immediate emergency
response or shelter.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

General Timeframe for Implementation
This featured project can be implemented within 24
months of project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Approval or permitting may be required from Nassau
County Department of Transportation (DOT), New
York State DOT, and Long Island Power Authority/
Public Service Enterprise Group for this phase of the
microgrid implementation.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport and Freeport Electric are the
entities with primary jurisdiction over this project
area. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC) authorize the New York Independant Systems
Operator (NYISO) to grant permission for grid interconnection. The Public Services Comission (PSC)
and New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYS DEC) may also have jurisdiction
over this project.

Proposed and Featured Projects

143

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Protection for Freeport Electric’s
Power Plant II, Phase 2: Construction
Phase 1 of Protection for Freeport Electric’s Power
Plant II develops, analyzes, and designs a coastal
flood protection system for Power Plant II. This project will fund the construction of the recommended
long-term flood protection options developed in
Phase 1. Further funding from State and Federal
grant programs for construction is required.
This project leverages other resiliency activities being
taken by the Village to protect Power Plant II. A
National Fish and Wildlife Foundation (NFWF) grant is
currently being sought to restore the natural coastline
and ecosystem immediately to the east of the plant,
which will simultaneously restore a natural ecosystem and provide a layer of natural protection around
Power Plant II. Should the NFWF grant be secured,
the grant work will be coordinated with Phase 1 and
Phase 2 of this project to ensure the designed flood
protection is compatible with and enhanced by the
protection afforded by the natural system.
Freeport Electric, the Village of Freeport’s power utility, owns and maintains power generation and distribution infrastructure throughout the Village. Power
Plant II is one of two Freeport Electric’s power plants
and is the primary power generating facility for more
than 43,000 residents and 1,800 businesses within
Freeport. It is capable of producing up to 87% of
Freeport’s total electrical power output.
Power Plant II is highly vulnerable to coastal surges
due to its location at the southern edge of the
Industrial Park peninsula. Though major damage

was not sustained during Superstorm Sandy and
Hurricane Irene, with the advent of a slightly larger
storm surge many components of Power Plant II
could be destroyed, potentially creating floating hazards and fuel spills. According to the Freeport Electric
Director and staff, who led a site visit with Committee
members, State planning officials and the Consultant
Team, floodwaters reached the control center door
and fuel tanks were shifted on their bases (despite
being bolted down) by the large volume of water from
Superstorm Sandy’s surge.
The risk assessment presented in the 2013 Draft
Freeport Hazard Mitigation Plan states that a
Category three or four hurricane could damage or
destroy all power generation equipment at the Plant,
including generators, motors, transformers, and
cooling towers, and could tear fuel storage tanks
from their foundations, contaminating waterways
and creating floating hazards in the process.
Estimated Project Cost
This featured project is estimated to cost between
$10,000,000 and $20,000,000, depending on the
design recommended in Phase 1.
Project Benefits
This featured project supports the Recovery Support
Functions of Infrastructure, Health and Social
Services, and Natural and Cultural Resources.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
The construction of an environmentally conscious
flood protection system will benefit Freeport Electric,
residents of southern Freeport and businesses in the
Industrial Park and along the coast. Freeport Electric
would reduce its risk of losing fuel, power generation
potential, and sustaining damage to other portions
of the site due to a potential floating hazard in future
storms. Residents and businesses are at a reduced
risk of sustaining loss of life, injury, and property damage from floating and contamination hazards.
Economic Benefits

Freeport Canal, damage from Superstorm
Sandy(source: Arup)

144

Proposed and Featured Projects

Freeport Electric benefits economically by protecting
key assets and reducing the potential foregone costs
of replacing fuel, generation equipment, and repairing

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

buildings after future storms. As noted by Freeport
Electric staff, depending on the protection measures
selected, the project could also offer protection for
the adjacent Equus Freeport Power Plant, which
supplies power to the Long Island Power Authority /
Public Service Enterprise Group grid, as well as the
broader Industrial Park peninsula, which is a potential
key local economic driver.
Health and Social Benefits
By having a stable energy supply, emergency
response facilities will have a greater chance of
remaining operational, reducing risk to the population
through faster emergency response. Buildings and
homes throughout the Community will have a greater
chance of retaining electricity and remaining habitable, reducing the need for immediate emergency
response or shelter.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project can be implemented within 12 months of
project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
This project may require permits and/or coordination
with NYS Department of Environmental Conservation,
NYS Department of State (NYS DOS), U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, and U.S. Coast Guard. NYS
DOS Coastal Consistency approval may be required
for any activity within the coastal zone.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport and its power company,
Freeport Electric, have jurisdiction over this project
area.

Environmental Benefits
The bays, marshes, wetlands, and wildlife will be
better protected from contamination hazards in the
event of a stronger storm surge dislodging one or
more of the Power Plant’s fuel tanks.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
By protecting Power Plant II, a significant economic
benefit can be realized in the event of a future storm
surge. The costs of an environmental cleanup and
repairs to private properties or businesses would
outweigh the costs of the construction of a flood protection system. In addition, through coordination with
the NFWF grant, if secured, environmental benefits of
this project will be enhanced.
Risk Reduction Analysis
The implementation of this project will reduce the
risk of catastrophic loss of key Freeport Electric fuel
storage assets, which are critical in a post-disaster
scenario, due to flooding caused by storm surges.
Construction of the flood protection system will reduce
flood risk to Power Plant II and enhance energy security for tens of thousands of residents, businesses,
and key Community facilities. Environmental risk of
contamination from leaking oil tanks and inundated
machinery and equipment will be reduced.
Proposed and Featured Projects

145

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Convert Home Heating to
Natural Gas in Extreme and High Risk Areas
This project will develop policy recommendations
and an incentive program for early adopters looking
to convert home heating oil systems to natural gas,
or other renewable methods such as solar, in extreme
and high risk areas. Village of Freeport staff, NYRCR
Committee members, and Community residents
all reported that residential fuel tanks were a major
source of damage during Superstorm Sandy. Home
heating oil tanks across south shore Communities
leaked during inundation as floodwaters displaced
fuel inside the tanks. The leaked fuel caused permanent damage to residences, businesses, parks,
marshlands, and waterways. In some instances,
tanks were removed from their foundations by the
force of floodwaters and became floating hazards to
people, cars, buildings, and infrastructure. Residents,
businesses, and community organizations are still
cleaning up the damage from displaced oil more
than a year after Superstorm Sandy and some residents can still smell heating oil fumes in their homes.
Although existing fuel oil tanks are required to be
strapped down, compliance with this regulation has
been difficult for Nassau to enforce due to the added
homeowner expense.
Home heating oil tanks and systems create significant safety and environmental hazards during
a flooding event. Ideally, all structures in extreme,
high, and moderate risk areas will convert over time
to natural gas and/or other power sources for heat
and hot water. The benefit of conversion is to remove
heating oil systems in homes and other buildings in
flood areas thereby reducing the risk that harmful
pollutants will be released into the environment.
The cost for this project includes the administrative
cost for changing applicable planning and building
regulations and for establishing a budget for the
incentive program.
Estimated Project Cost
This featured project will cost an estimated $50,000
to implement.
Project Benefits
This project addresses the RSFs of Infrastructure,
Housing, Natural and Cultural Resources, and Health
and Social Services.

146

Proposed and Featured Projects

Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
The primary benefit of this project lies in the reduced
risk of contamination and damage to homes, businesses, parks and open spaces, waterways, and
infrastructure in flood risk areas. Reduction of debris,
such as oil tanks, will help maintain roads used to
provide public safety services and access to community resources. Nearly one-quarter of Freeport’s
population of more than 43,000 residents live in NYS
DOS identified high and extreme risk areas, and
would benefit directly from these regulations.
Economic Benefits
The economic benefits include the reduced costs
of repairs to damage caused by oil tanks that may
detach and becoming floating debris in future
storms, as well as mitigating the costs of cleaning up
contamination that displaced fuel from the tanks may
leave behind after flood waters retreat.
Health and Social Benefits
This project improves energy security for affected
properties, reducing the chance that they will be
without heat during and after major autumn or winter storms. In addition, by reducing the chance of
oil leaks, it reduces public health and environmental risks. Community residents and businesses will
experience public health benefits from breathing
cleaner air, both in homes and in the Community.
Environmental Benefits
The bays, marshes, wetlands, and wildlife will be
better protected from contamination hazards.
Environmentally, the benefits include reduced contamination of waterways, groundwater systems, and
surrounding ecosystems caused by displaced fuel,
as well as mitigating the potential damage to flora
and fauna caused by floating tanks. Additionally,
conversion to natural gas and solar heating systems
will reduce the Community’s emission of greenhouse
gases. The Community will benefit through improved
local air quality and reduce its contribution to climate
change through reduced air pollution.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Cost-Benefit Analysis
By developing design guidelines and a phasing policy
that includes incentives for local homeowners, this
program can introduce natural gas and phase out
home heating oil over time. This would allow areas
to evolve and convert to this alternative fuel supply,
which carries less risk for pollution in homes, businesses, and the environment as it does not carry the
potential for toxic fluids to mix with floodwaters.
Risk Reduction Analysis
This project will reduce both environmental risk and
the risk of damage to properties from fuel oil spills. It
will also reduce the potential for damage to structures
from floating oil tanks that have become unearthed
or dislodged. Less floating debris will contribute to
an overall reduction in roadway blockages, improving accessibility during and immediately after a major
storm event. Additionally, conversion to alternative
heating sources will reduce the risk that home will be
without heat during and after major winter storms,
as fuel delivery may be stalled if roads are sufficiently
incapacitated.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project can be implemented within 12 months of
project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
This project will require coordination with National
Grid, which has provision over the local public natural gas system. Regulatory changes will be made to
the Village’s planning and building construction code.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport Building Department administers building codes. National Grid is responsible for
construction and maintenance of the regional natural
gas network.

Proposed and Featured Projects

147

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Regional Stormwater Drainage
Cleanout, Survey, and Verification
During storms like Superstorm Sandy, excessive
amounts of stormwater runoff and coastal inundation left many drains and sewer lines clogged with
debris. This led to an increased breadth and severity of flooding along stormwater drainage corridors,
such as the Meadowbrook State Parkway corridor.
The NYRCR Freeport Community also reported that
the often clogged and poorly maintained stormwater
drainage system in Freeport and across the County
exacerbates and causes flooding across the Village.
This project seeks to clean out all storm drains south
of (and including) Merrick Road in the Community.
While the drains are being accessed, a comprehensive survey will be conducted to verify and document
all stormwater infrastructure contained in the local
data inventory for the Freeport area.
Estimated Project Cost
The proposed project will cost an estimated
$4,800,000 to implement.

Economic Benefits
By reducing the exposure to flood damage, this project will reduce the risk for economic losses associated with rebuilding and repair in future flood events.
It also reduces the likelihood that businesses in the
area would close by lessening the risk for flood damage to both personal and public property and assets.
Finally, the project provides an information basis for
additional system improvements, better asset management, and reduced future costs associated with
deferred maintenance.
Health and Social Benefits
In addition to reduced flood damages, the benefits
include reduced delays in accessing schools, parks,
and homes during tidal flooding events or after heavy
rainfalls. Local residents, including seniors, will benefit
from being able to access critical services on Merrick
Road, such as food stores and pharmacies. Health
risks related to exposure to contaminated water are
reduced.

Project Benefits
The area south of Merrick Road is subject to episodic
flooding and has a high level of vulnerability during
a storm event. The featured project addresses the
Infrastructure, Housing, Economic Development, and
Natural and Cultural Resources Recovery Support
Functions (RSF) and provides risk reduction and
resiliency, economic, environmental, and health and
social benefits. The project will increase the efficiency
of the existing drainage system by upgrading stormwater defense in critical areas prone to flooding.
Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
The improvements associated with this project would
offer more reliable performance of infrastructure systems on a day-to-day basis by ensuring adequate
drainage of rainfall and preventing the backflow of
flood waters during a significant high tide or storm
surge. This, in turn, maintains access to the local
community, offers greater protection for property
in vulnerable areas, and reduces the potential for
harm during storm events by reducing the volume
and speed of floodwaters should they enter the
Community.

148

Proposed and Featured Projects

Environmental Benefits
Installation of trash/bar screens will have an environmental benefit by reducing the amount of debris
reaching bodies of water where it could potentially
damage sensitive ecosystems.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Stormwater and drainage issues are important to the
Committee and Community. There is regular flooding
throughout the Community and the current drainage
system is directly exposed to both tidal and storm
surge inundation events. For a cost of $4,800,000,
this investment will bring the current infrastructure
systems into a state of good repair and offer another
line of defense against flooding from rainfall, storm
surge, or high tide. It also protects Community
Assets, both public and private, reducing both the
risk of flooding and the potential costs for rebuilding
after a major event. The project will reduce flooding
to thousands of homes south of Merrick Road in the
Community, as well as several parks, schools, marinas, and fire department facilities.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Risk Reduction Analysis
This project will reduce flood risk by ensuring that
stormwater infrastructure is cleaned of debris and
returned to a state of optimal system function.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project can be implemented within 24 months of
project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
This project will require permits and/or coordination
with New York State, Nassau County, and the Town
of Hempstead.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport DPW has jurisdiction of the
majority of the storm drainage infrastructure.

Proposed and Featured Projects

149

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Street Tree
Maintenance and Guidelines
The Village and its key routes are susceptible to
downed trees and tree limbs in future hurricanes,
tropical storms, winter storms, ice storms, and
during heavy wind gusts. Downed trees and tree
limbs made roads impassable, delayed emergency
response and damaged the power distribution system during Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene.
This project will study current street tree provision
and maintenance, and recommend policy changes
to improve the resilience of the Village’s infrastructure
and increase overall public safety while maintaining a
balance with the aesthetic and environmental benefits street trees provide. Streets containing or leading
to Community Assistance Centers (see description
above), such as Guy Lombardo Avenue, and areas
with higher concentrations of street trees, such as
the northwestern portion of the Village, could be
included for treatment and improvement.
Estimated Project Cost
The proposed project will cost an estimated $100,000
to implement.

Health and Social Benefits
By having a stable energy supply, emergency
response facilities will have a greater chance of
remaining operational, reducing risk to the population through faster emergency response. Buildings
and homes throughout the community will have a
greater chance of retaining electricity, reducing the
need for immediate emergency response or shelter.
Trees create attractive spaces that promote pride of
place and a more cohesive community.
Environmental Benefits
Having a better understanding of what trees can be
utilized as street trees while minimizing the chances
of trees or tree limbs falling will also enable a balance between public safety needs and environmental
needs. Street trees provide the benefit of improving
local air quality, reducing greenhouse gas emissions
that enter the atmosphere, potentially reducing the
quantity of stormwater that enters the drainage system and the amount of toxins that enter waterways,
and providing shade and a cooling effect in built up
environments on hot days.

Project Benefits
This featured project will support the Recovery
Support Functions of Infrastructure and Natural and
Cultural Resources.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
The attention to managing trees will enhance energy
security and resilience for the Community by removing obstacles and threats to the distribution system,
such as electrical fires. It will also help reduce the
occurrence of downed trees and limbs that may
cause accidents, injuries and deaths, and block
roadway access to key evacuation routes and routes
to critical community facilities, and obstructs paths
for emergency response vehicles.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
An informed tree planting, replacement and maintenance plan will allow the Village to continue to provide the benefits of street trees while minimizing the
potential risks and associated economic and public
safety risks they can create.
Risk Reduction Analysis
The improvement in managing trees will provide
energy security and resilience for the Community by
removing obstacles and threats to the distribution
system, as well as reduce risk to the population by
maintaining access to evacuation routes and critical
community facilities and for emergency response
vehicles.

Economic Benefits
Attractive tree-lined streets draw visitors to retail
areas and encourage them to linger, providing benefits to businesses and the people they employ.
Trees also reduce urban heat island effects, leading
to lower air conditioning costs.

150

Proposed and Featured Projects

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project can be implemented within 12 months of
project commencement.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
The Village’s Department of Public Works (DPW) may
change some regulations as a result of this study.
Coordination may be required with Nassau County
and New York State, in addition to the Long Island
Power Authority/Public Service Enterprise Group.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport DPW has jurisdiction over
the majority of the street trees within Freeport.
Coordination may be required with the public agencies listed above.

Proposed and Featured Projects

151

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Green Infrastructure Plan
It was made clear by residents that storm surge was
not the only cause of flooding in the Community during Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene. Flash
flooding is an issue in many areas and it exacerbated
inundation levels in certain areas. This is caused by the
confluence of several factors. Runoff from upstream
outfalls discharges into the Community and saltwater intrusion had reduced the capacity of wetlands
to mitigate storm surge impacts. During Superstorm
Sandy, the storm surge coming in from the bay and
the water from stormwater outfalls converged near
Moxie Rigby Apartments (Freeport Public Housing)
and added to an already severe flood. Additionally,
the paved surfaces and roofs that make a significant
portion of Freeport’s total area impervious contribute
to stormwater runoff and the overflow of the stormwater system during heavy rains. During tidal flooding events and coastal surges, stormwater system
capacity is reduced and runoff increases the extent
and severity of flood damage.

the drainage system, allow for infiltration, and reduce
the level of contaminated runoff that reaches the Bay
during rain events.

Green infrastructure helps to mitigate these issues by
diverting and/or delaying stormwater from entering
the drainage system. Examples of green infrastructure include permeable paving, bioswales and green
roofs, and stormwater ponds. It is recommended
that a network of green infrastructure systems be
developed across Freeport to reduce demands on

Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits

Filter Fabric

Electric
Conduit

Stormwater Planter w/
Detention Chamber

Natural Gas
ICT
Conduit
Geothermal Header

Geothermal Pipe

Building Services Vault

This project will fund development of a Green
Infrastructure Plan that would identify green infrastructure opportunities based on feasibility, level of
impact, funding and street reconstruction schedules.
Opportunities to manage stormwater on public and
private properties will also be identified and recommended in the Plan.
Estimated Project Cost
This featured project will cost an estimated $500,000.
Project Benefits
This project will support the Recovery Support
Functions of Infrastructure and Natural and Cultural
Resources.
Permeable Pavers

By diverting or delaying stormwater from entering the
drainage system, green infrastructure helps reduce
the risk of flooding of community assets, homes,
and businesses. Having a specified plan for where
and when green infrastructure can be implemented
throughout the Community reduces the chances that
Stone Drainage Course

Perforated Storm Pipe

Water

Storm Sewer

Sanitary Sewer

ICT Conduit

Electric Conduit

Stormwater Planter w/
Detention Chamber
Building Services Vault

Example of a cross section through a green street (source: Arup)

152

Proposed and Featured Projects

Natural Gas
Water
Reclaimed Water

Sanitary Sewer

Storm Sewer

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

opportunities to install these systems will be overlooked in the future. Often, green infrastructure projects can be combined with regular road maintenance
or utility maintenance projects to realize cost savings.
Economic Benefits
Investments in green infrastructure have been proven
to reduce capital costs of installing expansive and
expensive grey infrastructure components (pipes,
drains, outfalls). The aesthetic value that green infrastructure provides can encourage economic development in built-up environments where roads and
buildings dominate the landscape.
Health and Social Benefits
Green infrastructure systems also create opportunities to improve social resilience and cohesiveness by
creating open spaces for residents to recreate and
communicate. Public health can also be improved
through enhancing local air quality and providing
places throughout communities for residents to exercise and enjoy the outdoors.

Risk Reduction Analysis
This featured project would reduce asset risk due to
flooding to infrastructure, housing, businesses, and
parks and open spaces. It will also reduce the risk of
ecosystem loss through pollution carried to wetland
areas – which serve a storm protection function –
and waterways through the stormwater system.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project can be implemented within 12 months of
project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
As the outcome of this featured project is a plan,
there are no related regulatory requirements.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport Department of Public Works
has jurisdiction over this project.

Environmental Benefits
The environmental benefits of green infrastructure
are vast and varied depending on the improvements
made; however, they can include groundwater
recharging through facilitating absorption of stormwater, pollutant reduction in bays and wetlands by
reducing the amount of runoff generated, air quality
improvements through increasing carbon-absorbing
foliage, and lower summer temperatures through
increasing shade and reducing the footprint of contiguous heat absorbing materials such as steel, concrete, and pavement.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
A green infrastructure plan identifies areas for
improvements and clearly outlines the economic,
environmental, and social benefits of each proposed
improvement. Having an upfront plan to reference
when opportunities arise can minimize planning and
design costs that may discourage implementation.
Through this proactive process, the full benefits of
green infrastructure in the Village can be realized.

Proposed and Featured Projects

153

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Public Bulkhead Repair
Bulkheads are structures designed to prevent erosion along the shoreline. While not intended to serve
a flood protection function, weak links or gaps in the
system can increase the impact of coastal flooding in certain areas. Superstorm Sandy caused
damage to many bulkheads in the Community and
across the south shore. In addition, the storm surge
height was greater than the current recommended
bulkhead height, leaving many areas inundated with
floodwaters.
This project will fund the inspection and identification
of the public property bulkheads at street ends that
require replacement and raising. Bulkheads would be
replaced at an appropriate height and constructed
using industry best practice materials, based on sitespecific requirements. The proposed bulkheads will
be more resilient to erosion, wind, and water damage
than traditional timber bulkheads.
The project will identify, design, and construct bulkheads along the Freeport waterfront. It includes a
detailed inspection of all existing bulkheads to identify
specific issues that need to be addressed as well as
potential regulatory changes. Existing bulkheads at
street ends and canal ends that are public property
will be examined. Bulkheads would be at or above
the recommended Village of Freeport height of 5.9 ft.
above North American Vertical Datum (NAVD).
The Village of Freeport received funding through
the Long Island Regional Economic Development
Council to replace 1,065 linear feet of bulkhead at
Waterfront Park, but the funding falls significantly
short of the amount required to complete the project.
This project seeks to fund the remainder. This project
would also fund the reconstruction of 200 linear feet
of damaged bulkhead at Fairview Park and 75 linear
feet of damaged bulkhead at Hampton Place.
Estimated Project Cost
The proposed project will cost an estimated
$950,000.
Project Benefits
This project supports the Recovery Support
Functions (RSFs) of Infrastructure and Natural and
Cultural Resources.

154

Proposed and Featured Projects

Erosion behind bulkheading along the shoreline of
Waterfront Park (source: Columbia University)

Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
The investment will bring the current infrastructure
into a state of good repair and help avoid the cost
of erosion that would otherwise occur during rainfall,
storm surge, or high tide. This line of defense would
directly protect roads, allow reliable performance
on a day-to-day basis, maintain access to the local
community, provide greater protection for property
in vulnerable areas and reduce harm during storm
events. This protection, in turn, reduces the ongoing
need for maintenance and the future cost for road
rebuilding and repair during the natural life cycle of
the asset.
Economic Benefits
By reducing the exposure to erosion, this project
will reduce the risk for economic loss associated
with deterioration and the subsequent rebuilding
and repair of roadway systems. This project will
also heighten property and infrastructure security
by strengthening the edges of the built environment
along canals and waterways.
Health and Social Benefits
The repaired and improved bulkheads may contribute
to reduced flooding impacts on local streets, helping to maintain access during and after flood events.
The reconstruction of the bulkheads will provide help

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

improve the consistency of the coast, reducing the
risk of damage to Freeport’s existing open space and
community recreational assets.

of Environmental Conservation. This will also involve
the USACE and CZM consistency concurrence (NYS
DOS).

Environmental Benefits

Jurisdiction

Using industry best practice materials for the bulkhead replacement can benefit the environment by
limiting the impact of damaged bulkheads on waterways and reducing soil erosion, sedimentation, and
saltwater intrusion of soil and groundwater systems.

The Village of Freeport has jurisdiction over Villageowned bulkheads.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
The reconstruction of the bulkheads will reduce erosion and potential damage to important community
assets by having higher and stronger barriers at
street ends or along public properties. There is also
the potential benefit of coastal protection, reducing
the risk of damage to the Community’s assets such
as parks, homes, and businesses. The bulkheads
can reduce flooding impacts on local streets, helping
to maintain access during and after flood events by
reducing erosion effects. The foregone costs of environmental and public and private property damage
justify the costs.
Risk Reduction Analysis
This project reduces flood risk to roadways, utilities, and public and private property during storms.
Decreasing the potential of unrepaired bulkheads
becoming floating debris during future storm events
also reduces risks to public safety and environmental
quality. By maintaining the state of good repair, these
facilities will be more likely to survive intact during a
major storm.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project can be implemented within 12 months of
project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
The Village grants permits for bulkhead installation, however, coordination may be required with
the Town of Hempstead Department of Waterways
and Conservation and New York State Department

Proposed and Featured Projects

155

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Key Intersection:
Streetlight Retrofit Pilot Project
The NYRCR Freeport Community reported that
there was a lack of clarity on which routes to use
and which streets would provide access to critical
facilities, relief services, and information centers during and after Superstorm Sandy and other recent
storms. Similarly, residents expressed frustration with
lack of information on what to do, where to go for
help, and how to get there following the storm.
Two projects (this project and Key intersection signage, below) will help to provide clarity for which
roads to use after a storm. This project proposes a
proof of concept to provide solar power and battery
backups for streetlights along Guy Lombardo Avenue
and at designated Community Assistance Centers.
The streetlights will remain illuminated in the event
of a power outage and will allow residents to follow
them toward the critical resources offered by the
Community Assistance Centers. A complementary
proposed project is to provide wayfinding signage,
as detailed in Key Intersection Signage project that
follows.
In addition to retrofitting five intersections along Guy
Lombardo Avenue, streetlights will be retrofitted at
the intersection of South Main Street and Mill Road
and along the street frontages of the five designated
Community Assistance Centers: Freeport Memorial
Library, Freeport Recreation Center, Freeport High
School, Atkinson School, and JW Dodd School.
Backup batteries for these units can typically
store enough energy to function for three days,
which is about the amount of time it took to fully
restore Freeport Electric’s distribution system after
Superstorm Sandy. Upon a successful pilot project,
a full solar streetlight system could be implemented,
allowing Freeport Electric to divert their efforts to
other areas of need during outages and system
disruptions.
Estimated Project Cost
The pilot project will cost an estimated $520,000.
Project Benefits
This project will improve nighttime public safety for
emergency responders, officials, residents, and businesses who may require access to shelter, supplies,
or assistance after a storm event – be it a hurricane,
156

Proposed and Featured Projects

wind storm, major rainfall, or winter weather. This
project addresses the Recovery Support Functions
of Infrastructure, Community Planning and Capacity
Building, and Health and Social Services.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
The solar power and battery backup systems for
streetlights will improve public safety at night for
emergency responders, officials, residents and businesses in NYRCR Freeport who may require access
to shelter, supplies, or assistance after a storm event
– be it a hurricane, wind storm, winter weather, or
major rainfall. These events often knock out power
lines and render entire areas dark making movement
after dark difficult and treacherous. A lack of streetlighting also increases the risk of criminal activity
which is one of the main reasons people chose not to
leave their homes during storms, as they feel a need
to personally protect their primary place of residence.
Economic Benefits
This project reduces government expenditures by
reducing the cost of power supply to public facilities.
Health and Social Benefits
This project secures access to critical assets, including key routes from coastal areas to Community
Assistance Centers. Recovery efforts can continue
after daylight hours, improving the pace at which
access to roadways and properties can be restored.
This has multiple co-benefits, including improving
access to Community facilities, reducing roadway
congestion, improving travel time and fuel efficiency,
and expediting local economic recovery.
Environmental Benefits
Replacing grid-powered streetlights with a 100%
renewable power source reduces the Community’s
reliance on fossil fuels, which contribute to global climate change through the production of greenhouse
gases.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Cost-Benefit Analysis
This small investment has a significant return on the
public safety of the area where these streetlights are
located and allows for the protection of key asset
classes of housing, public facilities, and infrastructure. The project will allow for emergency responders
to move to the necessary locations at night quickly
and safety. This would allow them to respond to calls
for help, fires, potential threats to personal property,
and to secure neighborhoods. It would also allow
residents to safety move at night once they are
allowed to return to an area. As a pilot project, the
Village has the flexibility to test the technology prior
to installing the new streetlights across the Village,
which would result in a large cost savings should the
lights not prove effective.
Risk Reduction Analysis
This project will reduce public safety risk to the population by illuminating the roads at night and by securing access to evacuation routes and Community
facilities during and after a storm. It can reduce the
number of people in high risk areas during a major
storm event if the pilot lowers the number of people
who choose not to heed warnings or evacuation
orders and instead remain in order to secure their
private property.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project can be implemented within 12 months of
project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
The Village of Freeport Department of Public Works
has regulatory authority over these streets.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport has jurisdiction over Guy
Lombardo Avenue and the other implementation
areas.

Proposed and Featured Projects

157

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Key Intersection Signage
The NYRCR Freeport Community reported there was
a lack of clarity on which routes to use and which
streets would provide access to critical facilities,
relief services, and information centers during and
after Superstorm Sandy and other recent storms.
Similarly, residents expressed frustration with lack of
information on what to do, where to go for help, and
how to get there following the storm.
Two projects will help to provide clarity for which
roads to use after a storm. This project proposes
to implement wayfinding and destination signage
directing people toward designated Community
Assistance Centers (described above). This project complements the solar streetlights and battery
backup pilot described in Key intersection streetlight
retrofit pilot project (above).
This project proposes to install signage along Guy
Lombardo Avenue at the intersections of South Main
Street and Mill Road, and at each of the five designated Community Assistance Centers: Freeport
Memorial Library, Freeport Recreation Center,
Freeport High School, Atkinson School and JW
Dodd School.
Estimated Project Cost
The proposed project will cost an estimated $60,000.
Project Benefits
This project addresses the Recovery Support
Functions of Infrastructure, and Community Planning
and Capacity Building.
Health and Social Benefits
Wayfinding signage will improve public safety after
storms for residents and businesses in Freeport who
may require a place to recharge cellphones or other
devices, obtain supplies, or gather with neighbors
following a traumatic event. While the direct benefits
of the Community Assistance Centers (CACs) are
discussed separately, securing access to the CACs
by way of this project will enhance their effectiveness.

158

Proposed and Featured Projects

Cost-Benefit Analysis
This small investment has a significant return on the
public safety as residents will be reminded on a daily
basis as to which routes they should use to reach
Community Assistance Centers and travel on after
a disaster.
Risk Reduction Analysis
This project will reduce risk to the population by
improving public awareness and knowledge of how
to access Community facilities after a storm.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project can be implemented within 12 months of
project commencement.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
The Village of Freeport Department of Public Works
(DPW) has regulatory authority over signage and the
streets on which they are proposed to be installed.
Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport has jurisdiction over Guy
Lombardo Avenue and the other implementation
areas and will be responsible for implementing this
project.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Public Communication
and Education Gap Analysis
Currently, the Village of Freeport Office of Emergency
Management (OEM) and Nassau County OEM coordinate all Federal, State, and local agencies to create and implement an Emergency Operations Plan.
OEM identifies vulnerabilities, mitigates disasters,
provides public education, responds to all-hazard
emergencies, and protects the Village’s and Nassau
County’s first responders. Nassau County has identified enhanced communication and education as an
ongoing need to maintain its ability to respond effectively during a storm event.

Phase 2, not funded by this project, and potentially
implemented by the Red Cross and would be funded
by local corporate sponsors, would establish a centralized location (such as a website) with consistent
“branding” to make disaster information identifiable,
and provide regular updates to keep information
current. Phase 3 will include the creation of an educational component, using the website to promote
educational seminars on disaster planning.

Despite warnings from OEM, during Superstorm
Sandy some Community members did not understand the severity of the storm and were unable
to evacuate after conditions became unsafe, putting themselves and emergency responders at risk.
Many residents also did not know where to look for
emergency information. Following the storm, power
outages and lack of cellphone service left residents
unable to communicate with friends and family
members, and without a means to find emergency
resource information. Even those with power stated
that there was no central place to go online to share
or find out about available emergency supplies in
their communities.

This project has also been proposed in the neighboring NYRCR Communities of Baldwin, Bellmore/
Merrick, Seaford/Wantagh, and Massapequa. The
approximate total project cost is $100,000, with an
estimated contribution of $20,000 by the NYRCR
Freeport Community.

This project will study Nassau County’s existing
emergency management efforts to identify opportunities to create a single, user-friendly source for
comprehensive information and emergency assistance from a variety of public agencies. It will identify
gaps in the existing communication network and find
ways to more effectively link the local government,
emergency management agencies, residents, businesses, and faith-based groups, as well as non-profit
organizations that direct aid and recovery efforts to
the community’s socially vulnerable populations.
Phase 1 of this project will evaluate existing emergency communication systems and determine
additional needs, with an emphasis on coordination
across multiple jurisdictions, allowing community
members to communicate with each other, and
emergency readiness education. This initial study
will provide recommendations for addressing gaps
in communication and education and will identify
potential public/private partnerships to implement
the study’s recommendations.

Estimated Project Cost

Project Benefits
This project, which addresses the Community
Planning and Capacity Building Recovery Support
Functions (RSFs), will allow emergency response
agencies to coordinate efforts before, during, and
after storm events, focusing resources to the areas
of greatest need. Implementation of the project will
improve access to emergency preparedness information for all Community residents and businesses.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
The benefits of a well-prepared Community include
reduced risk of physical damage from storm events,
less social strain on the Community during and following disasters, and reduced risk of injury or death.
Economic Benefits
Post-disaster claims for financial assistance from
State and Federal programs may be reduced if
homes are retrofitted appropriately and if people are
safe from harm because they know when, where,
and how to evacuate.
Health and Social Benefits
Knowledge and understanding of emergency procedures, responsibilities, and resources will be
increased across the Community. An enhanced

Proposed and Featured Projects

159

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

website that allows Community members, local
organizations, and governmental agencies to communicate with each other will benefit disaster recovery and aid efforts, while enhancing social connections at a time when they are needed the most.
Better awareness and information on how to properly securing personal property, including fuel tanks,
household paint, and other toxic chemicals, prior to
a storm provides environmental benefits by reducing
the volume of harmful toxins entering the water during a flooding event.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
The project identifies and addresses gaps in communication and education needs to better prepare the Community for emergencies. It also helps
the Community react quickly and appropriately to
notices, warnings, and orders, lowering the number
of people in risk zones and reducing the potential for
injury or death in the event storms overwhelm the
area with wind, rain, floodwaters, or storm surge.
Risk Reduction
Risk to populations will be reduced by increasing access to educational materials and improving
knowledge of emergency procedures and resources.
Risk to vulnerable populations will be reduced, as
emergency response agencies will be better able
to focus resources to the areas of greatest need.
Population health risks will be reduced as public
access to up-to-date information on hazardous conditions is improved.
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project has the potential for implementation
within 24 months.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
There are no regulatory requirements related to this
project.

160

Proposed and Featured Projects

Jurisdiction
The Village of Freeport and Nassau County OEM
handle emergency management and will coordinate
with other key stakeholders, such as the Town of
Hempstead and the State of New York.

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Featured Project: Neighborhood Preservation Guidelines
Superstorm Sandy resulted in heavy damage, defined
as damage totaling to more than 50% of the home
value, to 3,500 housing units in the Community.
In addition, approximately 3,900 homes out of the
Community’s 14,589 are located in high and extreme
risk flooding areas. Only 27% of all houses in the
Community are located outside of any designated
risk area.
Residential neighborhoods in the Community are
characterized by one- and two-story homes with
traditional architecture and consistent setbacks from
the street. Since Superstorm Sandy, however, many
local residents have opted to raise their homes, often
as high as 12 feet from their previous elevation, to
protect from future flooding events and/or to meet
FEMA guidelines.
While raising homes provides substantial protection from storm surges or other flooding, substantial
changes in building height can disrupt existing neighborhood character and impact close neighbors. It is
likely that residents will continue to raise homes for
years to come.
This project includes the creation of new residential
design guidelines for improving architectural quality and functionality in newly raised homes. Topics
covered may include garage and parking design,
stairway and entryway design, mechanical systems,
home appliance placement, structural reinforcement, materials recommendations, and resilient
landscapes.
Estimated Project Cost
This featured
$250,000.

project

will

cost

approximately

property. Guidelines will also convey the Community’s
expectations for safety, quality, and character to
which all development should abide.
Economic Benefits
Guidelines for resilient construction and reconstruction will provide greater economic certainty for existing home and business owners, real estate investors,
and potential residents and businesses by ensuring
that buildings will be better protected from future
flood events. In addition, it can lead to a reduction
in post-disaster claims for financial assistance from
State and Federal programs.
Health and Social Benefits
These guidelines will aid in public safety and the longterm resiliency of the community as building owners
will rely less on emergency response efforts or recovery resources.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
The design guidelines represent a small investment
with multiple returns by changing how buildings are
designed, constructed, and rehabilitated in Freeport.
With a small upfront planning cost, the guidelines can
be integrated into normal maintenance, as well as
the disaster recovery processes. These changes can
ensure that neighborhood transformations that occur
while residents rebuild their homes do not negatively
impact the Community, instead enhancing the areas.
In turn, the Community will remain an attractive place
to live and tax revenues, which support Village and
school district functions, will be maintained.
Risk Reduction Analysis

Project Benefits
This project supports the Recovery Support
Functions of Housing, Economic Development and
Community Planning and Capacity Building.
Risk Reduction & Resiliency Benefits
Neighborhood preservation guidelines will assist individual initiatives to respond to flood risk by providing
education and information about issues that building owners need to be aware of as they protect their

Risk to property and population will be reduced as
individual property owner flood protection projects
are designed in accordance with guidelines that
identify issues and address the safety and quality
expectations of the community. In addition, the risk
of reduced home values as a result of inconsistencies in building character and entrance height can
be limited.

Proposed and Featured Projects

161

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project has the potential for implementation
within 12 months.
Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
As the output of this featured project is a set of
guidelines, there is no regulatory approval required.
However, the adoption of the guidelines may require
changes to local building, planning, and zoning
codes.
Jurisdiction
This project falls under the jurisdiction of the Village of
Freeport and the Freeport Housing Authority.

162

Proposed and Featured Projects

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

This page intentionally left blank

Proposed and Featured Projects

163

Section V : Additional Materials
The following section provides supporting information for the NYRCR
Freeport Plan (NYRCR Plan):
A. Additional Resilience Recommendations: This section describes
resiliency projects and actions for NYRCR Freeport (Community) that the
NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) would like to highlight that are not
categorized as Proposed or Featured Projects.
B. Master Table of Projects: This table provides a comprehensive
list of Proposed and Featured Projects, as well as Additional Resiliency
Recommendations.
C. Public Engagement Process: This section provides a detailed
description of the public engagement process, including a description of
the Community’s eight Planning Committee Meetings and three Public
Engagement Events. Results from questionnaires and online surveys are
also included.
D. Community Asset Inventory: This table provides results of the risk
assessment for the Community’s key assets.
E. End Notes: This section includes numerical listing of all NYRCR Plan
references.
F. Glossary: This glossary comprises a comprehensive list of acronyms
used in the NYRCR Plan.

Facing image: Waterfront businesses in Freeport (Source: Joe Mabel)

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Table 12: Additional resiliency recommendations
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Regional

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for Critical
Assets

Downtown Microgrid
Phase 4: Power Plant I
and II, Recreation Center,
North Freeport Pump
Station

Phase 4 of the Downtown Microgrid project involves
the installation of distributed renewable energy
sources to diversify generation resources and add
capacity and redundancy to the power supply.

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for Critical
Assets

Lifeline Corridor
Implementation: Flood
Valves

Establish a program to regularly inspect and
maintain and replace flood valves located along
identified Lifeline roads.

N

Invest in Resilience
Enhancements for Critical
Assets

Lifeline Corridor
Implementation:
Underground Utilities

Use planned roadway improvements as an
opportunity to bury overhead utility lines along
identified Lifeline roads.

N

Establish Programs and
Policies for Resilient
Planning and Design

Develop a Strategic
Adaptation Plan

Develop a plan to identify long-term retreat and
resilience options for Freeport to protect future
residents and businesses from more frequent and
more intense storms.

N

Improve Transportation
Access and Connectivity

Raise Guy Lombardo
Avenue and South Long
Beach Avenue

Identify roads to raise based on highest risk of
flooding, start with previously identified key roads
from the Freeport Hazard Mitigation Plan.

N

Improve Transportation
Access and Connectivity

Community Assistance
Centers: Emergency
Backup (Option 2)

Outfit proposed Community Assistance Centers
with solar PV systems and battery storage to reduce
energy costs and provide power during outages.

N

Improve Transportation
Access and Connectivity

Advocate for Local
Participation in the Citizen
Preparedness Corps
Training Program

Take advantage of existing training and capacity
building programs in New York State to train
Freeport residents to be first responders in their
Community.

Y

Plan for Business
Continuity and Growth

Enhance, Diversify, and
Protect the Nautical Mile

Perform a study to investigate options to protect the
Nautical Mile from storm surge, sea level rise, and
coastal flooding. In addition, explore opportunities
to transform the Nautical Mile into a year-round
destination.

N

Plan for Business
Continuity and Growth

Freeport Library
Digitization Center

Provide Freeport and surrounding communities with
a place to scan and store important documents to
prevent losses during flooding/fire events.

Y

Plan for Business
Continuity and Growth

Clean Energy Education
and Apprentice Program

Apply for and utilize New York Energy Research
and Development Authority (NYSERDA) funding to
develop a clean energy education and apprentice
program for high school students.

N

166

Additional Materials

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 12 (cont’d) : Additional resiliency recommendations
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Regional

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Green Infrastructure:
JW Dodd Middle School
Demonstration Installation
(Option 1)

This option involves the installation of a green roof
to detain rainwater and reduce runoff. Dodd School
serves as an ideal location for a green infrastructure
demonstration project due to its high profile location
and ability to educate students on an emerging
technology and employment generator. Green
infrastructure here can also offer flood mitigation for
a proposed Community Assistance Center.

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Green Infrastructure: JW
Dodd Middle School Pilot
Installation (Option 2)

This option involves the installation of a of a
retention pond on the school grounds to capture
and store stormwater runoff. Dodd School serves
as an ideal location for a green infrastructure
demonstration project due to its high profile location
and ability to educate students on an emerging
technology and employment generator. Green
infrastructure here can also offer flood mitigation for
a proposed Community Assistance Center.

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Lifeline Corridor
Implementation:
Stormwater System
Upgrades

Install bioswales, permeable pavement and other
stormwater system improvements during regular
street maintenance and reconstruction projects
along identified Lifeline roads.

N

Improve Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Flood Diversion and
Control

Strategically locate structural and natural drainage
features to divert flood waters into designated
catchment areas. Commission a study and
determine overland flow patterns in flood-prone
areas to identify locations for drainage and
detention.

N

Establish Programs and
Policies for Resilient
Planning and Design

Regional Energy Action
Plan

This project proposes the development of an
energy action plan using a collaborative, regional
approach. The many stakeholders involved in
energy generation, distribution, and use will be
brought together to identify options for distributed
generation, microgrids, and smart grid technology
integration along the South Shore and in the
broader Nassau County area.

Y

Additional Materials 167

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

B. Master Table of Projects
Table 13: Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Relocation
Feasibility
Analysis:
Move Freeport
Department of
Public Works
Away from
Extreme Risk

Study opportunities to
relocate DPW out of the SFHA
while minimizing impact on
existing neighborhoods provide concept design for
recommended solution and
possible site acquisition.

Proposed

$3,000,000

N

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Freeport Electrical
Cable Channel
Crossing
Improvements

The project would extend the
buried portion of the cables
beyond the boat yard to
protect the lines from freed
boats and debris during storm
surges.

Proposed

$3,000,000

N

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Outage
Management
System

The system upgrade creates
a web-based reporting and
response system for outages
or issues with essential
services (power, water mains,
gas). It would link directly to
existing systems and enables
asset protection before an
event, incident mitigation
during an event, and faster
incident management and
service restoration after an
event.

Proposed

$265,000

N

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Protection for
Freeport’s Power
Plant II: Phase I:
Study, Design,
and Proof of
Concept

This project would seek to
study protection options,
design flood protection, and
identify further funding from
NYS and US grant programs
to implement and construct
the design. A proof of concept
would be constructed along
the most vulnerable portion of
the site.

Proposed

$1,750,000

N

168

Additional Materials

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 13 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Downtown
Microgrid Phase
I: Financial and
Engineering
Feasibility Study

This project seeks to identify
funding and financing methods
for the development of the
microgrid - including State and
Federal grant programs, capital
budgeting and contributions
from benefitting private
entities. In addition, it will
explore preliminary engineering
feasibility concepts for the
development of the microgrid,
examine costs and identify
necessary construction.

Proposed

$750,000

N

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Downtown
Microgrid Phase
2: Redundant
Energy Supply at
Power Plant I

This project would purchase
a dual-fuel (diesel/natural gas)
generator with black-start
capability and replace an
outdated diesel generator at
Freeport Power Plant I.

Proposed

$5,000,000

N

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Backup Power
for Sewer Lift
Stations

This project seeks to install
permanent backup natural
gas generators at each of
the Village of Freeport’s three
sewer lift stations located in a
SFHA.

Proposed

$150,000

N

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Community
Assistance
Centers

Community Assistance Centers
are places for residents to
gather information about
emergency preparedness
under normal conditions.
During and after a storm, these
centers would become a place
to gather, collect and distribute
resources, charge cell phones,
access the internet/TV, and
seek comfort. This project
would install backup power
generation, dynamic electronic
notification and alert signage,
and additional charging and
wifi capacity at each center.
In addition, a Local Disaster
Recovery Manager would be
hired for two years.

Proposed

$2,200,000

N

Additional Materials 169

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 13 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Establish
Programs and
Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Operation
SPLASH:
Resilience
Education Center

This project seeks to fortify and
protect Operation SPLASH
with innovative flood protection
design and infrastructure (two
passive self-closing flood
barriers, sewage back flow
preventers and personnel door
barriers).
In addition, partnerships
with Nassau County higher
education institutions will be
sought to raise awareness of
climate related risks on the
South Shore and promote
environmental stewardship.
Finally, surveillance cameras
will be installed at high points
along the coast and the
video feeds will be displayed
at Operation SPLASH as
a scientific monitoring,
community awareness, and
educational tool.

Proposed

$1,100,000

N

Plan for Business
Continuity and
Growth

Nautical Mile
Buoyant
Architecture

This project will design and
construct a buoyant building
along the Nautical Mile to
demonstrate the ability to
economically and resiliently
maintain a coastal economy.
In addition to improving
resilience of coastal structures,
this allows buildings and
neighborhoods the ability to
maintain their character, retain
access for elderly and disabled
populations, prepare for sea
level rise and in some cases
reduce the cost of construction
to comply with new building
elevation requirements.

Proposed

$195,000

N

170

Additional Materials

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 13 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Plan for Business
Continuity and
Growth

Modernize the
Industrial Park
Study

This project seeks to outline
implementation steps for the
formation of a local nonprofit
development authority that is
committed to transforming the
Industrial Park into a modern,
environmentally conscious and
resilient business center.
The study will also propose
design guidelines for safe,
affordable and environmentally
conscious light-industrial and
commercial development.
Short-term and long-term
goals, strategies, actions
and design concepts will be
developed.

Proposed

$500,000

N

Plan for Business
Continuity and
Growth

Business
Continuity
Program

This program would help small
businesses create their own
business continuity plans, and
provide a custom roadmap
for businesses to continue
operations under adverse
conditions. This includes
planning assistance and
access to alternate spaces and
facilities and grant assistance.

Proposed

$40,000

Y

Improve
Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Meadowbrook
Corridor
Stormwater
System Modeling,
Analysis, and Pilot

This project would include
the reconstruction of five
stormwater outfalls currently
entering Freeport Creek. And
reconnecting the Creek with
the natural floodplain.
A floating wetland pilot and
drainage study would also be
conducted for East Meadow
Pond to improve water quality
and reduce future flooding.
A daylighting study for Freeport
Creek would examine the
potential benefits of uncovering
the current underground
portion of the Creek.

Proposed

$650,000

Y

Additional Materials 171

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 13 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Lifeline Corridor
Study and Pilot
Implementation:
Merrick Road
Corridor

Merrick Road is an important
lifeline for many people,
businesses and institutions.
Due to the importance of the
road, it is proposed that a
study and subsequent pilot
projects to improve its poststorm functionality take place.
Based on the findings and
results, the Lifeline Project
could then be applied to
additional streets that are
critical at the neighborhood
and community level.
The study will identify best
practices and develop
design guidelines for resilient
streetscapes and implement a
pilot project.

Proposed

$300,000

Y

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Downtown
Microgrid Phase
3: Redundant
Distribution
Surrounding
Microgrid

Phase 3 of the Downtown
Microgrid project involves
the installation of four new
underground circuits on the
streets that border of the
microgrid. These circuits
increase redundancy and
replace outdated circuits, while
increasing capacity.

Featured

$30,500,000

N

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Protection
for Freeport
Electric’s Power
Plant II Phase 2:
Construction

This project would seek to
construct the recommended
design of protection options
from Phase 1 of the Protection
for Freeport Electric’s Power
Plant II project. Further funding
from NYS and US grant
programs for construction is
required.

Featured

$10,000,000 20,000,000

N

172

Additional Materials

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 13 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Establish
Programs and
Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Convert Home
Heating to Natural
Gas in Extreme
and High Risk
Areas

This project will develop policy
recommendations and an
incentive program to convert
home heating oil to natural gas
in extreme and high risk areas.
Temporary regulations to
require proper anchoring of
tanks in risk areas will be
developed and incorporated.
A deadline for all structures in
extreme, high and moderate
risk areas to convert to
Natural Gas and/or other
heat/hot water supply will be
established.

Featured

$50,000

N

Improve
Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Regional
Stormwater
Drainage
Cleanout, Survey,
and Verification

This project seeks to clean out
all storm drains in the Freeport
area. While they are being
accessed, it is recommended
that a comprehensive survey is
conducted to document and
verify all missing stormwater
infrastructure from the local
data inventory.
The data collected will feed into
the hydraulic and hydrologic
model to analyze the current
drainage system and identify
critical drainage projects. This
will include the implementation
of green infrastructure projects
and will quantify the benefits of
green infrastructure solutions.

Featured

$4,800,000

N

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Street Tree
Maintenance and
Guidelines

This project seeks to
recommend policy changes
to identify roads for tree
trimming, maintenance and/or
replacement with more resilient
trees.

Featured

$100,000

N

Improve
Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Green
Infrastructure Plan

This Plan seeks to identify
green infrastructure
opportunities based
on feasibility, level of
impact, funding and street
reconstruction schedules.
Opportunities to manage
stormwater on public and
private properties will also be
identified and recommended.

Featured

$500,000

N

Additional Materials 173

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 13 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Improve
Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Green
Infrastructure Plan
Implementation:
Main Street
Improvements

This project builds on
the existing "Building a
Better Freeport" plan which recommends street
improvement projects along
North Main Street. This project
would operate in tandem with
the proposed improvements,
ensuring that any pedestrian
improvements incorporate
bioswales or open channel
infiltration areas, to the extent
possible. It also recommends
reconstruction of areas along
South Main Street that have
been improved recently
but missed opportunities
to incorporate green
infrastructure.

Featured

$790,000

N

Establish
Programs and
Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Public Bulkhead
Repair

Publicly-owned bulkheads will
be replaced at an appropriate
height and with modern
materials that are more resilient
to erosion and wind.
The reconstruction of the
bulkheads will provide coastal
protection in public areas,
helping to maintain Freeport’s
open space and recreational
areas. In addition, the
bulkheads can reduce flooding
impacts on local streets,
helping to maintain access
during and after flood events.

Featured

$950,000

N

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Key Intersection
Streetlight Retrofit
Pilot Project

This project seeks to provide
solar powered lighting with
backup power leading to key
intersections, to ensure these
roads always stay lit in the
event of a power outage and
residents can follow these lit
streets toward safer areas and
critical resources. In addition
to providing solar power and
backup energy for street
lights, traffic signals at each of
these intersections will also be
provided.

Featured

$520,000

N

174

Additional Materials

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 13 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Key Intersection
Signage

This project provides
wayfinding and destination
signage to guide people
toward critical assets,
assistance centers and
information after storms and
during power outages. This
will enhance route clarity and
orient residents toward streets
that should be used after future
emergencies.

Featured

$60,000

N

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Public
Communication
and Education
Gap Analysis

This project would begin with
a gap analysis to determine
additional emergency
community needs in the region.
Findings would guide the
creation of a central website
with a community-driven
communication component,
and eventually include
education and outreach
activities.

Featured

$20,000

Y

Establish
Programs and
Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Regional
Transit Oriented
Development,
Access and
Parking Study

This study will identify
opportunities to combine
parking areas and develop
structured parking facilities
in key areas, and provide
recommendations on their
best use based on community
need.
Guidelines for the design
of resilient, sustainable and
aesthetically pleasing parking
structures will be identified.
This study will also develop
a concept for local public
transportation that connects
Freeport’s key business, retail
and recreational areas.

Featured

$500,000

N

Additional Materials 175

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 13 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Establish
Programs and
Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Neighborhood
Preservation
Guidelines

This project seeks to undertake
a planning study and make
recommendations to revise
Freeport zoning, planning and
building code regulations for
resilient design.
The study will work with
Freeport planning and building
agencies to ensure that needs
specific to the community’s
rebuilding efforts are not
omitted or overlooked.

Featured

$250,000

N

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Downtown
Microgrid Phase
4: Power Plant I
and II, Recreation
Center, North
Freeport Pump
Station

Phase 4 of the Downtown
Microgrid project involves
the installation of distributed
renewable energy sources
to diversify generation
resources and add capacity
and redundancy to the power
supply.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Lifeline Corridor
Implementation:
Flood Valves

Establish a program to
regularly inspect and maintain
and replace flood valves
located along identified Lifeline
roads.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

Invest in
Resilience
Enhancements for
Critical Assets

Lifeline Corridor
Implementation:
Underground
Utilities

Use planned roadway
improvements as an
opportunity to bury overhead
utility lines along identified
Lifeline roads.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

Establish
Programs and
Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Develop a
Strategic
Adaptation Plan

Develop a plan to identify
long-term retreat and resilience
options for Freeport to
protect future residents and
businesses from more frequent
and more intense storms.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Raise Guy
Lombardo Avenue
and South Long
Beach Avenue

Identify roads to raise based
on highest risk of flooding, start
with previously identified key
roads from the Freeport Hazard
Mitigation Plan.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Community
Assistance
Centers:
Emergency
Backup (Option 2)

Outfit proposed Community
Assistance Centers with
solar PV systems and battery
storage to reduce energy costs
and provide power during
outages.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

176

Additional Materials

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 13 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Improve
Transportation
Access and
Connectivity

Advocate for
Local Participation
in the Citizen
Preparedness
Corps Training
Program

Take advantage of existing
training and capacity building
programs in New York State
to train Freeport residents to
be first responders in their
Community.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

Y

Plan for Business
Continuity and
Growth

Enhance,
Diversify, and
Protect the
Nautical Mile

Perform a study to investigate
options to protect the Nautical
Mile from storm surge,
sea level rise, and coastal
flooding. In addition, explore
opportunities to transform the
Nautical Mile into a year-round
destination.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

Plan for Business
Continuity and
Growth

Freeport Library
Digitization Center

Provide Freeport and
surrounding communities
with a place to scan and
store important documents to
prevent losses during flooding/
fire events.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

Y

Plan for Business
Continuity and
Growth

Clean Energy
Education and
Apprentice
Program

Apply for and utilize New
York Energy Research and
Development Authority
(NYSERDA) funding to develop
a clean energy education and
apprentice program for high
school students.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

Improve
Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Green
Infrastructure:
JW Dodd
Middle School
Demonstration
Installation
(Option 1)

This option involves the
installation of a green roof to
detain rainwater and reduce
runoff. Dodd School serves as
an ideal location for a green
infrastructure demonstration
project due to its high profile
location and ability to educate
students on an emerging
technology and employment
generator. Green infrastructure
here can also offer flood
mitigation for a proposed
Community Assistance Center.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

Additional Materials 177

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

Table 13 (cont’d) : Master table of projects
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Category

Cost Estimate

Regional

Improve
Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Green
Infrastructure:
JW Dodd
Middle School
Pilot Installation
(Option 2)

This option involves the
installation of a of a retention
pond on the school grounds to
capture and store stormwater
runoff. Dodd School serves as
an ideal location for a green
infrastructure demonstration
project due to its high profile
location and ability to educate
students on an emerging
technology and employment
generator. Green infrastructure
here can also offer flood
mitigation for a proposed
Community Assistance Center.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

Improve
Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Lifeline Corridor
Implementation:
Stormwater
System Upgrades

Install bioswales, permeable
pavement and other
stormwater system
improvements during regular
street maintenance and
reconstruction projects along
identified Lifeline roads.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

Improve
Stormwater
Management and
Drainage Systems

Flood Diversion
and Control

Strategically locate structural
and natural drainage features
to divert flood waters into
designated catchment
areas. Commission a study
and determine overland
flow patterns in flood-prone
areas to identify locations for
drainage and detention.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

N/A

N

Establish
Programs and
Policies for
Resilient Planning
and Design

Regional Energy
Action Plan

This project proposes
the development of an
energy action plan using
a collaborative, regional
approach. The many
stakeholders involved in energy
generation, distribution, and
use will be brought together to
identify options for distributed
generation, microgrids,
and smart grid technology
integration along the South
Shore and in the broader
Nassau County area.

Additional
Resiliency
Measure

$200,000

Y

178

Additional Materials

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

C. Public Engagement Process
The strategies and projects outlined in the NYRCR
Freeport Plan (NYRCR Plan) will ultimately impact the
quality of life for those who live, work, visit, and play
in NYRCR Freeport (Community). As such, input from
residents, business owners, and community leaders
has been an important component of the planning
process. The NYRCR Freeport Planning Committee
(Committee) and Consultant Team provided a number of opportunities for public participation and community engagement, including a series of Public
Engagement Events, surveys, key informant interviews and an online outreach campaign.

NYRCR Planning Committee
The Committee dedicated their time and expertise to work closely with the technical Consultant
Team and local and state officials to propose projects, plans and programs that fit community needs
but respond to the requirements of NY Rising. The
Committee guided the development of material for
the NYRCR Plan and the community engagement
process. Committee members have had a major role
in defining the geographic scope and vision for the
Community and were critical to the development of
strategies and projects for future implementation.
Generating participation at the Public Engagement
Events was a key responsibility of the Planning
Committee since they have strong ties to the community and access to networks of residents and
stakeholders. The Planning Committee, with the
assistance of the Consultant Team, identified community organizations and individuals that could provide important perspectives and invited their participation. Committee members also invited the general
public to participate. Committee members issued
email blasts, distributed flyers, and conducted personal outreach. All Public Engagement Events were
posted on the NY Rising website (stormrecovery.
ny.gov).
The Committee held eight (8) official meetings over
the course of the project and had numerous other
meetings amongst themselves and with stakeholders throughout Freeport. In addition, the Committee
participated in two Joint Committee Meetings with
the neighboring NYRCR Communities of Baldwin,
Bellmore/Merrick, Massapequas, and Seaford/

Wantagh to learn about the coastal environment,
natural habitat, housing and economic issues, and
resilience measures and to explore shared issues
and opportunities for collaboration and cooperation.
• Committee Meeting 1: The first Committee
Meeting was held on September 11, 2013,
and was the initial meeting between members
from New York State, Planning Committee, and
Consultant Team to discuss the purpose of the
NYRCR Program and initial goals and objectives.
• Committee Meeting 2: The second Committee
Meeting was held on October 2, 2013. It
included a discussion of existing planning efforts,
Community assets, Community needs and
opportunities, and preparation of the first Public
Engagement Event.
• Committee Meeting 3: The third Committee
Meeting was held on October 25, 2013. It
included a report of feedback from the first Public
Engagement Event, a review of the NYRCR
Conceptual Plan, and preparation for the second
Public Engagement Event.
• Committee Meeting 4: The fourth Committee
meeting was held on November 7, 2013. In
this meeting Committee Members continued to
review the NYRCR Conceptual Plan and began
to discuss opportunities for sustainable reconstruction, recovery, and resilience, and further
preparation for Public Engagement Event 2.
• Committee Meeting 5 (Joint Committee
Meeting): The fifth Committee Meeting was held
on December 10, 2013, and was attended by
Committee Members from neighboring NYRCR
Communities. The meeting provided an overview of flood risk scenarios and flood mitigation
strategies.
• Committee Meeting 6: The sixth Committee
Meeting was held on January 14, 2014. In this
meeting Committee Members reviewed the
Community asset inventory and risk analysis,
discussed proposed projects, and reviewed the
findings of the business surveys.

Additional Materials 179

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

• Committee Meeting 7 (Joint Committee
Meeting): The seventh Committee Meeting was
held on February 19, 2014, and was attended by
Committee Members from neighboring NYRCR
Communities. The meeting addressed housing
and economic development opportunities within
the five Communities that were represented.
• Committee Meeting 8: The eighth Committee
Meeting was held on March 10, 2014. In this
meeting Committee Members voted on the proposed and featured projects to be included in
the NYRCR Plan.

Public Engagement Events
Community residents and other stakeholders participated in three Public Engagement Events to review
the evolving work of the Committee and Consultant
Team, and to contribute their voices to the planning
process. Outlined below is a brief summary of the
proceedings and the outcomes.
Public Engagement Event 1: Vision,
Community Assets, Needs and
Opportunities and Project Ideas
The first public engagement event was held on
October 16, 2013. The meeting, which included
an open house, presentation, and small group discussions, introduced the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program to the community and provided numerous opportunities for public
input. Participants viewed project materials at three
different Open House-style stations. The first station provided an overview of the NYRCR Program.
The second station presented six Community Asset
Maps. The third station presented the draft Vision
as prepared by the Committee. Participants were
encouraged to provide their feedback to the asset
maps and vision statement. Comments received on
the Vision Statement were used to revise it prior to
incorporation in the NYRCR Conceptual Plan.
The next portion of the meeting was dedicated to
small group discussions where participants cooperatively and creatively considered the future of their
Community. Participants identified the Community’s

180

Additional Materials

most important needs and generated project ideas
for recovery and resiliency. They discussed the following two questions:
• Superstorm Sandy and, before that, Hurricane
Irene had profound impacts on our Community.
Thinking about our Community as a whole, what
do you believe are the three top issues that need
to be addressed to recover and emerge more
resilient in the future?
• The NYRCR Freeport Plan will include the major
projects and programs that need to be undertaken for our community to recover and be more
resilient. The plans are an investment – done
thoughtfully, they can help make communities
safer and stronger, increase prosperity, improve
the quality of life, and drive innovation and competition. You are encouraged to think big, and
identify the transformative and innovative actions
needed to become resilient and grow the economy. What do you believe should be done to create a better future for our community?
Key Outcomes
Participants at the meeting had clear and specific
ideas about what they believed could effectively
help the Community to recover and become more
resilient. The small groups generated 50 different
ideas. These ideas were reviewed to identify emerging themes that represented issues of concern and
ideas for the future that would inform the development of strategies and projects. Listed below are the
emerging themes organized by Recovery Support
Function.
• Community Planning & Capacity Building:
Adequate equipment and facilities for effective
emergency response; Responsive and knowledgeable recovery and reconstruction administration (e.g. government agencies and insurance
providers); Effective public information and communication (pre- and post-emergency), particularly for hard to reach populations such as the
elderly; Codes/regulations that promote storm
resistant homes and businesses

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

• Economic: A vibrant, strong Downtown; Industry;
Private facilities that provide critical goods or
services should have backup generator power;
Storm resistant gas distribution
• Health & Social Services: Recreation centers
• Housing: Residential neighborhoods protected
from future storm impacts; Vibrant neighborhood
character (e.g. address deserted buildings, shift
to renters, etc.)
• Infrastructure: Effective storm water and wastewater management; Roadways resistant to
major storm impacts
• Natural and Cultural Resources: Restored/
enhanced coastal landscapes provide natural
habitats and storm protection; Parks and natural
areas provide recreation and education
The ideas expressed at this first Public Engagement
Event have been captured and addressed in vision,
goals, strategies, and projects of this NYRCR Plan.
Public Engagement Event 2:NYRCR Conceptual
Plan, Values, Strategies and Projects
The second Public Engagement Event was held on
November 19, 2013. The event had three main components. The meeting was designed to present the
emerging Conceptual Plan, solicit community feedback on issues related to the six elements of the plan,
and generate strategy and implementation ideas.
After the opening presentation, participants joined
small groups to weigh in on important community
issues and to expand upon the strategies and projects
included in the NYRCR Conceptual Plan. Participants
reviewed material related to two of the six Recovery
Support Functions: Community Planning and
Cultural Resources; Economic Development; Health,
Social Services, and Socially Vulnerable Populations;
Housing; Infrastructure; or Natural Resources. They
completed an independent participant questionnaire.
The group members then worked cooperatively to
provide reactions and observations on a map of the
community. Finally, they reviewed the list of strategies
and projects included in the NYRCR Conceptual Plan

and discussed what others should be included. The
group documented its most important ideas on summary sheets.
After the event, all materials were encoded and used
by the Consultant Team and the Planning Committee
to better understand community conditions and priorities as well as to revise and enhance the list of
reconstruction and resiliency projects. Although the
number of questionnaire responses generated is
small and not statistically significant, they do provide
an indicator of community sentiment.
Key Outcomes
Although the full event results are too extensive to
summarize here there were some interesting findings. Participants expressed much greater concern
with reconstruction and recovery related projects
than with those more targeted to promoting longterm resiliency. The exceptions were input received
on economic development, which focused on
improving the Nautical Mile, improving downtown,
improving the Industrial Park and strengthening the
workforce. For each of the recovery support functions, participants were asked to rate a variety of
issues identified by the Consultant Team on their
level of importance in the community on a scale from
1 to 5 (not important to very important). In general,
participants rated nearly everything as being important to very important on issues ranging from vacant
/ abandoned commercial space in business districts,
to potential of future flooding in residential areas, and
bulkheads and coastal barriers
This confirmed that the project ideas being developed by the Committee and Consultant Team were
in sync with the participants’ needs, and feedback
provided at this meeting was incorporated into the
evolving project lists.
Public Engagement Event 3: Vision,
Community Assets, Needs and
Opportunities and Project Ideas
This event, held on February 26, 2014, marked
the third public engagement event of the NYRCR
Program. The meeting’s objectives were to provide
the Community with a progress update, gather community feedback on the projects being considered

Additional Materials 181

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

for inclusion in the NYRCR Freeport Plan (Plan), and
begin to generate public support for implementation.
The Community Development Block Grant Disaster
Recovery Program (CDBG-DR), funded by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) and administered by New York State, has
allocated funds to the Community to support eligible
reconstruction and resiliency projects.
Participants viewed a presentation, the main focus of
which was the projects to be considered for inclusion
in the NYRCR Freeport Plan. The Consultant Team
presented the approach and community issues that
informed the preparation of these draft projects as
well as the definition of the three types of projects
that will be included in the NYRCR Plan.
• Proposed Projects are proposed in whole or in
part for the community’s allocation of CDBG-DR
funding.
• Featured Projects meet CDBG-DR funding
requirements but exceed Community allotments, are eligible for other identified funding
or regulatory reforms, or do not involve capital
expenditures.
• Additional Resiliency Recommendations are
projects the Committee would like to highlight
that are not included above.
Participants then learned more details of the projects during the Open House portion of the event.
Large Boards were posted throughout the meeting
space. Each board included information on projects
including description, proposed location, cost estimates, benefits, and more. Committee members and
Consultant Team representatives staffed the stations
and were available to field participants’ questions.
Participants were encouraged to complete Project
Comment Cards to provide reactions to and additional information for each of the projects. Each participant was also given a questionnaire to rate his /
her levels of support for each Proposed and Featured
Project on a three point scale (high, medium, and
low). Finally, participants were asked to select the five
projects they felt were most important to their community by writing them on their questionnaire and
then posting stickers on large boards.

182

Additional Materials

Key Outcomes
After the meeting all input received on Project
Comment Cards and participant questionnaires
was documented verbatim and tabulated. Projects
were also posted on the NY Rising website and an
online survey was released to solicit feedback from
people not able to attend the community meeting.
No feedback was received to the online survey. The
Project Comment Cards were reviewed to make
final enhancements to the project descriptions for
review by the Committee and potential inclusion in
the NYRCR Plan.
This feedback was uses to refine the project lists and
helped inform the selection of the final sets of project
proposals.
Public Engagement Event 4: The Freeport
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The fourth and final public engagement event will
present the completed NYRCR Plan to community
members and stakeholders in order to lay the foundation for implementation.

Online Presence and Tools
The website www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr provides information about the NYRCR Program, and
regularly posted material relating to the NYRCR Plan.
This includes the details for upcoming public engagement events, news and announcements, Committee
contacts, and plan-related documents. The website
also included a tool for visitors to submit comments.

Business Surveys
A survey was deployed specifically to businesses in
the Community to gather additional information on
storm impacts – which have been difficult to quantify from other sources – and to generate ideas that
could encourage economic development and support resiliency. Business surveys were open from
January 15 to February 25, 2014. The respondents
were distributed among many industry types including retail, healthcare, fitness, business/legal/financial, construction, manufacturing, restaurants and

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

warehousing/logistics and had varying degrees of
damage from Superstorm Sandy. There were, however, many similar issues and recommendations.

Housing Survey
The Community is primarily a residential community.
Research was, therefore, undertaken to explore the
impact of Superstorm Sandy on housing. Conducted
by a specialist firm, Urbanomics, data was gathered
from a variety of sources, including a limited number of broker interviews. The research looked at
the community’s housing characteristics, property
values, household characteristics, the impacts of
Sandy (both physically and economically) and from
this, considered the future demand and risks on
Community housing assets.

Health and Social Services Interviews
The Planning Committee and Consultant Team recognized the importance of information related to health
and social services issues as well as incorporating
the perspectives of socially vulnerable populations in
the planning process. The Committee – along with
those of the neighboring communities of Baldwin,
Bellmore-Merrick, andthe Massapequas, commissioned an assessment of health and social service
recovery needs and opportunities to plan for social
resilience. In addition to research, organizations and
individuals in the health and social services fields were
identified to participate in key informant interviews.
Since the identities of those interviewed are confidential, there are not individual results specifically for
the Community presented in the assessment.

Additional Materials 183

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

D. Community Asset Inventory
The asset inventory and risk assessment performed
for the NYRCR Plan includes individual information
for each Community asset, landscape attributes that
may influence risk,and the risk assessment which
establishes a risk score based on landscape attributes, a hazard score, an exposure score, and a vulnerability score for each asset. The asset inventory
and risk assessment inputs can be seen in Table 14.

Asset Information
The asset information columns in Table 14 include
the following information:
• Asset Name: The name of the facility or a
descriptive name that serves as a unique identifier.
• Risk Area: Identifies the risk area for each
asset based on New York State Department
of State hazard maps. Risk areas include
extreme, high, and moderate zones.
• Asset Class: Each asset is categorized by
asset class: Economic, Health and Social
Services, Housing, Infrastructure Systems,
or Natural and Cultural Resources.
• Critical Facility: Assets are marked as critical
facilities based on critical asset criteria established
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) guidelines or Community significance.
• Community Value: Assets are given a
community value of high, medium, or low based
on NYRCR Planning Committee Member input
and feedback from Public Engagement Events.
Community value can be applied individually
or collectively based on certain assets and
asset classes. 				

Landscape Attributes

• Shore Defenses: Marked “yes” if shore defenses
are absent, not constructed to anticipated storm
or sea level rise conditions, or are deteriorating.
• Vegetation: Marked “yes” if protective
vegetation, wetlands, or intervening structures
between asset and flood source are absent.
• Dunes or Bluffs: Marked “yes” if dunes
are absent, below the base flood elevation
(BFE), eroding, discontinuous, or have little
vegetation. Marked “yes” if bluff slopes
are unstable or partially vegetated.
• Soils: Marked “yes” if the asset is located on
a coastal barrier island or filled wetland.

Risk Assessment
The risk assessment columns in Table 14 include the
following information:
• Hazard Score: The hazard score is based
on the likelihood an event will occur and the
magnitude (destructive capacity) of the event.
Likelihood is derived from the storm recurrence
interval within the selected planning time frame.
• Exposure Score: The coastal risk assessment
area maps are used to provide a “base exposure
score” for each asset. Generally, assets in the
extreme risk area are closer to the shoreline
and are more exposed to potential damage.
Therefore, assets in extreme risk areas receive
a base exposure score of 2; assets in high
risk areas receive a base exposure score of
1, and assets in moderate risk areas receive
a base exposure score of 0.5. Landscape
attributes are used to further exposure scores,
contributing an additional 0.5 for each “yes”
in the landscape attribute columns.

The landscape attribute columns in Table 14 include
the following information:

• Vulnerability Score: Each asset receives
a vulnerability score based on the impact
of its damage relative to its asset class.

• Erosion Rate: Marked “yes” if the
long-term average erosion rate is 1 ft.
or more per year, or unknown.

• Risk Score: Risk scores are based on the
formula Hazard x Exposure x Vulnerability.

• Beach Width: Marked “yes” if the water
line is frequently in contact with a shore
defense structure or upland vegetation.

184

Additional Materials

Table 14: Community asset inventory
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Risk Assessment

Asset Name

Risk Area

Asset Class

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate

Beach
Width

Shore
Defenses

Vegetation

Dunes or
Bluffs

Soils

Landscape
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

25 Buffalo Ave - Freeport Public
Housing

High

Housing

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

3

2

18

Anchorage Condo complex

High

Housing

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

3

2

18

Archer St School

Moderate

Health & Social

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Atlantic Ave

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Bank of America

Moderate

Economic

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Cablevision

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

4

30

Caroline G Atkinson School

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Cell Tower - Ray St & S Main St

High

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

3.5

4

56

Cell Tower - W Seaman & N Main St

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

4

40

Compare Foods

Moderate

Economic

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Cow Meadow park

Extreme

Natural & Cultural

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Department of Labor Unemployment
Office

Moderate

Health & Social

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Dept of Waterways

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

5

67.5

Dodd Jr High School

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Freeport DPW

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

4.5

5

90

Fire Department 1

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

3

5

60

Fire Department 3

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Fire Department Headquarters

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Freeport Fire Department Training
Facility

High

Infrastructure

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

3.5

5

70

Freeport Health Care Center

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Freeport High School

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Freeport Historical Museum

Moderate

Natural & Cultural

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3

2

18

Freeport Kidney Center

Moderate

Health & Social

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

4

30

Table 14 (cont’d) : Community asset inventory
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Risk Assessment

Asset Name

Risk Area

Asset Class

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate

Beach
Width

Shore
Defenses

Vegetation

Dunes or
Bluffs

Soils

Landscape
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

Freeport library

Moderate

Natural & Cultural

No

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Freeport LIRR

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Freeport Mayor's Office

Moderate

Health & Social

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

3

22.5

Freeport Plaza West

Moderate

Economic

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Freeport Recreation Center

Moderate

Natural & Cultural

No

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Freeport Transfer Facility

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Guy Lombardo Ave

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Guy Lombardo Marina

Extreme

Infrastructure

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Hi Hello Childcare Center 2

Moderate

Health & Social

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Hudson Ave

High

Economic

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

3

2

18

Industrial Park Inner Loop

High

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

3

4

36

Industrial Park Outer Loop

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

4

4

48

John J Randall Park

Extreme

Natural & Cultural

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

4

2

24

Liberty Park Apartments

Moderate

Housing

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Meadowbrook Commons

Moderate

Economic

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Merrick Rd

Moderate

Infrastructure

No

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Moxie Rigby Apartments

Moderate

Housing

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

N Main Street

Moderate

Economic

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Nautical Mile

Extreme

Economic

No

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Operation SPLASH

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Power Plant I

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

Power Plant II

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

3

5

60

Pump Station - Howard & Guy
Lombardo

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

4.5

5

90

Pump Station - Ray & Sportsman Ave

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

4.5

5

90

Table 14 (cont’d) : Community asset inventory
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Risk Assessment

Asset Name

Risk Area

Asset Class

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate

Beach
Width

Shore
Defenses

Vegetation

Dunes or
Bluffs

Soils

Landscape
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

Pump Station Meister & Stirling

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

4.5

5

90

Rev. Madden Senior Housing

Moderate

Housing

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3

2

18

Roslyn Savings Bank

Moderate

Economic

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3

2

18

S Main Street

Moderate

Economic

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Schooner

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

4

2

24

Sea Breeze Park

Extreme

Natural & Cultural

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Sewer Lift Station (Suffolk & Miller)

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

4

4.5

2

36

Stop and Shop

Extreme

Economic

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

4

2

24

Substation - Mill Rd & South Main St

Extreme

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

4

2

32

Substation 4f

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

2

20

Substation B (S Main St & Mill Rd)

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

2

20

The Armory

Moderate

Infrastructure

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

US Petroleum (E Merrick)

High

Economic

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

3

2

18

US Petroleum (W Merrick)

Moderate

Economic

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

Verizon Hub

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

3

2.5

2

15

WTP

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

WTP (Prince Ave)

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

WTP (Sunrise)

Moderate

Infrastructure

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

2

4

2.5

5

50

This page intentionally left blank

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

E. End Notes
1. Five of the 102 localities in the program – Niagara,
Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery Counties
– are not funding through the CDBG-DR program.
2. Regional Plan Association, Sustainable Long Island.
Building a Better Freeport, July 2010. Page 18.
3. The New York Times. Old Freeport Days: New Development
Site Was Once an Indian Encampment, 1937. Page 199.
4. Long Island Regional Economic Development Council.
A New Vision for Long Island’s Economy, 2012.
5. “Community Facts.” United States Census Bureau
Fact Finder. <factfinder2.census.gov>
6. http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/
jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?pid=ACS_12_5YR_
DP05, accessed March 19, 2014
7. Long Island Regional Planning Council. “Sustainable
Strategies for Long Island 2035,” 2010. Page 118.
8. “Community Facts.” United States Census Bureau
Fact Finder. <factfinder2.census.gov>
9. “Community Facts.” United States Census Bureau
Fact Finder. <factfinder2.census.gov>
10. Long Island Index. “Places to Grow,” 2010. Page 27.
11. Thompson, Benjamin. History of Long Island
from its Discovery and Settlement to the Present
Time: Volume III. 1918. Page 317.
12. “Nautical Mile Road Raising and Promenade.”
Bowne AE&T Group. <www.bownegroup.com>
13. “Come and Discover Freeport’s Nautical Mile.” The
Freeport Nautical Mile. <www.thenauticalmile.us>
14. Village of Freeport. Draft Freeport All Hazard
Mitigation Plan, 2013. Page 46.
15. Village of Freeport. Draft Freeport All Hazard
Mitigation Plan, 2013. Page 55.
16. Village of Freeport. Draft Freeport All Hazard
Mitigation Plan, 2013. Page 34.
17. http://www.wunderground.com/blog/bnorcross/
comment.html?entrynum=29 (Official Blog of Bryan
Norcross, Hurricane Specialist at The Weather Channel,
December 17, 2012), accessed March 20, 2014.
18. “Sea Level Trends.” Tides and Currents.
<tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov>
19. “Dissecting Sandy’s Surge.” The University Corporation
for Atmospheric Research. <www2.ucar.edu>
20. Village of Freeport. Draft Freeport All Hazard
Mitigation Plan, 2013. Page 34.
21. Village of Freeport. Draft Freeport All Hazard
Mitigation Plan, 2013. Page 55.
22. Freeport Office of Emergency Management.
Hurricane Sandy After Action, 2013. Page 6.
23. Village of Freeport. Draft Freeport All Hazard
Mitigation Plan, 2013. Page 39.
24. Freeport Housing Authority
25. Village of Freeport. Draft Freeport All Hazard
Mitigation Plan, 2013. Page 34.
26. SBA Nassau and Suffolk County Business
Application Data report. 2013.

27. Freeport Office of Emergency Management.
Hurricane Sandy After Action, 2013. Page 43.
28. Village of Freeport. Draft Freeport All Hazard
Mitigation Plan, 2013. Page 64.
29. http://new.mta.info/press-release
30. Village of Freeport, Department of Public Works
31. Gomez, Karen. “Sandy Clobbers Long Island Home Heating
Oil Tanks.” June 2013. New England Interstate Water
Pollution Control Commission. <www.neiwpcc.org>
32. Village of Freeport. Draft Freeport All Hazard
Mitigation Plan, 2013. Page 36.
33. Long Island 2035 Study Team. LI 2035 Visioning
Initiative. December 2009. Pages 5-8.
34. South Shore Estuary Reserve Council. South
Shore Estuary Reserve Comprehensive
Management Plan. 2001. Pages 25-38.
35. Regional Plan Association. Places to Grow – An
Analysis of the Potential for Transit-Accessible
Housing and Jobs in Long Island’s Downtowns
and Station Areas. January 2010. Page 5.
36. South Shore Estuary Reserve Council. South Shore Estuary
Reserve Comprehensive Management Plan. 2001. Pages: All.
37. New York State Department of State. NYS Coastal
Management Plan. 2006. Pages: Section 5.
38. Nassau County. Draft Nassau County Master
Plan. October 2010. Pages 21-24.
39. Regional Plan Association. Cleaner Greener Long Island
Regional Sustainability Plan, 2013. Pages 115-116.
40. Nassau County. Draft Nassau County Master
Plan. October 2010. Page 18.
41. Regional Plan Association. Cleaner Greener LI Regional
Sustainability Plan. April 2013. Pages 56-74.
42. Regional Plan Association, Sustainable Long Island.
Building a Better Freeport, July 2010. Page 18.
43. Nassau County. Draft Nassau County Master
Plan. October 2010. Chapter 1, Page 1.
44. Nassau County. Nassau County
Consolidated Plan. 2010. Page 20.
45. Long Island Regional Planning Council. Sustainable
Strategies for LI 2035. December 2010. Pages 25,28.
46. Long Island Regional Economic Development Council. New
Vision for the LI Economy. November 2011. Page 18.
47. Long Island 2035 Study Team. LI 2035 Visioning
Initiative. December 2009. Page 8.
48. Regional Plan Association. Cleaner Greener LI Regional
Sustainability Plan. April 2013. Page 11, 15.
49. Long Island Regional Economic Development Council.
Strong Island – Recovery & Resurgence – Strategic
Economic Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk
Counties (Update). September 2013. Page 31.
50. Regional Plan Association. Nassau County
Infill Redevelopment Feasibility Report.
September 2013. Page 57.
51. Long Island 2035 Study Team. LI 2035 Visioning
Initiative. December 2009. Page 10.

Additional Materials 189

Freeport
NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

52. Long Island Regional Economic Development Council. New
Vision for the LI Economy. November 2011. Page 44.
53. Regional Plan Association, Sustainable Long Island.
Building a Better Freeport, July 2010. Pages: all.
54. http://www.fema.gov/
national-flood-insurance-program-community-rating-system
55. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Title 44,
Chapter 1, Part 201 – Mitigation Planning
56. http://www.davedenenberg.com/
news_details.php?news_id=MTA1
57. Freeport Office of Emergency Management.
Hurricane Sandy After Action, 2013.
58. Freeport Office of Emergency Management.
Hurricane Sandy After Action, 2013. Page 37.
59. “Connect Long Island Partnership.” Hempstead
Works. <www.hempsteadworks.com>
60. Refers to people ages 16-24
61. Key Stakeholder Interviews with Service Providing or
Advocacy Organizations for Vulnerable Populations
Including Those Serving Older Adults. January 2014
62. Older Adults are Defined by The US Department of
Health And Human Services People 65 and Over
63. Key Stakeholder Interviews with Service Providing or
Advocacy Organizations for Vulnerable Populations
Including Those Serving Older Adults. January 2014
64. The Village of Freeport. Building a
Better Freeport, 2010. Page 8.
65. FEGS 2013
66. English et al, 2013 citing Gallopin, 2006
67. Low Income Occupants Have Annual Incomes
Below $75,000 or Meet HUD’s Low Income Limit
at 80% of The AMI (Area Median Income)
68. “Housing Assistance Data Hurricane Sandy New York
& New Jersey.” 28 August 2013. Federal Emergency
Management Agency <www.fema.gov>
69. Esri Forecasts. Demographic and Income Profile,
Freeport Village (CDP 3627485). 03January 2014.
70. ESRI forecasts, Demographic and Income Profile
71. “NY Rising Buyout and Acquisition Programs.” New York
Storm Recovery Program. <www.stormrecovery.ny.gov>
72. “HOME Investment Partnerships Program (HOME).”
Nassau County New York. <www.nassaucountyny.gov>
73. Whittle, Patrick. “Hotel, Apartments Proposed For
Vacant Freeport Site.” 25 February 2014. Long
Island Newsday. <www.newsday.com>
74. “HOME Investment Partnerships Program (HOME).”
Nassau County New York. <www.nassaucountyny.gov>
75. “In the Matter of Municipal Electric Company Filings of
Financial Reports for Village of Freeport.” New York State
Public Service Commission. <documents.dps.ny.gov>
76. “Nassau and Suffolk Counties Trends in
Wetland Loss.” Department of Environmental
Conservation. <www.dec.ny.gov>
77. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Functions
and Values of Wetlands. 2001. Pages 1-2.

190

Additional Materials

78. Barbier EB, Georgiou IY, Enchelmeyer B, Reed DJ (2013)
The Value of Wetlands in Protecting Southeast Louisiana
from Hurricane Storm Surges. PLoS ONE 8(3): e58715
79. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Wetlands: Protecting
Life and Property from Flooding. 2006. Pages 1-3.
80. Galveston Bay Foundation. Living Shorelines: A
Natural Approach to Erosion Control. 2011. Page 5.
81. Village of Freeport. Draft Freeport All Hazard
Mitigation Plan, 2013. Page 35.
82. Long Island Regional Economic Development Council. New
Vision for the LI Economy. November 2011. Page 18.

F. Glossary
BFE: Base Flood Elevation
CDBG-DR: Community Development Block Grant - Disaster Recovery
CHHA: Coastal High Hazard Area
DPW: Department of Public Works
ESRF: New York State Empire State Relief Fund
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency
FD: Fire Department
GIS: Geographic Information System
HRRF: New York State Homeownership Repair and Rebuilding Fund
HUD: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
IHP: Individual and Households Program
kW: Kilowatt
LIPA: Long Island Power Authority
LIRR: Long Island Rail Road
MW: Megawatt
NDRF: National Disaster Recovery Framework
NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program
NGVD: National GeodecticVertical Datum of 1929
NOAA: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NOAA-CSC: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Coastal Services Center
NYRCR: New York Rising Community Reconstruction
NWS: National Weather Service
NYS: New York State
NYS CMP: New York State Coastal Management Plan
NYS DOS: New York State Department of State
PD: Police Department
PSEG: Public Service Electric and Gas Company
RSF: Recovery Support Function
SBA: U.S. Small Business Administration
SFHA: Special Flood Hazard Area
SLOSH: Sea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes
TOD: Transit-Oriented Development
TOH: Town of Hempstead
TSD: Transit-Supportive Development
UFSD: Union Free School District

