Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

March 2014

Members of the NYRCR Planning Committee:
Jim Donovan, Co-Chair
Doreen Garson, Co-Chair
Bob Banham
Barbara Berardelli
Cliff Bruckenstein
Linda Cupo
Kathy Flynn
Melissa Haggerty
Laura LaPlant
Paul Sarubbi
Theresa Scavo
Ellis Wagner

Cover: View of Sheepshead Bay, Plumb Beach, and Gerritsen Beach

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

This document was developed by the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay Planning
Committee as part of the NYRCR Program within the Governor’s Office of
Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is supported by New York State
(NYS) Homes and Community Renewal, NYS Department of State, and
NYS Department of Transportation. The document was prepared by the
following consulting firms:
URS Corporation
The LiRo Group
AIM Development
Planning4Places LLC

Foreword
Introduction
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in August 2011, the State
of New York experienced three extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the lives of
New Yorkers and their communities. These tragic disasters signaled that New
Yorkers are living in a new reality defined by rising sea levels and extreme
weather events that will occur with increased frequency and power. They
also signaled that we need to rebuild our communities in a way that will
mitigate future risks and build increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo led the charge
to develop an innovative, community-driven planning program on a scale
unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program empowers the State’s most impacted
communities with the technical expertise needed to develop thorough and
implementable reconstruction plans to build physically, socially, and
economically resilient and sustainable communities.
Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo in April of 2013, is a
more than $650 million planning and implementation process established to
provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities severely
damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy.
Drawing on lessons learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program
is a unique combination of bottom-up community participation and Stateprovided technical expertise. This powerful combination recognizes not only
that community members are best positioned to assess the needs and
opportunities of the places where they live and work, but also that decisions
are best made when they are grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by
the latest innovative solutions.

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

One hundred and two storm-affected localities across the State were
originally designated to participate in the NYRCR Program. The State has
allocated each locality between $3 million and $25 million to implement
eligible projects identified in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for these projects
is provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
program.1
Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising one or more of the 102
localities, were created and led by a NYRCR Planning Committee composed
of local residents, business owners, and civic leaders. Members of the
Planning Committees were identified in consultation with established local
leaders, community organizations, and in some cases municipalities. The
NYRCR Program sets a new standard for community participation in recovery
and resiliency planning, with community members leading the planning
process. Across the State, more than 500 New Yorkers represent their
communities by serving on Planning Committees. More than 400 Planning
Committee Meetings have been held, during which Planning Committee
members worked with the State’s NYRCR Program team to develop
community reconstruction plans and identify opportunities to make their
communities more resilient. All meetings were open to the public. An
additional 125-plus Public Engagement Events attracted thousands of
community members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR planning
process and proposals. The NYRCR Program’s outreach has included
communities that are traditionally underrepresented, such as immigrant
populations and students. All planning materials are posted on the NYRCR
Program’s website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several
ways for community members and the public to submit feedback on
materials in progress.
1

Five of the 102 localities in the program—Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and
Montgomery Counties—are not funded through the CDBG-DR program.

Foreword
Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were supported by
staff from the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR), planners from
New York State (NYS) Department of State (DOS) and NYS Department of
Transportation (DOT), and consultants from world-class planning firms that
specialize in engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green infrastructure, and
more.
With the January 2014 announcement of the NYRCR Program’s expansion to
include 22 new localities, the program comprises over 2.7 million New
Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent to 14% of
the overall State population and 12% of the State’s overall geography.
The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR Plan. Governor Cuomo
has allocated over $650 million of funding to the program for implementing
projects identified in the NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Communities are also eligible
for additional funds through the program’s NY Rising to the Top Competition,
which evaluates NYRCR Communities across eight categories, including best
use of technology in the planning process, best approach to resilient
economic growth, and best use of green infrastructure to bolster resilience.
The winning NYRCR Community in each category will be allocated an
additional $3 million of implementation funding. The NYRCR Program is also
working with both private and public institutions to identify existing funding
sources and create new funding opportunities where none existed before.
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated with State and Federal
agencies to help guide the development of feasible projects. The program
has leveraged the Regional Economic Development Council’s State Agency
Review Teams (SARTs), comprised of representatives from dozens of State
agencies and authorities, for feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR
Communities. The SARTs review projects with an eye toward regulatory and
permitting needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources.
The NYRCR Program is continuing to work with the SARTs to streamline the
permitting process and ensure shovels are in the ground as quickly as
possible.
On the pages that follow, you will see the results of months of thoughtful,
diligent work by NYRCR Planning Committees, passionately committed to
realizing brighter, more resilient futures for their communities.

defining the scope of its planning area, assessing storm damage, and
identifying critical issues. Next, the Planning Committee inventoried critical
assets in the community and assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On the
basis of this work, the Planning Committee described recovery and resiliency
needs and identified opportunities. The Planning Committee then developed
a series of comprehensive reconstruction and resiliency strategies, and
identified projects and implementation actions to help fulfill those strategies.
The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan are divided into three
categories. The order in which the projects and actions are listed in this
NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the NYRCR Community’s
prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects
proposed for funding through a NYRCR Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR
funding. Featured Projects are projects and actions that the Planning
Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and has
analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through the NYRCR
Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are projects and
actions that the Planning Committee would like to highlight and that are not
categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects. The Proposed
Projects and Featured Projects found in this NYRCR Plan were voted for
inclusion by official voting members of the Planning Committee. Those voting
members with conflicts of interest recused themselves from voting on any
affected projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics Handbook and Code of
Conduct.
The NYRCR Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay Community is eligible for up to
$13.3 million in CDBG-DR implementation funds.2
While developing projects for inclusion in this NYRCR Plan, Planning
Committees took into account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the
effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical
assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees also
considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be eligible
for CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented with this source of
Federal funding must fall into a Federally-designated eligible activity
category, fulfill a national objective (meeting an urgent need, removing
slums and blight, or benefiting low to moderate income individuals), and
have a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding is linked. These are

The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more resilient
community. Each NYRCR Planning Committee began the planning process by
Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

2

The following localities’ allocations comprise the NYRCR Community’s total allocation:
Gerritsen Beach – $6.7 million; Sheepshead Bay – $6.6 million.

Foreword
among the factors that the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery will
consider, in consultation with local municipalities and nonprofit organizations,
when determining which projects and actions are best positioned for
implementation.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR
Community’s CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed
Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review, HUD
eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the
projects and actions found in this NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan
does not guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for
CDBG‐DR funding or that it will be implemented. The Governor’s Office of
Storm Recovery will actively seek to match projects with funding sources.
In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions outlined
in this NYRCR Plan will become a reality helping New York not only to
rebuild, but also to build back better.

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Foreword
NYRCR Communities

Find out more at
StormRecovery.ny.gov/Community-Reconstruction-Program

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table of Contents

Executive Summary

ES-1

A. Overview

ES-1

B. Community-Driven Process

ES-2

C. Blueprint for Implementation

ES-4

Section I: Community Overview

1

A. Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan

3

B. Description of Storm Damage

12

C. Critical Issues

18

D. Community Vision

18

E. Relationship to Regional Plans

19

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

25

A. Description of Community Assets

26

B. Assessment of Risk to Assets

30

C. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities

37

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies 42
A. Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Table of Contents

43

Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles

57

Installation of Backup Generators at Key Community Facilities
(Proposed Project)

60

Evacuation Planning for Gerritsen Beach (Proposed Project)

63

Identification and Retrofit of a Building for Use as an Emergency
Response and Recovery Center in Sheepshead Bay (Proposed
Project)

66

Retrofitting of Vollies Hall and Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department
Station (Proposed Project)

69

Retrofitting of Key Businesses and Community Services Assets
(Proposed Project)

74

Emmons Avenue: Complete Streets Streetscape and Stormwater
Drainage Improvements (Proposed Project)

77

Elevating and Retrofitting of Homes (Proposed Project)

80

Installation of Backflow Prevention Measures on City
Infrastructure (Proposed Project)

82

Installation of Sewer Connection Cut-Off Valves (Proposed
Project)

86

Repair and Reconstruction of Canton Court Bulkhead (Proposed
Project)

89

Feasibility Study to Improve the Resiliency of the Courts in
Sheepshead Bay (Proposed Project)

91

Reconnaissance Study for Storm Surge Reduction and Flood
Barrier Systems (Proposed Project)

93

Page i

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Supplemental Community-Driven Emergency Response Programs
(Featured Project)

95

Support the Resiliency and Maintenance of Plumb Beach
(Featured Project)

97

Homeowner Education Program (Featured Project)

100

Construct a Resilient Comfort Station at Brigham Park,
Sheepshead Bay (Featured Project)

102

Establish Merchants Associations (Featured Project)

104

Section V: Additional Materials

106

A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations

107

B. Master Table of Projects

108

C. Public Engagement Process

112

D. Community Asset Inventory

114

E. Endnotes

117

F. Glossary

119

Figure II-4: Risk Assessment Map of Economic Development
Assets in Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
Figure II-5: Risk Assessment Map of Gerritsen Beach Assets
Figure II-6: Risk Assessment Map of Sheepshead Bay Assets

34
35
36

Tables
Table II-1: New York State Department of State Risk Areas
Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations for Gerritsen
Beach and Sheepshead Bay
Table V-2: Master Projects for Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead
Bay

Note: Unless otherwise noted, the photographs in this report were
generously provided by a resident of Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn.

Figures
Figure I-1: NYRCR Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay Planning
Area
Figure I-2: Sheepshead Bay Courts
Figure I-3: Land Use
Figure I-4: Superstorm Sandy Flood Inundation
Figure I-5: FEMA Superstorm Sandy Preliminary Damage
Estimates
Figure II-1: Gerritsen Beach Asset Inventory
Figure II-2: Sheepshead Bay Asset Inventory
Figure II-3: Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay Flood Risk
Assessment Areas

Table of Contents

4
8
11
13
16
27
28
32

Page ii

31
107
108

Executive Summary
A. Overview
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program was established
to provide rebuilding and revitalization assistance to communities severely
damaged by Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical Storm Lee.
The NYRCR Program enabled communities to identify resilient and innovative
reconstruction projects and other needed actions based on communitydriven plans that consider current damage, future threats, and the
community’s economic opportunities.
Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay are neighboring communities located
on the southern shore in Brooklyn, NY, which were severely impacted by
Superstorm Sandy. Gerritsen Beach is on a peninsula with water on three
sides, and Sheepshead Bay has an extensive waterfront along its southern
boundary, with much of its eastern boundary adjacent to Plumb Beach
Channel.
The neighborhoods have water access to Sheepshead Bay, Rockaway Inlet,
Jamaica Bay, New York Harbor, and the Atlantic Ocean, and both have a
long-term maritime history. The neighborhood shorelines are not protected
by extensive dunes or seawalls, and the communities are built on low-lying
ground. The NYRCR Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay Community
(Community) has developed an NYRCR Plan that addresses repairing damage
from the storms, mitigating future threats to the Community, and fostering
its economic future. The State of New York has allocated up to $13.3 million
in Federal Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery (CDBGDR) monies to fund eligible projects identified in this NYRCR Plan.

Storm Impacts
On October 29, 2012, Superstorm Sandy—one of the largest storms to land
ashore in New York’s recorded history—wreaked havoc on Gerritsen Beach
and Sheepshead Bay. The storm made landfall during an extra-high full
moon tide. The communities were battered by a massive storm surge, with

Executive Summary

water levels 9 to 12 feet above normal tides. The results were widespread
property and infrastructure damage, personal injury, and displacement of
residents.
In New York State, Superstorm Sandy took 48 lives and severely damaged or
destroyed over 300,000 homes, caused catastrophic flooding in subways and
tunnels, and damaged major power transmission systems 1. Governor Andrew
M. Cuomo estimated the damage to New York State to be $42 billion.
Superstorm Sandy produced the greatest damage ever experienced by
Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay. Homes, business, and streets were
overwhelmed by floodwater and sewage backflow. The stormwater
infrastructure and conveyance system were overtaxed, which compounded
the damage from direct overland flooding.
Gerritsen Beach was almost entirely engulfed in storm surge flooding. More
than half the housing in Gerritsen Beach, a predominantly residential
community, suffered significant damage from the 8 to 10 feet of tidal surge.
The narrow courts in the “old section,” south of the Gotham Avenue inlet,
are at low ground elevations and were substantially flooded. Damage to
housing units was most heavily concentrated in Gerritsen Beach south of
Devon Avenue, where 1,378 of 1,601 (86.1%) of all housing units sustained
some level of damage, including 195 units where flooding to first floor living
space exceeded 4 feet.
Flooding was widespread in Sheepshead Bay, with the southern third of the
community under water. Hit particularly hard were a concentration of homes
known locally as “the courts.” Between East 29th Street, Coyle Street, the
Belt Parkway, and the waterfront, there are over 220 homes grouped in six
courts that are located about 5 feet below the street level of Emmons
Avenue and are not connected to city drainage infrastructure. In combination
with the courts’ sunken elevation relative to the surrounding neighborhood,
this lack of connectivity to municipal stormwater infrastructure greatly
increased the duration of floodwater on site and the resulting damage.

Page ES-1

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Multi-story and supportive housing in Sheepshead Bay was greatly affected
by flooding. Damage to mechanical systems, electrical panels, and elevators,
located in the basements and on the first floors, made buildings
uninhabitable or greatly reduced their habitability for extended periods after
the storm. Even in areas where flooding levels on the street were minimal,
basement levels were deeply flooded, causing loss of contents, severe
damage to building mechanical systems, and extended displacement of
residents. Thus, many upper-floor units not directly flooded were
uninhabitable for extended periods after the storm. Many basement-level
apartments were entirely flooded, with loss of personal property and
furnishings, the loss of housing for tenants, and the loss of critical rental
income for property owners.
Flooding, sustained power outages, and the temporary dislocation of their
customer bases led to prolonged or permanent closure of many businesses
on key commercial corridors. Up to six months after the storm, as many as
40% of the businesses on Emmons Avenue remained closed. Damage
occurred to mechanical systems, inventory, and building interiors and
contents. Superstorm Sandy created an unprecedented quantity of debris,
including large items such as boats, cars, and building materials, including a
bar from Mill Basin that broke free from its foundation at Gateway Marina
and floated more than a mile west before landing on residential street on the
western side of Gerritsen Beach. The disaster debris was removed by the
extensive efforts of volunteers and emergency responders in the weeks after
the storm. Sand and other small debris infiltrated stormwater systems,
impeding their function, as evidenced by the increase in nuisance flooding
during high tides and small storms that have occurred since Superstorm
Sandy.
More than a year after Superstorm Sandy’s wrath, recovery efforts have
been made but great needs remain and opportunities exist for creating a
more resilient Community to avoid future devastation.

Critical Issues
Superstorm Sandy was an unprecedented event. The experience brought to
light both local and city-wide weaknesses and needs, including:

Executive Summary



Lack of comprehensive emergency response plans to protect
vulnerable populations, evacuate the public, and recover from the
disaster;



Vulnerable community assets, including homes, schools, and cultural
and civic structures, which are ill-equipped to handle severe flooding
and storm surge;



Fragile local economy, for which business suffered greatly (e.g.,
physical damage, inventory loss, revenue decline) and not all have
recovered;



Inadequate infrastructure, such as low-lying roadways that
hampered evacuation, and sewer systems failure that exacerbated
flooding;



Loss of power infrastructure for weeks after the storm; and



Inadequate planning and processes to meet the needs of the
Community’s significant vulnerable populations, of which:


21,495 (16%) are over the age of 65;



16,140 (12%) are disabled; and



70,943 (54%) speak a language other than English, with nearly
60% of foreign language speakers reporting that they speak
English “less than very well.” (U.S. Census, 2010, and American
Community Survey)

These factors can complicate advance planning and preparedness measures
at a community level and require special attention during and after an
emergency, particularly in the evacuation phase.
The NYRCR Plan responds to these weaknesses, or critical issues, to recover
from Superstorm Sandy and to make Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
more resilient to future storms.

B. Community-Driven Process
The NYRCR Plan was collaboratively developed by the NYRCR Planning
Committee (Committee) with input from the residents, business owners, and
members of civic associations of Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay. Local

Page ES-2

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
uniqueness and diversity were accounted for in creating a vision, to rebuild
in a manner that increases resilience, sustainability, and prosperity.

“Our vision is to restore and build upon the historic
uniqueness and diversity of our waterfront communities
by promoting resilient, prepared, and deeply rooted
neighborhoods that will ensure a stronger, safer, and
brighter quality of life for future generations.”

An overview of the NYRCR planning process was provided, followed by a
report on the Committee’s progress to date. Most of the meeting time was
devoted to facilitated breakout sessions at multiple tables, during which
participants were asked for feedback on the Vision Statement, needs and
opportunities, key strategies, community assets, and ideas for potential
projects. The feedback helped guide the Committee and was incorporated
into the NYRCR Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay Conceptual Plan,
particularly with respect to needs and opportunities, key strategies, and
project ideas.

Public Outreach

Second Public Engagement Event

The Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay communities were provided a
range of opportunities for collaboration during the planning process, which
began in September 2013 and concluded in March 2014. Three Public
Engagement Events (in October and November 2013, and February 2014)
were held to solicit feedback from the Community on the NYRCR planning
process, to help in the identification of local needs and priorities, to gather
information used in the development of projects to address these needs, and
to provide feedback on the proposed projects. A wide-ranging public
outreach campaign was conducted using print and online media, flyer and
poster distribution, e-mail, and word of mouth to inform Community
residents of the meetings and opportunities to provide feedback through
other methods, such as comment cards and on-line surveys.

The second Public Engagement Event was held on November 20, 2013, at
the Brooklyn Amity School in Sheepshead Bay and had approximately 100
public attendees. The purpose of this event was to share key elements of the
NYRCR Conceptual Plan, with a focus on resiliency strategies and potential
projects. The meeting format included a short presentation; small, structured
working groups; and a short open house session.

The Committee held 12 Planning Committee Meetings between September
18, 2013, and February 27, 2014. During this extensive planning process, the
Committee provided input on local issues, opportunities, and methods of
public outreach; created strategies and projects that respond to the critical
issues and storm effects of Superstorm Sandy; and worked with the public
during Committee meetings and at the three Public Engagement Events to
help them understand the planning process, and to gather valuable insights
from the public on the plan development and the project proposals.
First Public Engagement Events
Public Engagement Events were held on October 7 and October 8 2013, and
attended by more than 150 residents of the two Communities. The October
7th event was held in Sheepshead Bay, and the October 8 th event was held in
Gerritsen Beach. Both events opened with an introduction of the Committee.

Executive Summary

Public Engagement Meeting on October 7, 2013
(Source: Elizabeth Graham)

Page ES-3

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Third Public Engagement Event
The third Public Engagement Event was held on February 27, 2014, at the
Brooklyn Amity School in Sheepshead Bay and had approximately 55
attendees. The open house format included:


A Welcome Station with program history and work to date;



A Project Evaluation Station with an overview of the criteria, ranking,
inventory process, and any other factors that went into the ranking
process;



Nineteen Project Stations, including Proposed Projects and Featured
Project Boards; and



An Exit Station at which participants could map their address and
submit feedback forms.

Additionally, an electronic version of the survey was posted online and
shared through social media outlets. Over 50 additional feedback forms were
completed online and through additional outreach, and the information was
compiled and shared with the Committee. Overall, post-meeting feedback
was aligned with the feedback received during the meetings.

Implementation of these strategies will be pursued through a series of
projects, also developed by the Committee with extensive public input, which
are categorized in three groups: Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and
Additional Resiliency Recommendations.


Proposed Projects: Proposed Projects are proposed for funding



Featured Projects: Featured Projects are innovative projects for

through a community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding.

which an initial study or discrete first phase of the project is
proposed for CDBG-DR funding or other identified funding, and
regulatory reforms and other programs that do not involve capital
expenditures.


Additional Resiliency Recommendations: Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are resiliency projects and actions the Planning
Committee would like to highlight that are not categorized as
Proposed or Featured Projects.

The table below provides a list of strategies, paired with the Proposed
and Featured Projects that will execute them. The project list includes:
Infrastructure enhancements to reduce direct effects of flooding
Reconnaissance studies for large-scale flood risk reduction measures
Retrofit measures to individual buildings
Plans to increase local emergency response capabilities

The final Public Engagement Event, to be held in spring 2014, will solicit
additional input on the implementation of strategies and projects presented
in the NYRCR Plan.






C. Blueprint for Implementation

The order of appearance is not a reflection of project priority or ranking.

Throughout the planning process, the Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay
Planning Committee emphasized the following critical needs: identification of
measures to reduce future flood impacts; repair and retrofit of homes,
businesses, and key community facilities; and increasing the ability of local
emergency management groups to perform pre-event planning and response
activities during and after disasters. Members of the Community agreed with
this identification of needs and provided valuable information that was used
to help develop strategies to address them. The Committee relied on
residents’ specific local knowledge of, and personal experience with, the
impacts of Superstorm Sandy. In many cases, this local knowledge was
supplemented by the perspective of community groups, nonprofits, City and
State agencies, and elected officials.

Executive Summary

Page ES-4

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategies and Projects
Identify methods to reduce future flood risk and
damage
Reconnaissance Study for Storm Surge Reduction and
Flood Barrier Systems (Proposed)
Evaluate options for reducing flooding in Gerritsen Beach,
Sheepshead Bay, and the neighboring Manhattan Beach.

Identify methods to mitigate chronic sewer-related
damage
Installation of Backflow Prevention Measures on City
Infrastructure (Proposed)
Install valves or flap gates at stormwater outfall locations and
modify catch basins to maximize capacity to prevent overflow.
Installation of Sewer Connection Cut-Off Valves
(Proposed)
Install sewer connection cut-off valves in homes, businesses and
community facilities.

Repair and improve Community infrastructure
Study of Street and Drainage Infrastructure Repair Needs,
Gerritsen Beach (Proposed)
Identify needed repairs and modifications to streets and drainage
infrastructure throughout Gerritsen Beach.
Repair and Reconstruction of Canton Court Bulkhead
(Proposed)
Repair the bulkhead at the southern end of Canton Court in
Gerritsen Beach.

Ensure adequate evacuation routes and advance
planning
Evacuation Planning for Gerritsen Beach (Proposed)
Determine evacuation capacity of existing road network in
Gerritsen Beach, where there is one road leading out of the
neighborhood.

Emmons Avenue, Complete Streets (Proposed)
This project would replace Sandy-destroyed street trees and
plantings, and improve stormwater drainage infrastructure

Executive Summary

Page ES-5

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Increase community preparedness and emergency
response capabilities
Identification and Retrofit of a Building for Use as an
Emergency Response and Recovery Center in Sheepshead
Bay (Proposed)
Designate and modify a facility for “one-stop-shop” information
and resource headquarters in case of emergency.
Retrofitting of Vollies Hall and Gerrittsen Beach Fire
Department Station (Proposed)
Retrofit the existing emergency response and recovery centers to
prevent damage to the buildings in case of another event.
Supplemental Community-Driven Emergency Response
Programs (Featured)
Enhance local emergency response capabilities in Sheepshead
Bay.

Foster a thriving and resilient small business community
Establish Merchants Associations (Featured)
Increase coordination and support among small businesses in
Sheepshead Bay and Gerritsen Beach.
Retrofitting of Key Businesses and Community Services
Assets (Proposed)
Install flood prevention measures and elevate mechanical systems
of businesses and community facilities.

Support a resilient housing stock
Elevation and Retrofitting of Homes (Proposed)
Provide financial assistance for home elevation and/or retrofit of
homes in high-risk areas to increase resiliency in future events.
Feasibility Study to Improve the Resiliency of the Courts
in Sheepshead Bay (Proposed)
Identify retrofit solutions for “the courts” of Sheepshead Bay in
relation to home raising and connection to City sewer system.
Homeowner Education Program (Featured)
Provide information and technical support to homeowners in highrisk areas.

Restore and improve recreational opportunities
Support the Resiliency and Maintenance of Plumb Beach
(Featured)
Establish understanding of maintenance responsibilities at Plumb
Beach to support the maintenance and protective features.
Construct a Resilient Comfort Station at Brigham Park
(Featured)
Expand on current construction plans at Brigham Park in
Sheepshead Bay to include a flood-resilient comfort station.

Installation of Backup Generators at Key Community
Facilities (Proposed)
Install onsite power generation and storage equipment.

Executive Summary

Page ES-6

Section I:
Community Overview

Section I:
Community Overview
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program was established
to provide rebuilding and revitalization assistance to communities severely
damaged by Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical Storm Lee.
The NYRCR Program enabled communities to identify resilient and innovative
reconstruction projects and other needed actions based on communitydriven plans that consider current damage, future threats, and the
community’s economic opportunities.
The NYRCR Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay Community (Community) used
the process to develop an NYRCR Plan that addresses repairing damage from
the storms, mitigating future threats to the Community, and fostering its
economic future. In a manner consistent with the National Disaster Recovery
Framework, NYRCR Plans include needs, risks, and opportunities related to
assets in six Recovery Support Functions: Community Planning and Capacity
Building, Economic Development, Health and Social Services, Housing,
Infrastructure, and Natural and Cultural Resources.
Additionally, the NYRCR Plan for this Community:


Involves a locally driven grassroots planning process;



Provides a Community Vision that addresses regional and community
recovery and resilience;



Assesses each Community’s vulnerability to the negative effects of
future natural hazards;



Assesses the need for economic development; and



Describes cost-effective strategies, projects, and actions that will
increase the resilience of the two communities, provide protection to
vulnerable populations, and promote sound economic development
by protecting the communities’ assets.

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

View of Sheepshead Bay, NY, 2012, with Belt Parkway in middle

The State of New York has allocated $13.3 million in Federal Community
Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) monies to fund
eligible projects identified in this NYRCR Plan. Additionally, the NYRCR Plan
identifies other potential funding sources for project implementation that
range from Federal agency grants and low-interest loans to State funding
sources, foundation grants, and private-sector contributions.

Page 2

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

A. Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan
The NYRCR Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay Planning Committee used the
Community Board mapping of the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
neighborhoods as the basis for identifying the geographic scope of the plan.
In addition, the Committee decided to include the immediately adjacent
Plumb Beach peninsula as part of the Sheepshead Bay neighborhood. Plumb
Beach is large open park area lying to the east of the Emmons Avenue
waterfront and directly south of the Gerritsen Beach peninsula. Plumb Beach
provides a degree of protection to the area because of beaches and dunes,
which may reduce direct impacts from waves and floodwaters. The peninsula
supports the Belt Parkway as it heads east to the Gerritsen Inlet bridge.
Thus, it is an important natural resource and protective feature for the
Community.
The combined area containing Gerritsen Beach, Sheepshead Bay, and Plumb
Beach is the geographic scope of the NYRCR Plan (also referred to as the
NYRCR Community) is shown in Figure I-1. The boundaries of the Planning
Area are Avenue P to the north, Gerritsen Avenue to the east, Emmons
Avenue and Plumb Beach to the south, and Ocean Parkway to the west.

Gravesend, with the neighborhood of Midwood to the north of Avenue P. To
the east of Gerritsen Avenue is the Marine Park neighborhood, the New York
City Parks facility known as Marine Park, and the National Park Service’s
Gateway National Recreation Area, which includes Floyd Bennett Field. The
Rockaway Peninsula, which includes the neighborhoods of Breezy Point,
Roxbury, Belle Harbor, Rockaway Park, and Rockaway Beach, lies to the
south across Rockaway Inlet.

View from southern end of Gerritsen Avenue, looking toward Plumb
Beach, Belt Parkway, and Gerritsen Inlet bridge
Source: URS

The Planning Area is on the southern shore of Brooklyn, with water access to
Rockaway Inlet, Jamaica Bay, New York Harbor, and the Atlantic Ocean. The
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula, consisting of Sea Gate, Coney Island, Brighton
Beach, and Manhattan Beach, lies to the southwest of Sheepshead Bay. To
the west of the Planning Area across Ocean Parkway is the neighborhood of

Section I: Community Overview

Page 3

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-1: NYRCR Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay Planning Area

Section I: Community Overview

Page 4

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Gerritsen Beach
Gerritsen Beach, with a population of approximately 6,700, is situated on a
peninsula that extends between Avenue U to the north, Burnett Street and
Gerritsen Avenue to the east, Plumb Beach Channel to the south, and Shell
Bank Creek and Knapp Street to the west. Knapp Street is considered the
boundary line between Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay.
The Gotham Avenue Canal extends eastward to Gerritsen Avenue, dividing
the neighborhood to the north and south between Gotham Avenue and
Bartlett Place. Local residents often refer to the portion of the neighborhood
north of the canal as the “new section” while the portion to the south is
called the “old section.”
Gerritsen Beach was predominantly marshland until the 1920s when it was
developed as a planned seasonal community with hundreds of bungalows. As
marshlands were filled in for development purposes, flood storage capacities
have decreased, resulting in an increased risk of flooding. These filled-in
marshlands remain at low ground elevations, further increasing the flood risk
to properties. By the 1930s, Gerritsen Beach had more than 1,500 homes.
Today, Gerritsen Beach is a year-round residential community with homes
that sit between narrow streets and the water’s edge. Most of Gerritsen
Beach is residential; however, there are pockets of commercial uses along
Gerritsen Avenue and Knapp Street. The Gerritsen Creek estuary supports
recreational fishing and is also a major spawning ground for various aquatic
species.

Section I: Community Overview

Marina in Gerritsen Beach on Plumb Beach Channel
Source: URS

Businesses on Gerritsen Avenue
Source: URS

Page 5

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan


Gerritsen Beach is densely developed and now populated yearround, increasing the number of people and buildings vulnerable to
flood and surge impacts. There is now a greater likelihood of major
property damage and loss of access to critical assets and community
services.

Gotham Avenue Inlet, Gerritsen Beach
Source: URS

Gerritsen Beach is almost entirely composed of one- and two-family homes.
Residences are typically detached with front and side yards, backyards, and
driveway.

Homes on Dare Court, Gerritsen Beach
Source: URS

Gerritsen Beach is vulnerable to flooding and storm surge for several
reasons:


Structures and infrastructure in Gerritsen Beach were built prior to
enactment of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and
before Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and as a result were
constructed at elevations below the base flood elevation (BFE),
making them vulnerable to flooding.



Buildings constructed in Gerritsen Beach before 1980 were based on
BFEs that did not account for wave action, making them vulnerable
to surge damage. Additionally, most of homes and businesses were
built before modern construction codes, which require flood-resistant
building materials, design, and construction practices. These
structures were not built per floodplain management ordinances,
which require that the lowest finished floor elevation (FFE) be above
the BFE.

Section I: Community Overview

Page 6

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
In the early 1930s, the City of New York took control of Jamaica Bay and
began developing the waterfront by expanding Emmons Avenue and
redesigning the piers, which are still used today for daily party-boat fishing
tours. Year-round habitation was extensive by the 1930s. The Shore Parkway
was extended into the area in the 1940s, which improved access and made
the area more desirable to commuters. After World War II, a significant
housing shortage led to increased residential construction.
Today, Sheepshead Bay is a much larger neighborhood and its
demographics, economics, and land uses vary to a much greater degree.
Sheepshead Bay has a population of 124,500, who live in a mixed building
stock that includes single-family homes, newer multi-family dwellings, senior
care facilities, and New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA)-operated public
housing. The NYCHA Sheepshead Bay/Nostrand Houses includes a four-block
complex consisting of 34 six-story buildings bounded by Nostrand Avenue,
Bragg Street, Avenue V, and Avenue X. Sheepshead Bay also has a larger
commercial sector, with primary corridors along Emmons Avenue,
Sheepshead Bay Road, Nostrand Avenue, and Avenue U.
Bungalows on Stanton Court, Sheepshead Bay
Source: URS

Sheepshead Bay
Sheepshead Bay is defined as the area bounded to the south by the water
body of Sheepshead Bay, to the west by Ocean Parkway, to the north by
Avenue P, and to the east by Knapp Street and the Plumb Beach Channel.
Sheepshead Bay began developing in the late 1870s and 1880s, partly
because it became easier to travel between the then-separate municipalities
of Brooklyn and City of New York after the construction of the Manhattan
Beach branch of the Long Island Railroad; the Brooklyn, Flatbush, and Coney
Island Railroad (known as the BMT Brighton Line); the Ocean Parkway; and
the Brooklyn Bridge. The surrounding area was a thriving seasonal bungalow
community, anchored by the Coney Island Jockey Club’s construction of its
flagship racetrack in Sheepshead Bay in 1880. The State of New York
banned gambling in 1924 and the racetrack subsequently closed. However,
the Sheepshead Bay neighborhood was well-established by this time and
continued to expand after the closure of the track.

Section I: Community Overview

Similar to structures in Gerritsen Beach, the bungalows, many homes, and
the water-dependent businesses were developed before the enactment of
contemporary building codes and standards. These pre-FIRM and premodern code constructed structures and facilities are at risk to flooding and
storm surge damage and destruction due to construction below the BFE,
inaccurate FIRMs used for land use decisions, and noncompliance with
modern flood damage-resistant building materials, design, and construction
standards.
Sheepshead Bay has numerous bungalows located along “courts” (pedestrian
walks) north and south of Emmons Avenue, one of the main commercial
corridors. Some courts are as much as 5 feet below the street grade, are at
risk of inundation from storm surge, and are frequently subject to nuisance
flooding from stormwater run-off. The courts, as shown in Figure I-2,
include: Canda, Lake, Dunne-Mesereau, and Stanton, which are located
south of Shore Parkway and north of Emmons Avenue between East 29th
Street and Batchelder Street; and Weber and Shale-Bogardus, which are
located south of Emmons Avenue and north of the Sheepshead Bay.

Page 7

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
many of the businesses along the commercial corridors in Sheepshead Bay
away from the waterfront, and emphasizes the importance of small
businesses to the local economy.
The Sheepshead Bay Marina along the Emmons Avenue waterfront is
operated by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation, and is a
popular fishing, boating, and recreational area. However, the marina is also a
working waterfront and, thus, the maintenance of navigational facilities
(channels, piers, etc.) is required for safe operation.

Figure I-2: Sheepshead Bay Courts
Commercial uses in Sheepshead Bay are found along Kings Highway,
Emmons Avenue, Nostrand Avenue, Avenue U, Ocean Avenue, and
Sheepshead Bay Road. Although much of the micro-economy of Emmons
Avenue is based on water-dependent and water-enhanced uses such as boat
docking, storage, and charter fishing operations, and tourism-related
businesses such as restaurants, cafes, and three hotels, the other
commercial corridors in Sheepshead Bay include an array of businesses such
as health care and social assistance, retail and food services, and
professional, scientific, and technical services. Based on North American
Industry Classification System (NAICS) 2011 Business Pattern2 data for the
ZIP codes 11229 and 11235 (which include Sheepshead Bay and Gerritsen
Beach, as well as Brighton Beach and Manhattan Beach), 74% of the 4,421
business establishments in the area have 1-4 employees. This is reflected in

Section I: Community Overview

Sheepshead Bay Road commercial corridor, looking towards
Sheepshead Bay Road subway station
Source: URS

Page 8

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Sheepshead Bay Marina along the Emmons Avenue waterfront
Source: URS

Section I: Community Overview

Mixed-use commercial and apartment building on Coyle Street,
Sheepshead Bay
Source: URS

Page 9

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Avenue U commercial corridor
Source: URS

Land Use
Land uses in the Planning Area are shown in Figure I-3. There is a wide
range of land uses, with housing, commercial, and utility uses occupying the
majority of the area. There are substantial open space areas in Plumb Beach
and in Marine Park, adjacent to the eastern boundary of the Planning Area.

Section I: Community Overview

Page 10

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-3: Land Use

Section I: Community Overview

Page 11

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Description of Storm Damage
Superstorm Sandy struck the New York area on October 29, 2012, bringing a
storm surge of 9 to 12 feet above normal tide levels from Kings Point on the
western end of Long Island Sound to the Battery on the southern tip of
Manhattan. It was one of the largest storms in New York’s recorded history
to land ashore.
The storm’s effects were devastating, causing widespread damage to lives,
homes, businesses, core infrastructure, government property, and an
economy just beginning to recover from a financial crisis.
As detailed in the National Hurricane Center report on the storm, 1
Superstorm Sandy had the following impacts on New York State: 48
fatalities, severe damage or destruction of over 300,000 homes, catastrophic
flooding in subways and tunnels, and damage to major power transmission
systems and widespread power outages.

Firefighters responding to Superstorm Sandy on Shore Parkway at
Brown Street, Sheepshead Bay, October 2012

the State nearly $42 billion, with the vast majority of damage centered on
the City of New York and Long Island.5
In Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay, Superstorm Sandy caused the
greatest damage ever experienced in the history of the neighborhoods.
Flooding and ensuing damage to homes, businesses, and personal property
was widespread in both neighborhoods, with storm surge causing a rapid
inundation of widespread areas. In advance of the storm surge, a substantial
volume of floodwater entered both communities through stormwater outlets
without flap valves or check gates. When water levels rose in Sheepshead
Bay and the water bodies around Gerritsen Beach (Shell Bank Creek and
Plumb Beach Creek) before the storm surge, water surcharged the outlets
and flooded streets and homes. Storm surge and floodwater entered
Gerritsen Beach, overflowed a low-lying area along the Belt Parkway at
Plumb Beach, and passed through the Belt Parkway Bridge into the inlet. In
Sheepshead Bay, storm surge flowed over Emmons Avenue and into
adjacent areas. (See Figure I-4, Superstorm Sandy Flood Inundation.) The
flooding caused widespread displacement of residents throughout the
Community, with many forced to seek shelter and alternate housing for
extended periods after the storm.
The stormwater infrastructure and conveyance system were flooded and
damaged. The Coney Island Waste Water Treatment Plant, located on Knapp
Street, experienced numerous problems. Debris clogged parts of the plant,
causing a power outage. Water from Shell Bank Creek overtopped the plant’s
bulkheads and flooded the building, and the plant was shut down for 2 hours
on the night of October 29, 2013. To compound matters, a 72-inch outfall
pipe had been previously shut down for repairs, further reducing capacity at
the plant.6 An estimated 213 million gallons of raw sewage and combined
sewer overflow (CSO) overflowed from the plant, in addition to another 284
million gallons that escaped with only a reduction in secondary treatment. 7

Fourteen counties in New York State were declared Federal disaster areas.3
Economic losses as a result of Superstorm Sandy are estimated to be
between $30 and $50 billion, with an estimated $10 to $20 billion in insured
losses.4 New York Governor Andrew M. Cuomo stated the storm would cost

Section I: Community Overview

Page 12

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-4: Superstorm Sandy Flood Inundation

Section I: Community Overview

Page 13

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Gerritsen Beach was not included in the “Zone A” evacuation zone prior to
Superstorm Sandy. On October 29, 2012, City of New York Mayor Michael
Bloomberg issued a mandatory evacuation order for Zone A prior to Sandy’s
landfall. Zone A was defined as encompassing “all areas that will be
inundated with storm surge in a Category 1 hurricane and all areas abutting
the Atlantic coast.” At the time, Gerritsen Beach was mapped as Zone B,
which “encompasses all Category 2 inundation areas.” As a result, the
evacuation order that affected other areas of the City of New York was not
mandatory in the neighborhood and was not widely heeded by residents.
The storm surge thus trapped many residents in their homes, with some
having to seek refuge on the second floor.

The storm surge and flooding from Superstorm Sandy devastated the
bungalow courts along Emmons Avenue in Sheepshead Bay. Between East
29th Street, Coyle Street, the Belt Parkway, and the waterfront, there are
over 200 homes grouped in six courts. These courts are located about 5 feet
below the street level of Emmons Avenue and are not connected to city
drainage infrastructure. Without connection to municipal drainage, residents
had to pump out the trapped floodwaters. Ponding and nuisance flooding are
common during and after heavy rains. In combination with the courts’
sunken elevation relative to the surrounding neighborhood, this lack of
connectivity to municipal stormwater infrastructure greatly increased the
duration of floodwater on site and the resulting damage.

Over half the housing in Gerritsen Beach suffered significant damage, as a
tidal surge of 8 to 10 feet washed through the neighborhood in 10 minutes
during the storm. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) provided the following statistics on the damage. Damage to housing
units was most heavily concentrated in Gerritsen Beach south of Devon
Avenue, where 1,378 of 1,601 (86.1%) of all housing units sustained some
level of damage, including 195 units where flooding to first floor living space
exceeded 4 feet. The narrow courts in the “old section” (the area south of
the Gotham Avenue inlet) of Gerritsen Beach are at low ground elevations,
and were substantially flooded during Superstorm Sandy. These roadways
are constructed of a thin layer of asphalt over a sand foundation and are
subject to shifting, potholing, and cracking. These conditions were worsened
by inundation during Superstorm Sandy.

Multi-story and supportive housing in Sheepshead Bay was greatly affected
by flooding. Damage to mechanical systems, electrical panels, and elevators,
located in the basements and on the first floors, made buildings
uninhabitable or greatly reduced their habitability for extended periods after
the storm. Thus, many upper-floor units not directly flooded were
uninhabitable for extended periods after the storm.

Flooding was extremely widespread and damaging in Sheepshead Bay, as
shown in Figure I-4. Buildings and streets were inundated across the entire
southern portion of the neighborhood, extending inland past Avenue X.
Floodwaters and storm surge came from multiple locations, including the
waterfront along Emmons Avenue and then flowing north through the
streets, proceeding through the overpasses in the Belt Parkway to areas
north of the roadway. Plumb Beach was directly inundated by storm surge
and waves, and Plumb Beach Channel overflowed its banks and flooded
areas along Knapp St. Areas not receiving direct inundation experienced
flooding due to stormwater backflow in the municipal stormwater and
sanitary system; this occurred in areas north of Avenue X, and in particular,
between Avenues V and T, from East 26th Street east to Knapp St.

Section I: Community Overview

Flooding, sustained power outages, and the temporary dislocation of their
customer bases led to prolonged or permanent closure of many businesses
on key commercial corridors. Up to 6 months after the storm, as many as
40% of the businesses on Emmons Avenue remained closed. Damage
occurred to mechanical systems, inventory, and building interiors and
contents. While many businesses have repaired and reopened, throughout
the Community there are businesses that have not reopened or have not
fully recovered from their storm damage and resulting business interruptions.
Numerous basements, including basement apartments, were flooded
throughout the community. Even in areas where flooding levels on the street
were minimal, basement levels were deeply flooded, causing loss of
contents, severe damage to building mechanical systems, and extended
displacement to residents.

Page 14

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
A structural damage assessment conducted by Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
following Superstorm Sandy classified building damages into four categories:
destroyed, major damage, requires repair to be inhabitable, and affected.
Figure I-5 depicts the areas falling into each category. The assessment was
based on aerial imagery from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency
(NOAA), Civil Air Patrol (CAP) photographs, and media images captured from
immediately after Superstorm Sandy until Nov. 18, 2012.
The damage categories are defined as follows, by degree of damage to
impacted residences8:


Destroyed – total loss of structure, structure is not economically
feasible to repair, or complete failure to major structural components
(e.g., collapse of basement walls/foundation, walls or roof);

Section I: Community Overview



Major Damage – substantial failure to structural elements of
residence (e.g., walls, floors, foundation), or damage that will take
more than 30 days to repair;



Requires Repair to be Inhabitable – home is damaged and
uninhabitable, but may be made habitable in short period of time
with repairs; and



Affected – some damage to the structure and contents, but still
habitable.

It should be noted that the damage classification in Figure I-5 is part of an
ongoing work product and thus does not represent a final determination on
the damage level of any structure.

Page 15

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-5: FEMA Superstorm Sandy Preliminary Damage Estimates

Section I: Community Overview

Page 16

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Superstorm Sandy damage in the Courts, Sheepshead Bay

Sewer backflow from Superstorm Sandy inundates the basement of
a Gerritsen Beach home, October 2012

Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/occupysandy/8223577421/

Damaged home after Superstorm Sandy

Flood debris from inundated homes awaiting removal

Source: Linda Cupo

Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/occupysandy/8224652496

Section I: Community Overview

Source: Kathy Flynn

Page 17

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

C. Critical Issues
The risks resulting from Superstorm Sandy exposed numerous weaknesses
within the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay communities. This final
NYRCR Plan aims to respond to these weaknesses, or critical issues, to
recover from Superstorm Sandy, and to make Gerritsen Beach and
Sheepshead Bay more resilient to future storms.
Critical issues were derived from numerous meetings and discussions about
the storm, including 12 Committee meetings and three Public Engagement
Meeting Events (October 7–8, 2013, November 20, 2013, and February 27,
2014).
One of the most pressing issues communicated through the NYRCR process
was the lack of a comprehensive emergency response to the storm. The
Committee and the public feel that the overall emergency response was
inadequate, and that specific local plans to protect vulnerable populations,
evacuate the public, and recover from the disaster need to be created.

as well, as many sections of the Community were without power for weeks
after the storm.
According to the U.S. Census (2010), there are significant numbers of the
population who fall into vulnerable categories, due to age or language
limitations:


21,495 residents (16% of the population) are over 65 years old, a
number that is expected to increase by 28% by 2020.



16,140 residents (12% of the population) are disabled. Of this
population, 61% are 65 years or older.



70,943 (54%) of people in the planning area speak a language other
than English at home, with nearly three-fifths of foreign-language
speakers reporting that they speak English “less than very well.”

These factors can complicate advance planning and preparedness measures
at a community level, and require special attention during and after an
emergency, particularly in the evacuation phase.

Superstorm Sandy also highlighted the vulnerabilities of the Community’s
assets, including homes, schools, and cultural and civic structures. These
assets are ill-equipped to handle severe flooding and storm surge, and
increasing the resilience of these assets has become a hallmark issue for the
Community.

D. Community Vision

The Community has expressed support for protection of the local economy
after the storm. Local businesses suffered greatly, and many have yet to
fully recover. Businesses suffered physical damage to their brick and mortar
facilities, inventory was damaged, and the general lack of economic vitality
hurt businesses’ bottom line. According to the Brooklyn Community
Foundation, in “Sheepshead Bay, 40% of businesses – majority immigrantowned – will not return, jeopardizing economic vitality in the neighborhood.” 9

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay residents, business owners, and civic
association leaders were active members of the Committee. Together, they
collaborated in developing a blueprint to reconstruct their neighborhoods in a
sustainable and resilient manner.

Existing infrastructure, such as roadways and sewer systems, proved
vulnerable and inadequate during the storm. Resilience of these key assets is
important to the Committee and the public, and strategies and project ideas
to protect these assets have been proposed. Low-lying roadways, including
certain sections of the Belt Parkway, were flooded, making it difficult for
residents to evacuate quickly. Protection of power infrastructure is important

Section I: Community Overview

This section describes the Committee’s Vision Statement for the NYRCR Plan
and how Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay will rebuild stronger, smarter,
and safer.

Using a consensus-based approach at September 2013 Planning Committee
Meetings, the Committee worked together to create a draft Vision Statement,
which was then presented to the public for input and feedback at the
October 7–8, 2013 Public Engagement Events. The public reviewed the draft
statement and provided their thoughts and preferred language. This input
was used to create the final Vision Statement, presented below. (Details of
the public engagement process are provided in Section V.)

Page 18

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

“Our vision is to restore and build upon the historic
uniqueness and diversity of our waterfront communities
by promoting resilient, prepared, and deeply rooted
neighborhoods that will ensure a stronger, safer, and
brighter quality of life for future generations.”

E. Relationship to Regional Plans
City and regional planning documents, both pre- and post-Superstorm
Sandy, were reviewed to avoid duplicating ongoing planning efforts and to
identify how the NYRCR plan could best fill existing gaps.
These plans include resiliency and Superstorm Sandy recovery plans, along
with hazard mitigation, waterfront, and sustainability plans. The analysis and
recommendations included in these plans contributed valuable information
and ideas to the NYRCR planning process.
Existing plans with direct or indirect connections to the Community were
reviewed to identify Community goals and ongoing or proposed projects.
Some of the plans were at least 4 years old and did not address the lingering
financial effects of the recession that began in 2008, or the effects of
Hurricane Irene in 2011 or Superstorm Sandy in 2012. Significant work
related to planning has been completed since Superstorm Sandy, and the
City of New York has developed several documents related to the storm and
post-storm recovery.
The most relevant existing plans, studies, and projects are summarized
below, including key analysis and lessons learned. The section details how
the NYRCR Plan relates to or builds on these plans, and how the Committee
incorporated the information into this planning effort.

Regional Plans
NYRCR Jamaica Bay Regional Working Group

The Bay, known as a unique ecosystem in an urban landscape, is famous for
its salt marsh islands, intertidal flats, horseshoe crabs, and migratory birds
that use the area as a critical refuge during their seasonal travels. Beyond
the water, Jamaica Bay is surrounded by woodland and forests that host a
wide array of wildlife. This dynamic system has attracted people for
generations, and many of its surrounding communities are partially defined
by their close proximity to Jamaica Bay’s waters. However, this proximity
also served as a hazard during Superstorm Sandy. At the height of the
storm, the Bay swelled and water surged up through a network of creeks
and streams, infiltrating neighborhoods and inundating homes, businesses
and roadways.
As described in the Description of Storm Damages section of this Plan,
Superstorm Sandy had a devastating impact on communities, and individual
NYRCR Committees have developed strategies to rebuild and become
resilient to future storm risks. At the same time, communities in and around
Jamaica Bay realize the need for collaboration. Understanding that projects
and other actions in one area can have profound impacts across the estuary,
these communities have sought to create a unified, collective voice in
support of resiliency efforts throughout the Bay. Mindful of the communities’
call for cooperation, the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery created the
Jamaica Bay Regional Working Group (JBRWG), a collection of
representatives from the NYRCR communities closest to Jamaica Bay, shown
in Figure I-6. The JBRWG views this final plan as the vehicle for its collective
voice in support of ongoing and emerging resiliency efforts by stakeholders
in Jamaica Bay.
The JBRWG believes that collaboration with agencies active in Jamaica Bay,
namely the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and the National Park
Service (NPS) is paramount. Through various habitat restoration projects, in
addition to coastal protective measures along the Rockaway Peninsula,
USACE has long been a committed partner in the sustainability of Jamaica
Bay. Moreover, because of its management of the Gateway National
Recreation Area, NPS has an ongoing interest as a responsible steward of its
federally protected lands.

From Sea Gate on the western edge of the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula, to
South Valley Stream at its headwaters in Nassau County, communities in and
around Jamaica Bay suffered enormous damage from Superstorm Sandy.

Section I: Community Overview

Page 19

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
as the property lines along the cooperative, including Breezy Point
Tip.


Breezy Point Comprehensive Flood Protection System – This

proposed dune system would provide sustainable, natural flood and
erosion protection utilizing the area’s existing natural features. The
plan is comprised of an ocean side double dune system and
complementary set of bayside flood and erosion protections that are
designed to safeguard the community from future storm events. An
application for this project was formally submitted by the State to
FEMA on March 20, 2014.


Broad Channel Shoreline Protection – A potential project from



Edge Protection for Upper Jamaica Bay – The JBRWG supports



Howard Beach Shoreline Protection – The New York State

Figure I-6: Jamaica Bay Regional Working Group
The JBRWG is comprised of members from the following NYRCR Committees: Breezy
Point/Roxbury, Rockaway West, Rockaway East, Broad Channel, New, Old Howard Beach
and Hamilton Beach, Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay, the Southern Brooklyn Peninsula
(which includes Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, and Sea Gate), and in
Nassau County, the Five Towns (which includes Village of Cedarhurst, Hewlett, Village of
Lawrence, Woodmere, Village of Hewlett Neck, Village of Hewlett Harbor, Meadowmere and
Inwood), and South Valley Stream.

Breezy Point/Roxbury Long-Term Comprehensive Edge
Protection – This project envisions a system of dunes, berms,

marsh restoration, raised roads, floodwalls and baywalls, partially on
NPS land, for comprehensive protection of the Breezy Point and
Roxbury communities. This would include work at the Cove, as well

Section I: Community Overview

the inclusion of protective measures for communities located in
upper Jamaica Bay, including Gerritsen Beach, Sheepshead Bay, and
Manhattan Beach, in the USACE East Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway
Inlet Reformulation Study. This would include protections for Plumb
Beach and the water body of Sheepshead Bay, which were points of
entry for storm surge during Superstorm Sandy.
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC) is currently
working toward designing and implementing protective strategies on
NPS property in lower Spring Creek. The Howard Beach NYRCR
committee has also proposed work on NPS property at Upper Spring
Creek, Charles Memorial Park, and Shellbank and Hawtree Basins.

The JBRWG supports the following USACE and NPS projects, which would
further protect communities in and around Jamaica Bay from future storm
hazards:


the Broad Channel NYRCR committee is a “Resiliency Campus,” a
rebuilding program to enhance the resiliency of several important
community centers damaged during Sandy. The NPS property line
hugs the campus site, the northwest quadrant of the neighborhood,
and interventions here would further protect these community
assets.



Rockaway East and West Bay and Coastal Protection – A

system of bay walls, groins, and dunes are being implemented to
protect Rockaway West. The JBRWG also supports additional bayside
protections including bulkheads and natural solutions at vulnerable
locations in Rockaway East, along the western, northern, and

Page 20

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
eastern shoreline of Arverne, in Sommerville, and in Bayswater.
Additionally, Jacob Riis Park, the westernmost boundary of the
Rockaway West Planning Area geographic scope, remains NPS
property. The JBRWG supports work at this location, through either
dunes along the beachfront or berms within the property, and
believes the project would ensure protection of the entire
community.


Surge Barrier at Rockaway Inlet – The JBRWG supports New

York City Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency’s (SIRR) call
for the USACE to initiate an expedited study to examine the
feasibility of developing a surge barrier and alternative measures at
Rockaway Inlet as part of the previously mentioned Rockaway
reformulation study.
Lastly, the JBRWG supports the Science and Resiliency Institute at Jamaica
Bay, a partnership among academic institutions, government agencies,
nongovernmental organizations and community groups dedicated to the
promotion and understanding of resilience in Jamaica Bay and its
surrounding communities. Institutions taking part include: Columbia
University, Rutgers University, SUNY Stonybrook, Stevens Institute of
Technology, Cornell University, CUNY, NASA Goddard Institute for Space
Studies, the Wildlife Conservation Society, and New York Sea Grant. The
Science and Resiliency Institute at Jamaica Bay was created in response to a
RFEI (Request for Expression of Interest) put out by the NPS, City of New
York, and Trust for Public Land, with grant funding from the Rockefeller
Institute.
A Stronger, More Resilient New York (2013)
The City of New York issued this document on June 11, 2013. Then Mayor
Michael Bloomberg created the Special Initiative for Rebuilding and
Resiliency (SIRR) to identify means to create a more resilient City of New
York in the wake of Superstorm Sandy, with a long-term focus on preparing
for and protecting against the impacts of climate change. On June 11, 2013,
the City released A Stronger, More Resilient New York10 (SIRR Report), which
provides the most detailed analysis of all the documents completed to date.
It generally describes damage to the Brooklyn area, risks, initiatives, and
priorities.

Section I: Community Overview

Priorities discussed in the SIRR Report that are relevant for the Gerritsen
Beach and Sheepshead Bay Planning Area include:


Addressing coastal vulnerabilities for residential, commercial, and
public properties and civic facilities;



Providing additional coastal/shoreline protection from wave action,
beach erosion, and oceanfront vulnerabilities;



Adding protection from inundation from backflow that can lead to
flooding of inland areas;



Focusing on infrastructure inadequacy, particularly stormwater
drainage, power, and transportation;



Improving communications
situations; and



Addressing the lagging recovery of housing, social services, and
11
businesses along key commercial corridors.

during

and

following

emergency

The plan includes citywide initiatives and discussions, including the following
sections: Superstorm Sandy Impact, Climate Analysis, Citywide Infrastructure
and the Built Environment including Coastal Protection and Buildings,
Economic Recovery (Insurance, Utilities, Liquid Fuels, and Healthcare),
Community Preparedness and Response (including Telecommunications,
Transportation, and Parks), Environmental Protection and Remediation
(including Water and Wastewater, other critical networks), Specific
Rebuilding and Resiliency Plans (for Brooklyn and Queens waterfront, east
and south shores of Staten Island, South Queens, Southern Brooklyn, and
Southern Manhattan), Funding, and Implementation. These initiatives are
reflected in the reconstruction strategies and projects for Gerritsen Beach
and Sheepshead Bay.
Specific project recommendations within the NYRCR Community include a
Neighborhood Retail Recovery Program on key commercial corridors such as
Emmons Avenue, Nostrand Avenue, and Gerritsen Avenue; hardening or
otherwise modifying shoreline parks to protect adjacent communities, and a
recommendation to work with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) to
study mitigating flood inundation risks through the Rockaway Inlet.

Page 21

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
New York City Regional Economic Development Council 2011 and
2012 Plans and 2013 Project Report
The New York City Regional Economic Development Council (REDC) has a
five-borough strategy that encourages partnerships between government,
business, labor, academia, and civic organizations as well as inter-regional
cooperation aimed at maximizing benefits of economic growth and job
creation for the entire State. This report 12 acknowledges the serious blow
dealt by Superstorm Sandy to the New York metropolitan area. The NYRCR
effort follows a similar process as the REDC in terms of project identification
and public engagement.
The REDC priorities for bolstering the local economy, which are germane to
Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay, include:


The revitalization of the Coney Island waterfront to include 5,000
new housing units, 25 acres of entertainment attractions, more than
25,000 construction jobs, and 6,000 permanent jobs;



The opening of Steeplechase Plaza, a 2.2-acre public open space
that is the western entryway to the revitalized amusement district;



The new state-of-the-art 44,000-square-foot YMCA; and



The City’s HireNYC Program listed 500 open positions and filled 400
new hires for the summer of 2013 from the surrounding
neighborhood.

Sustainable Communities: Climate Resilience Studies – Urban
Waterfront Adaptive Strategies (2011)

The Urban Waterfront Adaptive Strategies13 (UWAS) report, prepared by the

New York City Department of City Planning, provides a systematic
assessment of the coastal flood hazards from climate change and sea-level
rise that face the City of New York. The UWAS lays out a risk-based, flexible
process for identifying, evaluating and implementing potential coastal
protection strategies. It recognizes that waterfronts vary, and may require a
range of strategies at different scales. The report also identifies a range of
potential adaptive strategies, and analyzes each for their ability to protect
waterfront communities.

Section I: Community Overview

The report identifies a range of potential adaptive strategies that are
applicable for the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay Planning Area such
as:


Interventions inland, at the shoreline, and in the water. Each was
analyzed for its ability to protect waterfront communities by reducing
flooding from storm surge and high tides or absorbing destructive
wave forces.

The Committee considered this information for the development of natural
resource projects for flood reduction.
Sustainable Communities: Climate Resilience Studies – Designing
for Flood Risk (2013)

Designing for Flood Risk14 identifies key principles to guide the design of new

buildings in flood zones so that construction will be more resilient to the
effects of climate change and coastal flood events. Recognizing the distinct
character and needs of higher-density urban environments, the report
provides recommendations for how regulations and individual project design
can incorporate these principles. The study informed the Department of City
Planning’s Flood Resilience Zoning text amendment adopted by City Council
in 2013.
This report identifies key design principles to guide flood-resistant
construction in urban areas, which are applicable to the Gerritsen Beach and
Sheepshead Bay Planning Area, such as:


An overview of NFIP regulatory requirements for construction in
flood zones;



The effects of flood-resistant construction standards;



The creation of a vibrant streetscape and public realm; and



Recommendations for how zoning can incorporate these principles to
enable more versatile and desirable design solutions for floodresistant construction.

The Committee considered this information for the development of housing
and infrastructure projects.

Page 22

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
New York City Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan (2009)
15

The Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP) provides hazard risk-reduction strategies
and projects that are based on risk analyses, and developed through a
community-wide planning process. The HMP includes the following elements
that were considered during the development of the Gerritsen Beach and
Sheepshead Bay NYRCR Plan:


Natural hazards risk assessment;



Mitigation strategy;



Hazard mitigation projects; and



Potential funding sources for projects.

The Committee reviewed the City Mitigation Plan, specifically the Section IV
Mitigation Strategy that includes programs, plans, projects, and policies to
decrease or eliminate potential losses from hazards identified in the Risk
Assessment section. Overarching mitigation strategies pertain to the Planning
Area, but no specific projects were listed for Gerritsen Beach or Sheepshead
Bay.
The goals in the HMP coincide with the Community Vision developed for this
NYRCR Plan and mention the economy, public safety, and property
protection, as well as the need to be prepared and resilient. Many of the
objectives in the HMP coincide with strategies and projects in this document.

framework for the City’s waterfront, short- and long-term strategies, and is
used to guide land and water use decisions. Priorities in the plan focus on
expanding public access, supporting the working waterfront, improving water
quality, restoring the ecology of the waterfront, enhancing the Blue Network
(the waterways between the five boroughs), and increasing the resiliency of
the City in respect to climate change and sea-level rise.
Plan recommendations relevant to the NYRCR Community are in the sections
describing Brooklyn Reach 15, 3.b for Calvert Vaux Park, and Reach 16 for
Coney Island to Sheepshead Bay. Reaches refer to specific segments along
the shoreline and are described on page 150.
Recommended actions for Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay include:
Sheepshead Bay:


Evaluate for possible dredging in consultation with State and Federal
partners; and



Brigham Street Park: explore opportunities for enhanced public
access by integrating into adjacent Plumb Beach.

Gerritsen Beach:


Explore opportunities for enhancing visual access to waterfront at
street ends with provision of public access where feasible.

PlaNYC 2030 (2007) and PlaNYC Full Report (2011)
PlanNYC16 serves as the mandated blueprint for how future development will
occur in the City. The 2007 local comprehensive plan includes initiatives that
are relevant for Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay to support community
resiliency through improvements to a range of community resources,
including housing, parks and open space, climate change, green buildings,
waterfront revitalization, and opportunities for economic development.
The updated 2011 plan includes initiatives and milestones for December
2013.
Vision 2020: New York Comprehensive Waterfront Plan (2011)
The Comprehensive Waterfront Plan17 (CWP) is an analysis and overall vision
for the City of New York’s 520 miles of shoreline. It includes a strategic

Section I: Community Overview

Page 23

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Plumb Beach:


Support the National Park Service General Management Plan process
for Gateway National Recreation Area;



In coordination with partners, explore options to mitigate against
continuing erosion to promote recreational uses and enhance natural
habitat; and



Rebuild bike paths.

New York City Waterfront Revitalization Program (WRP)
The Waterfront Revitalization Program18 is the City's principal coastal
management tool, and implements the CWP. It establishes the City's policies
for development and use of the waterfront, and provides the framework for
evaluating the consistency of all discretionary actions in the coastal area.
When a Proposed Project is located in the City’s designated waterfront area,
and it requires a local, state, or federal discretionary action, a determination
of the project's consistency with the policies and intent of the WRP must be
made before the project can move forward.

Section I: Community Overview

Page 24

Section II:
Assessment of Risk
and Needs

Section II:
Assessment of Risk and Needs
This section identifies community assets in Sheepshead Bay and Gerritsen
Beach, and describes the risk assessment process for those assets.
Conducting an assessment of risk and needs is an objective means to
support decision-making for asset reconstruction and new construction that
is more resilient to future storms.

and mapped their locations, utilizing input from the Committee. The
remaining Recovery Support Function, Community Planning and Capacity
Building, focuses on local institutional arrangements and community
organizations, and thus does not address fixed assets. The Recovery Support
Functions are defined below:

The impact of hazards on assets was assessed by performing a risk analysis
using current conditions and future goals and strategies. This process helped
the Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay Planning Committee identify and
evaluate methods to mitigate future risks.

Community planning and capacity building: Relates to how the
community will restore or enhance its ability to organize, plan, manage, and
implement its recovery. This involves community engagement of a wide
range of public, private, and non-governmental organization stakeholders.

A. Description of Community Assets
The Community Asset Inventory highlights the community assets (including
critical facilities) that, if impaired as a result of hazard events, would
compromise the essential social, economic, and/or environmental functions
of the community. These impairments can adversely affect short- and longterm recovery efforts. This risk assessment depicts these two communities’
assets, including those damaged by Superstorm Sandy, and their
vulnerability to future flood and storm surge hazard events.
Critical facilities are defined as those that are crucial to the health and
welfare of the entire population in the Planning Area, and to emergency
response and recovery functions following hazard events. Critical facilities
include health care facilities, police and fire stations, emergency operations
centers, public works facilities, evacuation shelters, schools, daycare centers,
and facilities that serve and house special needs populations.

Economic development: Addresses how the community will restore
economic and business activities and develop new economic opportunities,
provide goods and services, resume commerce and employment, and
generate revenue.
Health and social services: Describes how the community will restore and
improve essential health and social services, including those that serve
vulnerable populations.
Housing: Relates to meeting the demand for affordable housing (and
promotion of affordable housing), addressing post-disaster housing needs,
and encouraging disaster-resistant housing for all income groups.
Infrastructure: Details how the community will restore, repair, and
manage essential infrastructure services.
Natural and cultural resources: Relates to natural and cultural resource
management from a risk reduction and economic development context.

The asset inventory also includes vital infrastructure systems, such as water,
wastewater, stormwater systems, electrical systems, and transportation
networks.

The resulting asset inventory and associated maps were further modified
based on public input captured at the first series of public engagement
meetings, which were held on October 7 and October 8, 2013.

The NYRCR Planning Committee identified a list of community assets in five
of the six Recovery Support Functions (Economic Development, Health and
Social Services, Housing, Infrastructure, and Natural and Cultural Resources)

Asset Inventory Maps are shown for Gerritsen Beach (Figure II-1) and
Sheepshead Bay (Figure II-2). These maps show a list of community assets
and their corresponding locations.

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 26

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-1: Gerritsen Beach Asset Inventory

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 27

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-2: Sheepshead Bay Asset Inventory

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 28

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The following discussion of community assets is organized by five of the six
Recovery Support Functions. The associated asset descriptions include facts
about the critical assets as a way to understand their significance in terms of
emergency response and community sustainability. Many of the assets listed
were either directly impacted by Superstorm Sandy or are susceptible to
coastal hazards.

Economic Development
The NYRCR Community’s principal commercial corridors include Kings
Highway, Emmons Avenue, Nostrand Avenue, Avenue U, Ocean Avenue, and
Sheepshead Bay Road in Sheepshead Bay, and Gerritsen Avenue in Gerritsen
Beach. Emmons Avenue houses a variety of water-dependent and waterenhanced uses, including boat docking and storage, fishing charter
businesses, restaurants, local and chain retail outlets, and three hotels.
These uses are supported by the Emmons Avenue esplanade and
Sheepshead Bay Footbridge, which attract high volumes of pedestrian
activity in warm-weather months. Similar boating and marine uses are also
found in Plumb Beach Channel in Gerritsen Beach.
Commercial uses on the other corridors in Sheepshead Bay, and on Gerritsen
Avenue in Gerritsen Beach, are non-water dependent, and provide an array
of neighborhood retail and service needs, such as groceries, doctor’s offices,
restaurants, and assorted shops.
While Sheepshead Bay attracts high numbers of visitors from Brooklyn and
other parts of the City of New York during summer months, businesses in
Gerritsen Beach cater almost exclusively to local residents. The Gerritsen
Avenue corridor serves a vital function to neighborhood residents as the only
local source of goods and services, including groceries, pharmaceuticals, and
restaurants.

Health and Social Services
Within Sheepshead Bay are six senior centers, five residential health care
facilities, five residential adult care facilities, and three community residences
for people with developmental disabilities. There are no similar facilities
within Gerritsen Beach.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

The five public elementary schools in the Planning Area include one in
Gerritsen Beach, which serves 459 pupils, and four in Sheepshead Bay,
which serve a total of 2,676 students. One intermediate school in
Sheepshead Bay has 1,365 students, and a junior high school in that
community has 560 students. Sheepshead Bay High School (SBHS), the large
public high school in the Planning Area, serves 1,168 students. Four other
specialized high schools are co-located on the SBHS campus, including two
charter schools, which serve much smaller populations.19
The Planning Area is also home to the 61st Police Precinct, headquartered in
Sheepshead Bay, and five fire stations, including the Gerrittsen Beach Fire
Department (spelled with two “t”s in reference to the neighborhood’s
historical spelling), the last remaining volunteer fire company in Brooklyn.

Housing
The occupied housing units in the Planning Area include a variety of building
types, ranging from high-rise apartment towers to detached, one- to threefamily structures. As described above, over 90% of the housing stock in the
Community was built before 1960. The City of New York implemented a
modern building code in 1968 and made additional enhancements to these
regulations to improve flood resiliency in 1983. Therefore, most housing
units in the Community predate modern building codes. In Gerritsen Beach,
detached single-family structures on relatively small, narrow lots
predominate. In 2012, there were a total of 54,009 housing units in the
Community, with 92% occupied and 8% vacant. 20 This vacancy rate is
21
comparable to the overall City of New York vacancy rate of 7.8%. Of the
total housing units, 46% were owner-occupied and 54% were rental units.
Housing units were primarily in multiple dwellings with 20 or more units
(42%), one-family attached or detached homes (26%) and two-family
homes (20%). Sheepshead Bay’s two public housing developments
22
encompass 34 medium-rise buildings and 2,199 apartments.

Infrastructure
The Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay Planning Area is served by
numerous local bus lines, including two that access Manhattan directly via
the Hugh L. Carey Tunnel (formally Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel). Two subway
lines, including the B, which runs express to Manhattan during the week,

Page 29

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
serve four elevated subway stations, all of which are located in Sheepshead
23
Bay. The busiest subway station in the Planning Area, Kings Highway,
served nearly 5.5 million riders in 2012. The limited access highway at the
northern end of the Planning Area, the Belt Parkway, carries approximately
24
140,000 private vehicles per day.

Natural and Cultural Resources
The Planning Area was historically characterized by marshlands and
wetlands. Intensive, urban-scale development has replaced or significantly
degraded many of these assets. Natural and cultural features such as Plumb
Beach, in Sheepshead Bay, which is part of the Jamaica Bay National Wildlife
Refuge, and Marine Park adjacent to Gerritsen Beach, serve important
mitigation and water attenuation functions. These features are supplemented
by a variety of structural features within the Planning Area, including jetties,
sea walls, and bulkheads. The quality and condition of these features is
highly variable. The City is working to make improvements to the area’s
parklands and to increase access for public recreation. In addition, the City is
working cooperatively with various federal entities to effect improvements to
Jamaica Bay that would increase the area’s resiliency to flooding, storm
surge, and erosion.
The Planning Area has four branch libraries, with three located in
Sheepshead Bay. The Gerritsen Beach Library was closed for several months
due to damage caused by Superstorm Sandy, and has since been completely
repaired.

B. Assessment of Risk to Assets
The New York State Department of State (NYS DOS) risk areas defined in
Table II-1 were used to identify the location of community assets in flood
and storm surge inundation areas. The Risk Assessment Map (Figure II-3)
shows that most of Gerritsen Beach and the southern (coastal) part of
Sheepshead Bay are located in a high-risk flooding area. Portions of the
coastline of both neighborhoods are located in the extreme-risk flooding
area. Most of the high and extreme risk areas are vulnerable to storm surge
and backwater inundation.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

A risk assessment was conducted to determine the potential impact of
hazards on community assets. This assessment helped the community
choose mitigation options to reduce future risk. The NYRCR Planning
Committee selected proposed strategies, such as infrastructure
improvements and changes in the building environment. Many of these
general strategies were refined into project ideas, which were then subjected
to a cost-benefit analysis.
Throughout the planning process, input from the NYRCR Planning Committee
and the general public on areas with the highest risk of flooding was used to
clarify and add information regarding at-risk areas along with the NYS DOS
Risk Assessment Map.
Risk assessment methods
The Risk Assessment Tool developed by NYS DOS was used to quantify and
evaluate risk to vulnerable assets within Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead
Bay. A detailed description of the methods used within the tool is provided in
the NYS DOS report, Guidance for Community Reconstruction Zone Plans.
The Risk Assessment Tool is available at:
http://nysandyhelp.ny.gov/community-reconstruction-zones.
The three factors used to assess risk were hazards, exposure, and
vulnerability.

Hazards included flood and storm surge. Hazard scores were calculated by

evaluating risk from a range of storm events, from frequent, low-intensity
events to infrequent, high-intensity events. Assets located within an
extreme-risk area experience hazards more frequently and with greater
impact than those located in a high- or moderate-risk area.

Exposure refers to the location of the asset. Exposure scores were calculated

as an expression of local topography (land elevation) and proximity to a
flood source (near the shoreline or in a floodplain) that tend to increase or
decrease the effect of coastal hazards on assets. Exposed assets at lower
elevations suffer storm effects to a greater degree than less-exposed assets
located at higher elevations.
Additionally, a series of landscape attributes was used to calculate a total
landscape attribute score, which includes the following characteristics of the
landscape for each asset:

Page 30

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan


Erosion rate ≥1 foot per year or unknown;

The Risk Assessment Tool calculates a Risk Score using the formula:



Waterline frequently at shore defense or upland vegetation;

Hazard x Exposure x Vulnerability = Risk



Shore defenses absent, not constructed to anticipated conditions, or
deteriorating;



Protective vegetation between asset and flood source absent;

The tool generated a Risk Score that represents the relative risk of
community assets to one another. The possible scores range from 1.5
(negligible) to 75 (severe).



Dunes absent, below base flood elevation (BFE), eroding, little
vegetation; bluff slope unstable, little vegetation; and



Asset on coastal barrier island or filled wetland.

Vulnerability pertains to the capacity of an asset to be operational after a

The community contains a large number of assets, many of which share
functional commonalities that put them into the same risk categories.
Housing and systems assets such as stormwater and electrical were grouped
together to simplify the assessment process. Risk scores for individual assets
are presented in Section V.D.

storm. Vulnerability scores are based on the durability of the structure as
well as the ability to provide service (as a condition of having electric, water,
and communications capabilities) from that structure. Assets that can quickly
recover have a low vulnerability score.
Table II-1: New York State Department of State Risk Areas
Extreme Risk Area

High Risk Area

Moderate Risk Area

Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) Coastal V Zones

FEMA 1% (100-year) annual flood risk
(FEMA Zone V and Zone A)

FEMA 0.2% (500-year) annual flood risk

National Weather Service (NWS)
advisory thresholds for shallow coastal
flooding

Areas within 3 feet of elevation of NWS
advisory thresholds for shallow coastal
flooding

Areas within 3 feet of elevation of FEMA 1%
annual flood risk (base flood elevations)

Areas within 3 feet of elevation of mean
higher high-water shoreline as defined
by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)

Area bounded by National Hurricane Center’s
Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from
Hurricanes (SLOSH) Category 3 hurricane
storm surge inundation zone

Areas prone to erosion
Source: New York State Department of State

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 31

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-3: Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay Flood Risk Assessment Areas

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 32

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk Assessment Results
An initial risk assessment was completed for the at-risk assets identified
during the asset inventory (Figures II-1 and II-2) for Economic Development,
Health and Social Services, Housing, Infrastructure, and Natural and Cultural
Resources Assets. Using the Risk Assessment Tool, risk scores were
calculated for each of the assets. The assessed risk for certain assets such as
the Sheepshead Nursing and Rehabilitation Center, the 61st Police Precinct
building, and Homecrest Library is moderate, while that of others such as the
Brooklyn Yacht Club, the Tamaqua Bar and Marina, and the Fishing Charters
is very high. The disparity between these levels of risk is largely the result of
the facilities’ different outage times and their physical locations. Assets with
lower risk scores are located outside the Superstorm Sandy surge inundation
areas. Assets with higher risk scores tend to be facilities located along the
coastline, and water-dependent uses (such as the marinas) have some of the
highest risk levels. The details of the risk assessments and resulting overall
risk scores are presented in Section V.D.
Figure II-4 maps the locations of the Economic Development assets in both
Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay, with the underlying mapping of the
risk areas (moderate, high, and extreme). This figure shows the locations of
the major commercial corridors in both communities. The numbers of the
locations on the map correspond with the numbers in Section V.
Figure II-5 maps the locations of the Economic Development, Health and
Social Services, Housing, and Natural and Cultural Resources Assets in
Gerritsen Beach, with symbols to identify the assets with the highest risk
scores.

Building foundation undermined by flooding during Superstorm Sandy,
Gerritsen Beach
Source: URS

Figure II-6 maps the locations of the Economic Development, Health and
Social Services, Housing, Natural and Cultural Resources Assets in
Sheepshead Bay, with symbols to identify the assets with the highest risk
scores.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 33

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-4: Risk Assessment Map of Economic Development Assets in Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 34

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-5: Risk Assessment Map of Gerritsen Beach Assets

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 35

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-6: Risk Assessment Map of Sheepshead Bay Assets

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 36

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Assessment of Risk to Systems
This assessment of risk to systems highlights the initial risk assessment
results for system asset groups (infrastructure, public services, etc.) that do
not lend themselves to assessment as individual point assets. The risk
assessment methods and risk assessment results described in the previous
subsection were utilized to determine the risk score of systems. The systems
analyzed included stormwater management, power, and communications.
These fell into moderate-risk (stormwater management) and high-risk
categories (power and communications).
The higher risk scores associated with power and communication systems
assets are generally reflective of longer outage duration and greater service
interruption for that system. Generally, though, because infrastructure
systems are administered at a citywide or regional level, performance tends
to be similar among adjacent neighborhoods. In general, the scores reflect
that power, stormwater, and communications systems had considerable
interruptions because of Superstorm Sandy.

C. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
The Planning Committee and the public identified the reconstruction and
capacity-building needs and opportunities to address resilience and
mitigation issues through various Planning Committee Meetings and Public
Engagement Events, using a consensus-driven approach.
The following needs and opportunities, organized by the six Recovery
Support Functions, will be implemented using the strategies, projects,
programs, and actions described in Section III.

Community Planning and Capacity Building
Needs
As noted previously, the NYRCR Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay Planning
Area contains high concentrations of socially vulnerable populations who may
not able to access and use traditional resources offered in emergency
planning, response, and recovery. Special consideration is necessary to
ensure needs of vulnearable populations are adequately met during and after
emergencies.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

In the case of individuals with limited English proficiency, many reported not
receiving or understanding evacuation instructions, and thus interpreters
may be needed. Similarly, the challenges faced in the evacuation of nursing,
elder-care, and assisted-living facilities points to the need to ensure that
evacuation protocols and methods are tailored to accommodate individuals
with limited mobility, and for greater advanced planning at the neighborhood
level.
A variety of civic groups and other non-governmental organizations provide
vital services to many socially vulnerable individuals in the Community.
These organizations include assisted-living facilities, nursing and elder-care
facilities, religious institutions providing social services like hot meals, and
local chapters of national and international fraternal and social organizations.
Gerritsen Beach is also home to Brooklyn’s only remaining volunteer fire
department. The Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department’s emergency response
capabilities are a vital complement to the municipal emergency response
infrastructure.
Even modest power and other utility outage times at these facilities
compromised their ability to provide vital services and communicate
important information to residents and constituents in the weeks after the
storm. Moreover, many local service providers and non-profits are
neighborhood-focused organizations that lacked significant resources or
connections to a broader network of service providers. Although these
providers are an essential component of the everyday social fabric, most
local non-profits were stretched beyond capacity by the extraordinary events
of Superstorm Sandy. Because these organizations traditionally focused on
local constituencies, many had limited experience in collaborating across
neighborhood lines and other boundaries.
The Brooklyn Community District 15 Community Emergency Response Team
(CERT) is active, but its membership could be expanded. Under the guidance
of the New York City Office of Emergency Management (NYC OEM), the
District 15 team could undertake additional targeted outreach to grow the
ranks of the team to ensure that it reflects the diversity and character of
both communities. Committee members from both Sheepshead Bay and
Gerritsen Beach have consistently expressed interest in developing
neighborhood-level emergency response teams and capabilities to
supplement CERT and City-wide emergency response plans. The Committee
consistently identified storm surge and flooding mitigation as key priorities

Page 37

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
and primary concerns. Although many potential solutions to these problems
are infrastructural in nature, the Committee identified a need to increase
general preparedness by developing community-based emergency response
strategies.
NYC OEM has been conducting evacuation planning on a city-wide basis,
incorporating lessons learned from Superstorm Sandy. Additional evacuation
planning at a neighborhood level would augment these efforts, and is a
useful method to evaluate specific evacuation needs and challenges within
the NYRCR Community. Gerritsen Beach, which was not included in the City
of New York’s original evacuation order during Superstorm Sandy, is
connected to the rest of Brooklyn by one main road; when the storm surge
hit the neighborhood, residents were effectively trapped in place after
Gerritsen Avenue was overtopped by floodwaters. Compounding the need for
enhanced evacuation planning, many Community residents either do not
have access to cars or rely on public transportation as their primary means
of transportation.
Residents who sheltered in place or who returned to their home after the
storm often encountered sustained cell phone or Internet outages. The lack
of reliability of the local communications network was not only inconvenient,
but potentially dangerous in the days immediately after Superstorm Sandy.
As the City and other entities tried to communicate vital information to
Community residents, many individuals were unable to access these
communications. Because so many residents were unable to return to their
homes immediately after the storm, and because so many residents reported
difficulty accessing useful information about recovery activities for
Superstorm Sandy, the Committee identified a need for community relief and
gathering centers. The Committee identified this issue at its first meeting in
September 2013 and continued to explore ways to develop and refine
potential project ideas related to this need for the duration of the planning
process.
Opportunities
The following opportunities were identified for community planning and
capacity building:


The Committee identified sites in the Community that could
potentially serve as community relief and gathering centers. Many of
these sites have the advantage of being located outside the

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

floodplain or being affiliated with an existing community service
provider.


Many local community facilities and key assets appear to have the
building space and other necessary resources to permit the
installation of building-scale backup generators in case of sustained
power outages.



Sheepshead Bay has direct highway access, and both Gerritsen
Beach and Sheepshead Bay have primary thoroughfares that are
major borough surface roads. These factors should facilitate
evacuation planning.



Barring extraordinary unforeseen circumstances, both Vollies
Memorial Hall and the Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department should be
able to accommodate structural upgrades that would improve the
resiliency of those buildings.



Community interest in participating in localized emergency
preparedness and response planning is high. Many Community
members have specific local knowledge that could be incorporated
into municipal and non-profit planning for the needs of socially
vulnerable populations.

Economic Development
Needs
Community Risk Assessment Maps show that nearly all of Gerritsen Beach
and approximately one-third of Sheepshead Bay are at extreme or high risk
for flooding (see Figure II-4, Risk Assessment Map of Economic Development
Assets in Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay).
Not surprisingly, local businesses suffered severe impacts in connection with
Superstorm Sandy. Businesses that were not directly affected by the storm
surge or backwater flooding still had to contend with power outages,
intermittent heat and hot water service, and limited access to retail delivery.
Six months after the storm, the Brooklyn Eagle reported that 85% of
businesses on Emmons Avenue had sustained some level of damage and
that at least 40% of the businesses in the broader neighborhood had yet to

Page 38

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
reopen. Similar damages were observed along Gerritsen Avenue, Gerritsen
Beach’s commercial thoroughfare.
Analyses by the City, FEMA, and the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce
suggest that the goal of business resilience is undercut by a lack of
coordination among area merchants on key commercial corridors. Prospects
for merchant organization are complicated by the diverse language
backgrounds and English-proficiency levels of many area property owners
and merchants. In this context, it is understandable that many business
owners reported relatively limited understanding of disaster-funding sources
or business resiliency strategies, even several months after Superstorm
Sandy.
However, even with improved business continuity planning, local enterprises
will remain vulnerable to physical risk. With so much of the Community
susceptible to storm surge, backwater inundation, or both, improved building
practices and technologies are needed to limit the damages associated with
flooding.
Retail activity often benefits from an attractive physical environment.
Although recent years have seen increased municipal focus on street tree
planting and streetscape design in Southern Brooklyn, Superstorm Sandy
reversed some of this progress by killing or damaging trees and plantings on
many streets, including along major commercial corridors.
Opportunities
The following opportunities were identified for economic development:


Sheepshead Bay offers an attractive mix of commercial and
recreational activities that are accessible to major public
transportation lines and the local highway network.



Both the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay neighborhoods have
extensive waterfront access that has allowed for the development of
water-related uses, including recreational use and access
opportunities.



The City of New York, the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce, and nonprofit groups like Empower Sheepshead are already exploring means
of promoting merchant organization and coordination on Emmons
Avenue and Sheepshead Bay Road.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs



Key businesses such as pharmacy service, retail food providers, and
office uses on Gerritsen Avenue likely have the physical-plant
capacity required to elevate mechanicals and implement
floodproofing measures.

Housing
Needs
As noted previously, over 90% of the housing stock in the Community was
built before 1960 and thus predates the City of New York’s modern building
code, implemented in 1968. Unsurprisingly, an analysis by the Furman
Center found that housing damages from Superstorm Sandy were more
severe for buildings constructed before the introduction of modern building
codes. The SIRR Report indicated that although buildings constructed after
1961 constituted 28% of the building stock in the Superstorm Sandy
inundation area, these newer buildings represented only 5% of the total
number of buildings assigned red tags by the City.
In addition to building age, the housing stock in both neighborhoods in the
Community faces considerable exposure to flood risk due to its proximity to
the waterfront and low ground elevation. Large sections of Sheepshead Bay,
and almost the entirety of Gerritsen Beach, are located within FEMA’s A (1%
annual chance flood flood zone) or VE-zone (1% annual chance flood zone,
with potential for wave damage). Over 43% of Sheepshead Bay’s housing
units are in areas impacted by storm surge during Superstorm Sandy, and
over 50% were impacted in Gerritsen Beach.
Housing affordability is another topic that was frequently mentioned during
the planning process. This concern is particularly acute in the context of
flood insurance rates. Despite the recently-enacted Homeowner Flood
Insurance Affordability Act of 2014, which will provide relief to some
ratepayers facing steep premium increases, there is signifigant uncertainty
surrounding flood insurance rates, especially in the longer-term. Nearly 50%
of homeowners in the Community have mortgage costs that exceed the
accepted U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
definition of housing affordability. Owners who must dedicate large portions
of their incomes to basic housing costs tend not to have funds available for
repairs and upgrades that can improve the basic conditions and resiliency of
their homes. Dozens of attendees at meetings expressed particular concern

Page 39

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
that with flood insurance premiums set to rise in the future, the cost of basic
repairs or floodproofing would force them from their homes.
The damages that Superstorm Sandy created continue to impact residents,
homeowners, and renters, especially those in vulnerable populations,
including low- and moderate-income families, seniors, and the disabled.
Committee members and public meeting attendees stated that the slow pace
of housing recovery underlined the need for greater homeowner education
to increase resiliency after future storm events. Indeed, at the first and
second Public Engagement Events, both held over a year after the storm,
many attendees expressed a lack of awareness of funding and technical
assistance programs relevant to their needs. The Committee has identified
the need for a homeowner education campaign to better communicate
necessary information on rebuilding programs and assistance, regulations,
and methods. This campaign could complement existing efforts by the City of
New York, such as Build it Back, and the Resilient Neighborhoods Program
organized by the Department of City Planning.

Health and Social Services
Needs
Many of the nursing homes, assisted-living facilities, and elder-care facilities
in the Community still need to elevate their mechanical systems. The
Committee reported that Waterford by the Bay, which has elevated its
mechanicals, is a relative exception in this regard.
Opportunities
The following opportunities were identified for health and social services:


As discussed in the “Community Planning and Capacity Building”
section, the emergency response capacities of the Community’s
CERT could be expanded to assist in the evacuation of seniors and
people with mobility impairments.



The elevation of mechanicals at Waterford by the Bay provides a
useful case study for operators and owners of other similar facilities
in the Community.

Opportunities
The following opportunities were identified for housing:


The Committee stated unequivocally that the majority of local
residents intend to remain in the Community, particularly if they are
able to access necessary funding and technical assistance.



Homeowners appear to be receptive to building elevation or other
floodproofing techniques if they have the financial means to
implement them. Committee members reported that some residents
of Gerritsen Beach and the Sheepshead Bay bungalow courts have
already raised their homes above the base flood elevation.



The City and the State have introduced a variety of housing
assistance programs for which many Community residents are
eligible.



A large number of non-profit and social-service organizations have
developed educational and assistance programs to meet the needs
of homeowners, both locally, citywide, and regionally.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Infrastructure
Needs
Superstorm Sandy caused significant damage to many of the Community’s
infrastructure assets and systems. Given the intensity of the storm surge
associated with Superstorm Sandy, Committee members have consistently
expressed strong interest in pursuing solutions that would mitigate future
flood risk.
Moreover, the Community faces severe risk not just from direct storm surge
but from backflow inundation. During Superstorm Sandy, floodwaters
entered stormwater outfalls and flooded back through the stormwater
system. This led to flooding of interior areas of the Community before the
storm surge occurred. Where stormwater and sanitary sewer lines are
combined (known as combined sewer overflows, or CSO), floodwaters
caused sewage to back up into the system and overflow through connection
valves into homes, businesses, and community facilities. This led to high
levels of building damage and potential human exposure to toxic materials.
Both Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay remain highly vulnerable to this

Page 40

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
type of inundation in future storm events, including storms less severe than
Superstorm Sandy. Throughout the planning process, the Committee and
attendees at public meetings strongly expressed the need to upgrade
stormwater and wastewater conveyance systems to handle current flow
volumes.
Roadway improvements are needed in both Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead
Bay. The Belt Parkway, along the north shore of Jamaica Bay and east of
Knapp Street, has been threatened by erosion for decades. During
Superstorm Sandy, the storm surge flowed over Plumb Beach and increased
flooding in Gerritsen Beach.
Opportunities
The following opportunities were identified for infrastructure:




Relatively inexpensive, cost-effective methods of backflow
prevention exist, and have been employed successfully in the City of
New York.
USACE has completed construction of a project to protect Plumb
Beach along the Belt Parkway through the construction of stone
groins and a breakwater, and sand placement. These measures may
help mitigate flooding from storm surge and will reduce risk to the
roadway and buried utilities.



The NYC Department of City Planning has expressed interest in
identifying planning solutions for the Sheepshead Bay courts. At the
same time, the Pratt Center for Community Development is
collaborating with a private architecture studio to develop conceptual
plans to improve the resiliency of the courts.



The Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay Planning Committee and the
NYRCR Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, Sea Gate
Planning Committee have identified storm surge reduction as a top
priority. To ensure consistency of approach and to address the
problem on a regional level, the two NYRCR Committees have
included in their final list of Proposed Projects a reconnaissance
study to evaluate methods for flood risk reduction in Manhattan
Beach, Sheepshead Bay, and Gerritsen Beach. Both Committees
would share the cost of the study.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs



Although Sandy caused extensive damage to the local street network
in Gerritsen Beach, there are cost-effective means available to repair
the most affected street segments.

Natural and Cultural Resources
Needs
The Committee identified that Plumb Beach Park is an underutilized and
under-maintained natural and recreational asset. The Committee feels that
jurisdictional responsibilities related to Plumb Beach must be clarified, and
that current confusion is leading to unsafe conditions that limit public use of
the asset.
More generally, attendees at Public Engagement Events reported that some
areas of the Community were relatively underserved by formal open space
and parkland areas.
Opportunities
The following opportunities were identified for natural and cultural resources:


The City of New York has committed to work with State and Federal
partners to restore city beaches, including Plumb Beach. The SIRR
Report specifically identifies Plumb Beach as a location where the
city intends to improve and restore recreational infrastructure.



The City of New York has approved plans to construct a park at the
foot of Brigham Street in Sheepshead Bay, and funds have been
allocated for construction. The park will include a direct connection
to the greenway leading to Plumb Beach, and will encourage waterenhanced public recreational use and access opportunities.

Page 41

Section III:
Reconstruction and
Resiliency Strategies

Section III:
Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
The Committee developed reconstruction and resiliency strategies described
in this section by reflecting on the impact of Superstorm Sandy, their direct
experience as Community residents, insights gained through the visioning
process, and the needs and opportunities and the risk assessment processes.
These strategies were used as a framework for developing specific projects.
The strategies represent the Committee’s general recommendations for
achieving rebuilding, resilience, and economic growth.
Taking existing local, State, and regional plans into consideration, the
Committee discussed strategies in terms of the anticipated benefits to the
community, as well as their potential to develop into projects that meet the
critical community needs as a result of Superstorm Sandy. This section lists
all reconstruction and resiliency strategies and, where applicable, introduces
resulting Proposed and Featured Project concepts in general terms. The
following is a brief summary of the needs that inspired these strategies.
Given the magnitude of the storm surge and flooding associated with Sandy,
it was inevitable that coastal communities such as Gerritsen Beach and
Sheepshead Bay would experience a significant level of damage. The
Committee recognized that the failure or underperformance of key
infrastructure systems exacerbated damage. The impacts of direct storm
surge were made more severe, for instance, because water and wastewater
systems backed up and overflowed. Similarly, the effects of prolonged,
geographically extensive power outages were compounded by a lack of
redundancy and power generation capacity at the local and building-specific
levels. The Committee was particularly determined to generate strategies
that specifically addressed the needs of socially vulnerable populations.
A great deal of the housing within the Planning Area suffered tremendous
damage during Superstorm Sandy. A variety of residential building typologies
are located in high- and extreme-risk areas of Gerritsen Beach and
Sheepshead Bay, ranging from single-family homes to high-rise apartment
co-ops, supportive housing and assisted living facilities on or near the
waterfront. As the Committee devised strategies to mitigate housing damage

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

by improving infrastructure systems, it also developed strategies to protect
individual homes, homeowners and tenants.
The Committee also recognized that a disaster of Sandy’s scale pointed to a
need for improved community-based planning. While structural solutions are
required to safeguard the Community’s physical assets, community
organization and capacity-building strategies are needed to utilize these
assets and enable outside responders to provide assistance. While drawing
on the challenges experienced during and after Sandy, the Committee
worked collectively to generate a range of strategies to improve planning
and build the capacity of local organizations, including community groups,
nonprofits, and Community Emergency Response Teams (CERT). Many of
these planning strategies were designed in response to urgent health and
social service needs. For a variety of reasons, Gerritsen Beach and
Sheepshead Bay have different levels of local emergency response capability.
The Gerritsen Beach neighborhood is home to a well-trained and equipped
local volunteer fire department, the only remaining volunteer fire department
in Brooklyn, which was able to coordinate response activities after
Superstorm Sandy. With this model in mind, the desire to enhance response
capabilities in Sheepshead Bay was a constant theme throughout the
planning process, serving as the basis for several strategies and associated
projects.
The Committee also recognizes that the Community’s long-term sustainability
is predicated on economic well-being. Numerous Community residents rely
directly on local businesses and commercial corridors for employment.
Residents may rely on nearby businesses as a source of necessary household
goods. With this in mind, the Committee developed strategies to protect and
strengthen economic assets in Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay.

A. Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
Stemming from the aforementioned needs and opportunities, the following
section lists and describes the specific strategies designed to enhance the
Community’s ability to organize, plan, manage, and implement recovery

Page 43

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
measures. Highlighted below each strategy description are Proposed or
Featured Projects created to address each strategy developed by the
Committee.
The strategies provide a framework for the key Proposed Projects to be
funded under the NYRCR Plan, as well as the Featured Projects and
Additional Resiliency Recommendations for which the Plan advocates:


Proposed Projects are proposed for funding through a community’s
allocation of Community Development Block Grant – Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding.



Featured Projects are innovative projects for which an initial study or
discrete first phase of the project is proposed for CDBG-DR funding
or other identified funding, and regulatory reforms and other
programs that do not involve capital expenditures.



Additional Resiliency Recommendations are resiliency projects and
actions the Planning Committee would like to highlight that are not
categorized as Proposed or Featured Projects.

Metrics such as cost, time frame, and technical feasibility were considered
during the development of projects. The estimated costs in the following
tables are projections of projects’ capital costs and industry-accepted unit
costs using information currently available. Costs are likely to change during
the implementation phase as projects are further developed and additional
information gathered.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 44

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Identify methods to reduce future
flood risk and damage
The Committee agreed unanimously that identifying methods to reduce
future flooding was a critical need, and worked to develop a strategy that
would address the primary source of property damage to the community.
The resulting strategy statement is sufficiently broad to encompass a variety
of potential project types that could include building and refurbishing dunes,
creating or enhancing wetlands, strengthening or constructing bulkheads,
constructing flood walls and levees, installing breakwaters or jetties, or
constructing flood gates. Prior to the first Committee meeting in September
2013, Committee members conducted a walking tour of both neighborhoods.
The tour of Sheepshead Bay included stops at several of the bungalow
courts located below street-grade on either side of Emmons Avenue. There
are over 200 homes in the courts, and all suffered extensive damage due to
flooding. South of the Belt Parkway, over 900 additional housing units in
Sheepshead Bay sustained damage, recorded as far north as Avenue V in the
neighborhood. The Committee then visited Gerritsen Beach and saw the
widespread effects of flooding during Superstorm Sandy, with as many as
30% of homes still unrepaired and unoccupied almost a year after the storm.
Floodwaters entered the neighborhoods through Gerritsen Inlet into Plumb
Beach Channel and Shell Bank Creek, over low-lying sections of Plumb Beach
and the Belt Parkway, and through backflow flooding of stormwater and
sewer outfalls. South of Channel Avenue, over 86% of housing units
recorded
some
level
of
damage.

USACE Plumb Beach Coastal Storm Risk Reduction Project Source:

https://www.flickr.com/photos/newyorkdistrict-usace/9719805236/

Strategy: Identify methods to reduce future flood risk and damage
Project Name
Reconnaissance Study for Storm
Surge Reduction and Flood
Barrier Systems

Short Project Description
This project would evaluate a range of options for
reducing storm surge and flooding in Gerritsen Beach,
Sheepshead Bay, and the adjoining neighborhood of
Manhattan Beach.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured
Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

$100,000

Proposed

Y

Page 45

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Identify methods to mitigate chronic
sewer-related damage
While the Community was being inundated with floodwaters, these waters
were also entering the stormwater outfall and sanitary sewer systems. This
volume of water entering these systems led to widespread backflow flooding,
in which the floodwaters mixed with sewage rushed up through the tunnel
system and into homes, businesses, and community facilities. This situation
affected the majority of buildings in the flooded areas, and resulted in
untreated sewage and floodwaters in the basements and first floor levels of
many buildings. Committee members, and members of the public, identified
the need to prevent such an occurrence during future flood events,
understanding that regional-scale flood reduction measures such as tide
gates and sea walls require years to plan and build, and do not eliminate the
possibility of risk. The Committee thus developed a strategy and associated
projects to address this critical need that would be achievable through smallscale retrofits of buildings, stormwater and sewer outfalls, and other
drainage infrastructure such as catch basins.

Sewage backflow inside a Lake Avenue bungalow

Source: Melissa Haggerty

Strategy: Identify methods to mitigate chronic sewer-related damage
Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured
Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Installation of Backflow Prevention
Measures on City Infrastructure

This project would install valves or similar flap gates at
appropriate stormwater outfall locations throughout Gerritsen
Beach and Sheepshead Bay. The project would also modify
catch basins to maximize capacity while preventing overflow.

$740,000

Proposed

N

Installation of Sewer Connection
Cut-Off Valves

This project would provide direct financial assistance to home
and business owners for the installation of sewer connection
cut-off valves in homes, businesses, and community facilities
in Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay.

$5.7 million

Proposed

N

Emmons Avenue: Complete Streets

This project would replace Sandy-destroyed street trees and
plantings, and improve stormwater drainage infrastructure

$500,000

Proposed

N

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 46

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Repair and improve Community
infrastructure
Superstorm Sandy caused damage to local streets and underlying
infrastructure systems that raises transportation safety concerns and poses
risk to property due to frequent ponding and flooding after rainstorms. Many
streets in the neighborhood, particularly in the “old section,” are constructed
on a shallow foundation on top of sand. The roadways are prone to cracking,
settling, and potholes; these conditions are a challenge to motorists and
pedestrians alike, as many of the courts (side streets) do not have sidewalks.
Catch basins and storm drains have to be reinstalled to remain at the proper
level relative to the street. While the New York City Department of
Transportation (NYC DOT), through the agency’s 10-year capital fund, will
reconstruct or repair approximately 6,300 linear feet along Bartlett Place,
and in selected blocks between Seba Avenue and Cyrus Avenue, the
remainder of streets in the neighborhood (approximately 13.5 linear miles)
are not scheduled or budgeted for repair or reconstruction. Given the
concern related to local street conditions, the Committee developed the
following strategy statement, which responds to needs related to everyday
access and evacuation planning.

In the case of Canton Court, which ends at Plumb Beach Creek, the bulkhead
supporting the roadway was in poor condition pre-Superstorm Sandy and
was severely damaged by the event. The bulkhead is failing, and the
roadway surface is severely sloped towards the water. This presents a
hazardous condition for the adjacent homes, drivers and pedestrians, and
emergency services vehicles. If not repaired, the bulkhead and the end of
the roadway will collapse into the water. In response, the Committee
developed a project to reconstruct the failing bulkhead and the roadway.

Strategy: Repair and improve Community infrastructure
Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured
Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Study of Street and
Drainage Infrastructure
Repair Needs, Gerritsen
Beach

Identify needed repairs to streets and drainage infrastructure
throughout Gerritsen Beach to address damage from
Superstorm Sandy and long-term deficiencies in street
construction and condition.

$200,000

Proposed

N

Repair and
Reconstruction of
Canton Court Bulkhead

This project would reconstruct the failing bulkhead at the end of
Canton Court in Gerritsen Beach and return the roadway to a
safe condition, and would help protect it from future wave
impacts and flooding.

$500,000

Proposed

N

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 47

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Ensure adequate evacuation routes
and advance planning

evacuation can be conducted.

Evacuation plans are critical for both Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay;
however, due to its composition, specific attention is needed for Gerritsen
Beach. During Superstorm Sandy, very few residents evacuated from
Gerritsen Beach. Many felt the storm would not result in overland flooding,
recalling the relatively limited impact of Hurricane Irene the year previous.
Additionally, the neighborhood was not designated as Zone A on the former
New York City evacuation maps, the area for which Mayor Bloomberg issued
a mandatory evacuation order. When floodwaters rapidly began rising and
rushed down streets, residents found the water quickly became too deep for
them to drive though, and thus were forced to evacuate on foot or remain in
place. The neighborhood has now been remapped as Zone 1, out of the 6
newly designated evacuation zones and Committee members believe that
widespread evacuation would likely occur in advance of the next significant
storm.
However, there are geographic challenges to conducting an evacuation from
Gerritsen Beach. Evacuation routes in the neighborhood are limited by the
Gotham Avenue Inlet, which bisects the community, and the location of
Marine Park to the east of Gerritsen Avenue. As seen in the figure to the
right, all vehicles leaving the “old section” of the neighborhood south of
Gotham Avenue Inlet must travel east to Gerritsen Avenue before heading
north and out of the low-lying neighborhood. Gerritsen Avenue, like all
streets in the neighborhood, is at risk of flooding during a nor’easter or
hurricane, leaving some concern about whether an orderly and efficient

The Committee adopted a strategy to perform advance planning for
evacuation, conduct an analysis of the street grid and its capacity, and
identify any necessary operational or physical changes to the road network
needed to achieve sufficient evacuation capacity.

Strategy: Ensure adequate evacuation routes and advance planning
Project Name
Evacuation Planning for Gerritsen
Beach

Short Project Description
Determine evacuation capacity of existing road network in
Gerritsen Beach, and identify any operational or physical
changes needed to conduct an orderly evacuation in advance
of a hurricane or other hazard.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured
Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

$50,000

Proposed

N

Page 48

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Increase community preparedness
and emergency response capabilities
The Committee provided a detailed description of the challenges faced
throughout the Community during and after Superstorm Sandy. The storm
itself was of far greater magnitude and impact than the municipal and local
emergency management personnel were prepared to address. Extreme
challenges were faced in the coordination of personnel, supplies, and
equipment; downed trees throughout the area led to power failures and road
blockages; the majority of residents had not evacuated in advance and many
were forced to shelter in place without adequate food, water, medical
supplies, or information. These difficulties were intensified in Sheepshead
Bay due to the lack of a neighborhood-level emergency response team or a
central facility for the coordination of recovery activities.
While Gerritsen Beach benefitted from the capabilities and resources of the
volunteer Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department, no equivalent organization
existed in Sheepshead Bay during Superstorm Sandy, nor does it today. The
Committee identified a critical need to develop a robust emergency response
program focused on the needs of Sheepshead Bay. Working in concert with
New York City emergency planning efforts, this localized program would
develop a block captain system, identify residents with mobility and medical
care needs, and facilitate evacuation and other response measures. Building
on this strategy, the Committee identified the need for a central location
where Sheepshead Bay residents could obtain information and supplies and
for local emergency management groups and volunteers to base their
assistance programs. Committee members and residents reported having
limited access to municipal services and storm-related information after
Superstorm Sandy.

stop-shop” recovery center in case of emergency. Establishing a
headquarters would greatly enhance emergency planning in the
neighborhood; as importantly, residents would be better able to identify a
single location where they can obtain needed assistance during and after a
disaster. The headquarters would also be a site for response training
sessions and other civic events that would benefit the larger community.
In Gerritsen Beach, Committee members recognized the value of existing
facilities, including the Vollies Memorial Hall and the Gerrittsen Beach Fire
Department station, in preparing for and responding to emergencies. These
facilities are used regularly for training of emergency management
personnel, and for a variety of community meetings. For these two buildings,
structural retrofits could be undertaken to provide better facilities for the
volunteers who perform critical services in emergencies such as fire
response, evacuation assistance, and first aid.

In Sheepshead Bay in particular, the disorienting days and weeks following
Superstorm Sandy were worsened by a lack of organization in the
community. Residents did not know where to go to obtain supplies and
information and organizations did not know how to reach those in need. In
response, the Committee developed a project to identify and retrofit a
building for ongoing community use the potential for activation as a “one-

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 49

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Increase community preparedness and emergency response capabilities
Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured
Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Identification and Retrofit of a
Building for Use as an Emergency
Response and Recovery Center in
Sheepshead Bay

Identify a facility to serve as emergency operations
headquarters (both pre- and post-disaster) and as a
distribution point for supplies and information. Facility
to be retrofitted as needed (such as floodproofing and
installation of onsite power generation equipment).

$2.4 million

Proposed

N

Retrofitting of Vollies Hall and
Gerrittsen Beach Fire
Department Station

The Vollies Hall and Gerrittsen Beach Fire Station, both
community-owned facilities, serve as an emergency
response and training hub. This project would increase
the resiliency and capacity of the buildings in
preparation for future disaster events by adding second
floors, applying wet floodproofing, and installing
equipment for 24-hour emergency response, to both
buildings.

$2.4 million

Proposed

N

Supplemental Community-Driven
Emergency Response Programs

Augment local emergency response capabilities at a
neighborhood level in Sheepshead Bay, including
development of block captain system, advance
preparation of response plans, and creation of a
Sheepshead Bay Emergency Response Team.

$150,000

Featured

N

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 50

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Foster a thriving and resilient small
business community
Local businesses provide many daily necessities to residents, such as food
and medical supplies. When these key businesses are closed for any
significant period, it creates a hardship for residents, such as the elderly,
who may lack the means or ability to travel to other locations to obtain these
supplies. This difficulty is compounded if businesses are closed over a wide
area, as was the case after Superstorm Sandy. In addition, local businesses
are a primary component of the local economy, providing employment to
residents and tax revenues to the municipal budget. Thus, any extended
closure of businesses has profound effects on the local community. Business
owners experienced substantial damage to their properties and merchandise
caused by direct flooding and power outages, leading to spoilage. Increasing
the resilience of businesses to future damage, through floodproofing and
elevation of mechanical equipment, would address many of these concerns
and widely benefit the community. The Committee decided to address this
need by means of a strategy designed to reduce the risk of future physical
damages (and resulting closures) to businesses.
Superstorm Sandy caused moderate to severe damage to a number of
institutions critical to the local economy. Although some key institutions with
greater access to capital resources rebounded reasonably quickly after
Superstorm Sandy, many local small businesses were slower to recover with
some closing entirely. As noted previously, 74% of the businesses in the two
ZIP codes that cover Sheepshead Bay and Gerritsen Beach have four or

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

fewer employees. Several small businesses along Sheepshead Bay’s business
corridors are owned and managed by individuals with limited English
proficiency who may lack experience interacting with City, State, or Federal
agencies for assistance. Many of these businesses are also in high risk areas.
The ability of businesses to mitigate storm damage and reopen quickly is
often linked to access to information about available loans/grants, insurance
programs, or other resiliency measures such as floodproofing. Increased prestorm planning and coordination is a strategy that would address this need.
A business association could share best practices with its members, identify
and implement actions aligning with shared goals, and provide information to
its constituencies, all of which would support business growth and retention.
The Committee also identified a critical need to maintain adequate power
supplies in key community facilities, such as assisted living facilities and
shelters, and key businesses that provide daily necessities such as food and
medicine, after a disaster. After Superstorm Sandy, many such facilities were
either forced to operate at a very limited capacity by using small portable
generators, or were forced to close entirely. Closure of the facilities caused a
hardship to Community residents, and hampered efforts to clean, ventilate
and repair the facilities. Thus, the Committee developed a strategy and
associated project to provide reliable backup power for key assets.
Increasing the ability of these facilities to remain operable during and after a
disaster or emergency would be a widespread benefit to the Community.

Page 51

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Foster a thriving and resilient small business community
Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured
Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Establish an association to help increase coordination
among businesses by establishing associations, or
other formal business organizations, on key commercial
corridors to promote sharing of information on
resiliency, disaster preparedness, and economic
development. Key corridors would include Emmons
Avenue, Sheepshead Bay Road, Avenue U, and
Gerritsen Avenue.

$35,000

Featured

N

Retrofitting of Key Businesses
and Community Services Assets

This project would fund the installation of small-scale
flood barriers at the front and rear entrances to key
businesses and community service centers. Sewer
connection cut-off valves would be installed to prevent
sewage backflow during floods. This proposal would
also direct financial assistance to key businesses to
elevate mechanical equipment, such as heaters,
boilers, electrical panels, and HVAC systems.

$2.5 million

Proposed

N

Installation of Backup
Generators at Key Community
Facilities

Install onsite power generation and storage equipment
at key community facilities such as assisted living
facilities and emergency shelters to reduce downtime
and increase their capacity to provide critical services
during and after an emergency.

$2.5 million

Proposed

N

Project Name

Short Project Description

Establish Merchants Associations

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 52

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Support a resilient housing stock
Throughout Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay there is still an urgent
need for home repair assistance, with widespread unmet need for repair and
retrofit of damaged homes. Residents and Committee members both
identified significant difficulties in obtaining funds, whether through
insurance, FEMA, or other public programs, to perform repair work.
Understanding the new reality of living in a coastal community, many
residents also want to elevate and/or retrofit their homes to reduce risk of
future flood damage. Elevation above FEMA’s Base Flood Elevation is widely
considered the most effective method to mitigate flood risk and to alleviate
the financial burden of increased flood insurance premiums. However,
smaller-scale retrofit measures, such as installation of deployable flood
barriers, elevation or encasement of mechanical systems, also offer
significant risk reduction, and at lesser cost.

Raising and retrofitting the bungalow courts in Sheepshead Bay is more
complex as they are not connected to municipal drainage systems, in
addition to sitting, at some locations, 5 feet below the adjacent street grade.
The small-scale drains and privately operated pump stations are often
incapable of removing rainwater from a significant storm from the low-lying
walkways and yards, resulting in frequent ponding and nuisance flooding.
After Superstorm Sandy, a combination of sewage and floodwaters sat for
several days until pumping equipment could be used to remove the water.
Residents and Committee members identified the need to identify long-term
measures to improve the overall resiliency of the courts, with an emphasis
on improving utility connections, drainage, and the reduction of flood risk to
homes.

Strategy: Support a resilient housing stock
Project Name

Short Project Description

Elevation and Retrofitting of
Homes

Provide direct financial assistance to fund elevation
and/or retrofitting of homes in high-risk areas to increase
resiliency after future floods. Measures could include
flood barriers and elevation of mechanical equipment.

Feasibility Study to Improve the
Resiliency of the Courts in
Sheepshead Bay

This study would address resiliency modifications to
buildings, walkways, and shared services within the
Courts; future infrastructure and maintenance
arrangements and requirements; and the potential for
connection to city utilities.

Homeowner Education Program

The project would provide a targeted and coordinated
distribution of information already available from existing
City, State, and Federal programs, and provide tailored
information sessions to local residents, on the programs,
policies, and building practices that increase resilience
and protect community assets.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Proposed or
Featured
Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

$2.5 to $3.5
million

Proposed

N

$150,000

Proposed

N

$30,000

Featured

N

Estimated
Cost

Page 53

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Restore and improve recreational
opportunities
With a focus on everyday resources and community connectivity, the
Committee also focused on existing and potential public gathering spaces
whose creation or enhancement would catalyze local coordination and
collaboration. The large open space parkland on Plumb Beach is under the
jurisdiction of New York City Department of Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR)
and the National Park Service (NPS). The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) has finished construction of a beach stabilization and groin
construction project to reduce the erosion rate on the beach and provide
needed protection to the adjacent Belt Parkway. The park’s facilities are
somewhat underdeveloped and the only building on site, the Roundhouse, is
closed due to deterioration. Identifying opportunities for coordinated
maintenance and operation of Plumb Beach, and an evaluation of potential
measures to reduce storm damage to the peninsula and adjacent areas,
could increase the value to the Community.
Additionally, NYC DPR has completed planning and design, and allocated
funding for, construction of a new park at Brigham Street. The park design
incorporates lessons learned from Superstorm Sandy through the use of
flood-resilient construction materials. However, this Phase 1 construction
does not include installation of a comfort station. NYC DPR has prepared
plans for construction of a resilient comfort station elevated above the FEMA
Base Flood Elevation (BFE). This work (referred to as Phase II) has not been
budgeted. Installation of a comfort station would greatly benefit park users,
entice visitors from surrounding areas (such as the Emmons Avenue
waterfront), and users of the adjacent bicycle path and Plumb Beach.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

The Roundhouse at Plumb Beach

Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/gerritsenbeach/

Page 54

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy: Restore and improve recreational opportunities
Project Name

Short Project Description

Support the Resiliency and
Maintenance of Plumb Beach

This project calls for an expansion of the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers study of Upper Jamaica Bay, as well
as for the development of a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) with all relevant parties at Plumb
Beach.

Construct a Resilient Comfort
Station at Brigham Park

This project would expand on the current construction
plans (Phase 1) at Brigham Park to include a floodresilient comfort station. The year-round facility would be
built and elevated above the FEMA Base Flood Elevation
and would be maintained by the Department of Parks
and Recreation. This would make the park more
appealing, safer, and convenient for local and non-local
visitors.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured
Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

$0

Featured

N

$2.7 million

Featured

N

Page 55

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Summary
The Committee identified a wide range of reconstruction and resiliency
strategies to meet the identified needs in the Community. These strategies
were informed by a review of planning documents and best practices from
the City of New York and the region, the direct experiences of Committee
members during and after Superstorm Sandy, and extensive public input.
After establishing the reconstruction and resiliency strategies, the Committee
focused on refining the list of projects to achieve the strategies.
As detailed in the following section, the Committee’s overall project list
includes:


Infrastructure enhancements to reduce direct effects of flooding



Reconnaissance studies for large-scale flood risk reduction measures



Retrofit measures to individual buildings



Plans to increase local emergency response capabilities

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 56

Section IV:
Implementation –
Project Profiles

Section IV:
Implementation – Project Profiles
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program has allocated to
the Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay Community (Community) up to $13.3
million (Gerritsen Beach: $6.7 million; Sheepshead Bay: $6.6 million). The
funding is provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) program.
This section provides a complete project profile for each Proposed and
Featured Project identified by the Planning Committee and the Community.
The Proposed and Featured Projects were selected and developed as a
response to risks, needs, and opportunities identified in Section II. The
Proposed and Featured Projects are the implementation vehicles of the
Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies in Section III. These projects
represent actions that can be implemented in the near future to build
resiliency and fulfill other important community goals.
The Committee valued the input from the Public Engagement Events,
including online surveys, to make decisions about which projects to select.
Details of Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay’s Public Engagement Events
are documented in more detail in Section V, but the overall results confirmed
the Committee’s selection of projects.
In addition to providing a detailed description of each project, the profiles
include information on two important elements used by the Committee to
evaluate the value of each project—a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) and a riskreduction analysis. Before proceeding to the projects themselves, it is
important to understand these two analytical elements of the project
profiles.
Project ideas that evolved from these Committee discussions are classified as
Proposed
Projects,
Featured
Projects,
or
Additional
Resiliency
Recommendations, and are defined as follows:


Proposed Projects are proposed for funding through a community’s
allocation of CDBG-DR funding.

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Featured Projects are innovative projects for which an initial study or
discrete first phase of the project is proposed for CDBG-DR funding
or other identified funding, and regulatory reforms and other
programs that do not involve capital expenditures.



Additional Resiliency Recommendations are resiliency projects and
actions the Planning Committee would like to highlight that are not
categorized as Proposed or Featured Projects.

This section provides information on the Committee’s approved Proposed
and Featured Projects. The title block of each project profile identifies it as a
Proposed or Featured Project, respectively.

Cost-benefit analysis
A CBA is a tool used to calculate and compare the benefits and costs
associated with a project. The CBA provides decision-makers with a
framework for comparing different projects (i.e.; anticipated cost of
implementation against total expected benefits), and determining whether
the benefits of a particular project outweigh the costs.
Because the NYRCR Program is a community-driven process, the CBA
focuses on identifying project costs and benefits that easily relate to the
communities that the Committees represent. Community and Committee
input – informed by a true understanding of local conditions, needs, and
community values – plays a crucial role in the selection of projects that are
implemented. The risk-reduction benefits are described in terms of how
much the Proposed or Featured Project would lower the vulnerability of a
given asset. The additional benefits of the projects are provided in
descriptive qualitative terms that explain how these projects bring additional
value to the community.
The costs and benefits used to evaluate projects through the CBA are
explained further below.

Page 58

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Project costs



Project profiles include a cost estimate for design and construction at a
planning level, and have described factors contributing to operations and
maintenance costs. However, the CBA cannot forecast costs or benefits with
complete certainty; rather, it provides the community with a practical
understanding of the potential estimated costs of project implementation and
the potential benefits accrued to the community with the particular project in
place.

Health, social, and public safety services: Qualitative
information was provided on the overall population benefits of
improved access to health and social service facilities and public
safety services, type and size of socially vulnerable population
secured,27 and degree to which essential health and social service
facilities are able to provide services to a community during a future
storm or weather event as a result of the project.



Environmental protection: Benefits include the protection of
crucial environmental assets or high-priority habitat, threatened and
endangered species, migration or habitat connectivity; any cleanup
resulting from the action; and creation of open space or a new
recreational asset.

The cost of implementation for a project is just one aspect of the justification
for funding the Proposed Projects. Conversely, another important variable is
the future costs of not implementing these Proposed Projects – which have
the potential to negatively impact the long-term viability of the Community.
Although these costs are more difficult to quantify, they are no less
important to our analysis, and are, therefore, addressed qualitatively. These
costs include:


Extensive, repetitive damage to personal property (vehicles,
residences) and public infrastructure resulting from frequent
recurring flooding and future storm events;



Economic loss to residents and to local and regional employers as a
result of the inability to work; and



Hindrance in the provision of life-safety and emergency services,
resulting in repeated inability to access vast areas of the community.

Risk-reduction analysis
The risk-reduction analysis estimates the extent to which each Proposed and
Featured Project will lower the flood risk to the Community’s critical assets
and population when the project is in place. The risk-reduction analysis uses
information from the risk assessment in Section II to determine the risk of an
asset before the project implementation. The analysis estimates how the risk
will be lowered by showing how much the Proposed or Featured Project
would lower the vulnerability score.

Project benefits
The types of benefits considered in the CBA include:


Risk reduction: The extent to which a project reduces the risk of
damage to a community asset from a future storm event (discussed
further below under “Risk-reduction analysis”).25



Economic resiliency: The project’s potential to help minimize
economic costs and reduce the time it takes for the local economy to
rebound from a storm event. Economic data include, where
applicable, an estimate of permanent jobs secured/added;
relationship to, and/or furtherance of, Regional Economic
Development Plan goals; potential for additional economic activity;
and the net effect on local municipal expenditures. 26

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 59

Installation of Backup Generators at
Key Community Facilities (Proposed Project)
This project would provide onsite power generation
and storage equipment to key facilities, including
assisted living facilities and emergency shelters.
Description
Power outages during storms and other emergency events are a
significant problem in Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay.
One full week after Superstorm Sandy, Con Edison reported that 2,326 of
its customers in Gerritsen Beach, and 13,294 in Sheepshead Bay and
Brighton Beach, were without power. Even a month after the storm,
power had still not been restored to 223 residential customers in Gerritsen
Beach.28
Power outages at key community facilities reduced those facilities’ ability
to provide sheltering and medical services, and to serve as distribution
points for basic supplies to residents. The Committee recognized that
minimizing or eliminating sustained power outages at individual facilities
would confer broad benefits on the wider Community. For each key facility
that remains operational in the immediate aftermath of a disaster, the
overall need for costly or disruptive alternative power service
arrangements is reduced. As Con Edison and other utility providers make
long-term improvements to their systems, the Committee recognized this
project as a relatively low-cost, scalable option to mitigate risk to key
facilities in the interim. In many instances, community facilities escaped
major flood damage but were still taken out of service due to power loss
and associated disruptions to key building systems such as lighting;
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC); plumbing; and elevators.
In cases like these, redundant onsite power generation capacity would be
an effective means of increasing resiliency by reducing vulnerability to

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

High-capacity power generator installed on building rooftop, above flood
elevation
Source: AWMA Industries

Page 60

Installation of Backup Generators at Key Community Facilities

future power outages. This project would provide onsite power generation
and storage equipment to key facilities, including assisted living facilities,
medical care facilities, and designated community shelters. Identified
locations would store/install equipment above the base flood elevation.
Elevation of equipment or placement in floodproofed enclosures would be
required wherever feasible. The project assumes the installation of 100-kW
generators, which are of sufficient capacity to power a sizable building;
however, additional analysis of specific power requirements would be needed
to select the optimal equipment.
Potential criteria for selection of specific facilities, which will be further
defined during the project implementation phase:

adult living facilities and nursing homes within the Community. The project
would also benefit socially vulnerable populations who rely on community
facilities for provision of basic services or supplies, either on a permanent
basis or on a provisional basis in the immediate aftermath of an emergency
event.
Economic
The project may indirectly benefit local economic activity by providing
continuity of critical services within the Community. The availability of these
services may allow more residents to return to their homes relatively quickly
after an acute event.



Facility located in an extreme- or high-risk flood zone;

Cost-benefit analysis



Limited to public facilities or private buildings that provide health and
medical services, food and medical supplies, and critical needs to the
community.



Facility must have elevated space available, or have space available
for construction of an enclosed area for the installation of generators
protected from flooding

This project would provide a long-term benefit to the operators of key
community facilities through installation of means to provide reliable onsite
power. Facility operators would have reduced post-emergency costs and
have a better ability to perform necessary clean-up and repairs, while being
better able to provide critical services to Community residents. The benefits
of the project would continue for the useful life of the generators (estimated
at 35 years).

For non-public buildings, the property must be owned outright by the
business operator or have a minimum lease period of 10 years.

Cost estimate
The cost estimate for this project is $2,550,000. This cost is based on
installation of 13 large-scale generator systems at key facilities, including the
generator unit, fuel systems, and electrical components including switch gear
for power transfer. The generators would be sited to limit (or if feasible,
prevent) exposure to floodwaters.

Benefits
Health and social
The project is anticipated to provide specific benefits to Gerritsen Beach and
Sheepshead Bay seniors and other socially vulnerable populations served by

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Risk reduction
This project would reduce the risk that key community facilities will
experience service outages due to a lack of power. Therefore, the project
reduces risk to the population by promoting the greater availability of critical
community services during and after acute events. By maintaining an onsite
power supply, facility operators would be better able to reduce additional
damages such as mold infestation due to lack of ventilation.
The useful life of this project is limited to the useful life of generation
equipment. With regular maintenance and limited usage, the units would be
expected to have a useful life of 35 years. Both maintenance and operation
of these generators entail costs above and beyond the implementation costs
described above.

Page 61

Installation of Backup Generators at Key Community Facilities
If this project is not implemented, community facilities in Sheepshead Bay
and Gerritsen Beach will remain susceptible to the sustained power outages
that affected both neighborhoods following Superstorm Sandy.

General time frame
This project could be completed within 12 to 16 months from inception,
which would include time for site analyses and evaluation of power
requirements, design, permit application, preparation of bid documents, and
installation of generator equipment.

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: New York City (NYC)
Zoning Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text
Amendment; NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code, and all
subsequent amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code, and all subsequent
amendments; NYC Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if
applicable.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
neighborhoods of Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings County, in the
City of New York.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 62

Evacuation Planning for Gerritsen Beach (Proposed Project)
This project would evaluate the existing roadway
capacity of the neighborhood to determine whether it
is sufficient to conduct an orderly evacuation under
advance warning scenarios for a hurricane or
nor’easter.
Description
During Superstorm Sandy, hundreds of Gerritsen Beach residents
were prevented from evacuating because of the sudden incursion
of floodwater. This hazardous situation was partly the result of limitations
in the storm forecast and the neighborhood’s not being included in Zone A,
the zone for which the City of New York issued a mandatory evacuation
order. Since Superstorm Sandy, the City released new hurricane
contingency plans based on six evacuation zones that represent varying
threats of coastal flooding resulting from storm surge. This change is
positive, but large-scale neighborhood evacuation still poses significant
challenges.
Despite recent evacuation policy changes and the City’s remapping of
evacuation zones (which now includes Gerritsen Beach in the new
evacuation Zone 1), the Committee remains concerned about the
neighborhood’s overall capacity for quick and efficient evacuation. The
concern related to both the street grid and to levels of advance planning.
Evacuation routes from Gerritsen Beach are limited because of the Gotham
Avenue Inlet, which bisects the community, and the location of Marine Park
to the east of Gerritsen Avenue. All vehicles leaving the “old section” of the
neighborhood must travel east to Gerritsen Avenue before heading north.
Gerritsen Avenue, like the majority of the neighborhood streets, is at risk of
flooding. The Committee determined that recent operational changes in City
evacuation practices should be accompanied by a targeted study of
Gerritsen Beach to determine whether an orderly evacuation can be
conducted.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Gerritsen Avenue (indicated by the black arrow) is the primary evacuation
route from the neighborhood, and the only route for residents in the “old
section” south of the Gotham Avenue canal

Page 63

Evacuation Planning for Gerritsen Beach

This project would evaluate the existing roadway capacity of the
neighborhood and determine whether capacity is sufficient (e.g., roadway) to
conduct an orderly evacuation under the likely advance warning scenarios for
a major hurricane or nor’easter. The analysis would begin with a review of
available traffic information, including volumes from the New York
Metropolitan Transportation Council’s Best Practices Model. In coordination
with the New York City Office of Emergency Management (NYC OEM), the
citywide evacuation plan would be reviewed and evaluated as input to the
neighborhood-level plan to be developed.
If more detailed traffic data are needed, an automatic traffic recorder or
“road tube” would be placed across Gerritsen Avenue to record daily
outbound and inbound traffic counts for a week. This information would be
used to estimate the increased outbound traffic during an evacuation.
An analysis of the local street network in the neighborhood, and its
connection to the larger City street grid, would be conducted to identify any
necessary operational changes needed to increase evacuation capacity. For
example, a parking ban on Gerritsen Avenue during an evacuation may be
needed to increase traffic flow out of the neighborhood, while still allowing
for easy access by emergency service vehicles.

Cost estimate
The cost estimate for this project is $50,000. This cost is based on a study
consisting of the evaluation of current evacuation routes and procedures,
coordination with New York City Department of Transportation (NYC DOT)
and NYC OEM, traffic count data collection, development of
recommendations for improved coordination, and identification of potential
corridor (roadway) enhancements.

Risk reduction
The planning process would reduce risk to residents of Gerritsen Beach by
facilitating more effective and efficient evacuation procedures in the event of
an emergency or other acute situation.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Benefits
Health and social
The project would benefit socially vulnerable households in Gerritsen Beach,
including those who may require additional time or assistance to evacuate
their residences, such as people with access and functional needs and senior
citizens. These categories include the 770 individuals aged 65 and older who
live in Census Tract 628, which includes much of the neighborhood. By
identifying not only potential changes to the roadway grid but also operating
or institutional changes, the project would deliver benefits to vulnerable
populations as well as the general population of the neighborhood.
A reduction in evacuation times, and clearly established and communicated
protocols for evacuation, would provide a benefit to all residents during any
emergency situation that may require large-scale evacuation. By increasing
the percentage of residents who heed evacuation warnings, the potential for
injury or loss of life is reduced.

Cost-benefit analysis
A well-developed evacuation plan resulting from the study would have an
indefinite useful life. This neighborhood-level plan would be structured to
complement the larger NYC OEM evacuation system.
The revision of the City of New York’s hurricane evacuation maps to include
Gerritsen Beach in the new Zone 1 reduces the probability that so many
community residents will again be caught unaware during an acute flooding
event. That said, the neighborhood continues to face real logistical and
geographic challenges related to large-scale evacuation. This planning
process would help address these challenges.

General time frame
This study could be completed within 3 to 4 months from inception, which
includes coordination with City agencies, field data gathering, review of
existing evacuation plans and procedures, and preparation of a findings
report.

Page 64

Evacuation Planning for Gerritsen Beach

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) guidelines on Evacuation
Planning; NYC OEM evacuation planning and protocols; NYC DOT for any
physical changes to streets

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach neighborhood of Brooklyn
Community District 15, in Kings County, in the City of New York.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 65

Identification and Retrofit of a Building
for Use as an Emergency Response
and Recovery Center in Sheepshead Bay (Proposed Project)
The hazard-resilient center would support training,
preparedness, community outreach, and disaster
response activities, and serve as a central point for
information and supplies for residents in Sheepshead
Bay.
Description
In the wake of Superstorm Sandy, Sheepshead Bay residents
reported that they had only limited access to municipal services
and information related to the storm. This feeling of being
disconnected from services and information was a prominent and
recurring theme at Committee meetings and Public Engagement Events,
as attendees reported difficulty accessing municipal services in the storm’s
immediate aftermath. This lack of access was compounded by the
temporary closure or inaccessibility of many of the social service
organizations that would ordinarily fill these needs.
This project would identify suitable locations in existing buildings to use as
a response and recovery center in Sheepshead Bay that would provide
local residents and business owners with a primary meeting space to
obtain information, seek support, and receive services after a disaster. An
existing building would be retrofitted to create the response and recovery
center, including the installation of green technologies for energy
efficiency and power generation such as wind, solar, and if feasible,
geothermal energy. In addition, the response and recovery center would
include onsite power generation and storage, as well as sufficient space

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Resilient building retrofit techniques and
sustainable power generation equipment
Source: Green Building Council

Page 66

Identification and Retrofit of a Building for Use as an Emergency Response and Recovery Center in Sheepshead Bay
for pre-disaster planning and post-disaster operations and storage of
necessary supplies and equipment. Major project activities would include:


Review existing lists of potential pre-identified potential locations;



Conduct additional site suitability analyses to determine specific
modifications needed and determine best methods of reducing
hazard risks (such as flood barriers, hurricane-rated windows,
upgraded roofs); and



Prepare and issue a Request for Proposal (RFP) for building retrofit



Develop lease, Memorandum of Understanding, or
arrangements for selected site to ensure longevity of use.

other

Cost estimate
The cost estimate for this project is $2.4 million dollars. This cost is based on
the upgrade of building facilities, installation of resiliency measures such as
generators and solar paneling, installation of flood protection measures,
installation of hurricane-rated doors and windows, and installation of other
equipment needed to support 24-hour emergency response operations.
Engineering and design, and construction management costs are included.

Benefits

Risk reduction
This project would lead to a reduction of risk for the building selected as a
response and recovery center. The project also would fill a communications
gap expressed by Community residents, who expressed feeling disconnected
from emergency response activities before, during and after the storm. An
emergency response and recovery center would provide a location for
information sharing amongst Community residents and City and emergency
personnel.

Cost-benefit analysis
The useful life of the facility is limited to the useful life of the building. With
regular maintenance, this period would be no less than 30 years. If the
response and recovery center is sharing a facility with another entity, the
operations and programming of the recovery center must not impinge on the
regular function of the host space.
If the project is not implemented, Sheepshead Bay will remain vulnerable to
the real and perceived challenges regarding the provision of social services
and post-disaster communications. This facility would provide a valuable
resource to help better address the specific preparedness and response
needs of Sheepshead Bay.

Economic

General time frame

This project would result in more efficient delivery of services and access to
information in a post-disaster setting. With more services and supplies
available locally, the displacement of residents may be reduced. The project
would therefore be useful in restoring and maintaining local business and
resident confidence. Furthermore, the facility would serve as a central point
for pre-disaster preparedness training and community outreach. This project
would be a significant support to the Featured Project titled “Supplemental
Community-Driven Emergency Response Programs.”

This project is estimated to take 12 to 16 months to complete, including site
selection, analysis of building modification requirements, preparation of RFP,
design and engineering, and construction.

Health and social
This project would benefit all residents of Sheepshead Bay, including socially
vulnerable households which include, but are not limited to, individuals with
limited English proficiency, households with children or elderly residents, and
households of low or moderate income.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: New York City (NYC)
Zoning Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text
Amendment; NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code, and all
subsequent amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code, and all subsequent
amendments; NYC Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if
applicable.

Page 67

Identification and Retrofit of a Building for Use as an Emergency Response and Recovery Center in Sheepshead Bay

Jurisdiction
The project is located in Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings County, in
the City of New York.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 68

Retrofitting of Vollies Hall and
Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department Station (Proposed Project)
This two-part project is intended to increase the
resiliency and capacity of both Vollies Hall and the
Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department Station in
preparation for future disaster events.
Description
The Vollies Hall and Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department (GBFD)
Station on Seba Avenue, both owned and operated by the GBFD,
serve as an emergency response and training hub for Gerritsen
Beach. The GBFD is Brooklyn’s last remaining volunteer Fire Department.
Due to the geography of the Gerritsen Beach peninsula, it can be difficult
for fire crews from other parts of Brooklyn to quickly reach the
neighborhood during a fire here. The GBFD provides a range of
emergency services and provided critical assistance to residents during
Superstorm Sandy and its aftermath. Befitting its status as a community
gathering place, Vollies Hall hosted several Committee meetings in the
first months of the NYRCR planning process. Both buildings escaped major
damage during Superstorm Sandy, but only thanks to extraordinary
interventions on the part of volunteer personnel before the storm.
The Committee identified the mitigation of risk to these facilities as a key
objective from the very beginning of the planning process. Members of the
Committee recognized that reliance on provisional measures during an
emergency, such as sandbags, is not a sustainable means of safeguarding
Vollies Hall or the GBFD station against future floods and hazards. This
two-part project is intended to increase the resiliency and capacity of both
buildings in preparation for future disaster events. The first part would
enhance the capability of Vollies Hall to serve as a relief and recovery
center by retrofitting the first floor through installation of flood barriers,

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Vollies Memorial Training Hall and the Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department
Station, Seba Avenue, Gerritsen Beach: Existing Conditions
Source: URS

Page 69

Retrofitting of Vollies Hall and Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department (GBFD) Station
hurricane-rated roll-up doors, and elevation or enclosure of mechanical
systems; adding a second floor above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) to
increase space for response planning activities, training, and storage of
supplies; elevating mechanical systems to the second floor; and adding
green power generation equipment, such as solar panels. The new second
floor would contain equipment needed for round-the-clock emergency
response operations, including a full industrial kitchen, facilities for first
responders such as cots, toilets and showers, and communications
equipment.
The second project component would be to retrofit the GBFD station to
increase its ability to operate as an emergency community assistance center
during and after an emergency. Specifically, the project would add a second
floor to provide operations space above the floodplain, relocate mechanical
and communications equipment to second floor, install a generator, and
incorporate green power devices for power generation and storage.

Cost estimate
The project cost is estimated as $2.4 million dollars. The cost includes the
following work (or elements thereof) to both the Vollies Hall and GBFD
station: extensive upgrades to the first floor, construction of a second floor,
installation of resiliency equipment including flood barriers and generators,
new building features to support 24-hour response operations such as an
industrial kitchen and hygiene facilities. Costs for engineering and design,
and construction management, are included in the estimate.

Benefits
Health and social
The project would benefit all Gerritsen Beach residents, including socially
vulnerable populations such as, but not limited to, children, the elderly, and
individuals with access and functional needs.
Economic
The project may reduce damage to the GBFD facilities and increase the
organization’s ability to respond to emergencies. Rapid fire response
capabilities would reduce the prospect of widespread, multi-building fires

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

that cause severe property damage, as occurred in several New York City
neighborhoods during Superstorm Sandy.

Risk reduction
Vollies Hall and the fire station were both defined as community assets
during the planning process. The Committee agreed that these critical
facilities are of high community value in pre- and post-disaster scenarios.
The project would considerably reduce risk to both assets, since both
facilities would be less likely to have prolonged outages because of the
addition of a redundant power supply, reduced or eliminated flood damage
through use of floodproofing retrofit techniques, and relocation of key
equipment to upper floors.
This project would reduce risk to residents of Gerritsen Beach by ensuring
continuity of operations for the GBFD, which provides local emergency
services. The physical isolation of Gerritsen Beach and the layout of the
neighborhood both limit immediate access by the Fire Department of the City
of New York and magnify the importance of the GBFD.

Cost-benefit analysis
Modifications to the two buildings are expected to remain effective for at
least 30 years. The buildings themselves would remain in the floodplain,
though the project would relocate critical equipment above the BFE. These
facilities cannot be relocated horizontally out of the floodplain as they are
local emergency service providers that must remain in Gerritsen Beach.
If this project is not implemented, the GBFD’s emergency response capacity
would be jeopardized during future flood events. Because of the
neighborhood’s geographic isolation from the rest of Brooklyn, and because
of the unique nature of Gerritsen Beach’s physical street layout, the GBFD’s
local experience and expertise are vital to the community’s long-term safety.

General time frame
The project is expected to take 12 to 16 months to complete, including
preparation of architect and engineering designs, preparation of building
permit applications, preparation of bid documents, contractor selection, and
construction.

Page 70

Retrofitting of Vollies Hall and Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department (GBFD) Station

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: New York City (NYC)
Zoning Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text
Amendment; NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code, and all
subsequent amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code, and all subsequent
amendments; NYC Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if
applicable.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach neighborhood of Brooklyn
Community District 15, in Kings County, in the City of New York.

Memorial and mural on Vollies Memorial
Training Hall, Seba Avenue, Gerritsen Beach
Source: URS Source: URS

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 71

Retrofitting of Vollies Hall and Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department (GBFD) Station

Concept rendering of Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department Station after addition of a second floor, and resiliency measures
including flood barriers, storm shutters, high-wind rated roof, and solar panels
Source: URS

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 72

Retrofitting of Vollies Hall and Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department (GBFD) Station

Concept rendering of Vollies Memorial Training Hall after addition of a second floor, and resiliency measures including floodproof doors, storm
shutters, high-wind rated roof, and solar panels
Source: URS

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 73

Retrofitting of Key Businesses
and Community Services Assets (Proposed Project)
This project would fund the installation of small-scale
flood barriers and the protection of mechanical systems,
increasing the resilience of Community assets to future
floods.
Description
Flooding caused by Superstorm Sandy resulted in severe damage to
key businesses and community facilities in Gerritsen Beach and
Sheepshead Bay. Many of these assets became inoperable for extended
periods. In some cases, business closure posed significant hazards to residents.
For example, pharmacies and grocery stores were without power, precluding
residents from accessing basic necessities. For many residents with mobility
challenges, the sudden inaccessibility of groceries, prescription drugs, and
Community centers they rely on each day, caused major hardship. Beyond the
inconvenience caused to residents, the damage sustained by local businesses
disrupted local employment patterns and resulted in lost income to merchants.
The Committee was particularly keen to address these issues in Gerritsen
Beach, which has only one commercial corridor. The Committee felt that the
neighborhood had been relatively underserved by economic recovery resources
in Sandy’s aftermath. Members also felt that businesses that had survived
Sandy would not necessarily have the financial means to withstand future
disasters. Thus, the Committee developed its strategies related to business
recovery and resiliency into a project concept that would provide targeted
assistance to local businesses and community service providers in a costeffective and efficient manner.

Deployable flood barriers installed to protect a business
Source: Flood Panel LLC

This project would fund the installation of comprehensive flood risk reduction
measures, that could include: small-scale flood barriers at the front, rear and

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 74

Retrofitting of Key Businesses and Community Services Assets
side entrances, sewer connection cut-off valves to prevent sewage backflow
during floods, upgrades to windows and roofs to reduce damage during high
winds, and elevation or enclosure of mechanical equipment. The project
would focus on businesses and community service centers, such as St.
James Church in Gerritsen Beach, and schools and assisted living facilities
throughout the Community. For facilities such as churches, the retrofitting
would be focused on those portions of buildings used for community
purposes such meeting spaces and sheltering residents during an
emergency.

Cost estimate
The project is estimated to cost $2.5 million dollars, and would include
retrofit of key businesses and community assets to select and install flood
damage reduction measures. Project costs include site assessment and
selection of needed retrofit, purchasing equipment (such as flood barriers)
and installation and building retrofit.

Benefits
Health and social
The project would benefit socially vulnerable residents, including but not
limited to, individuals with limited English proficiency, households with
children or elderly residents, households of low or moderate income, and
individuals with access and functional needs who may require ready access
to food or pharmacy services. The project would enhance the capacity of
essential health and social services to continue providing quality services to
multiple constituencies. The project would also help ensure the continuous
availability of vital commodities and resources after disasters, including food
and medication.
Economic
This project would mitigate risk to local businesses that are currently
susceptible to flooding and/or protracted power outages during and after
emergencies. Local employment patterns may be positively affected by
reduced business outage times in post-disaster scenarios. More generally,
minimization of flood damage and power outages during and after
emergency events would positively impact the local economy by minimizing

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

short- and longer-term displacement of residents who constitute the
customer base for local small businesses. The project is also likely to
minimize government expenditures associated with storm recovery, as it
diminishes the risk faced by businesses in the event of future disasters.

Risk reduction
This project would reduce the vulnerability of key community facilities and
businesses. Risk scores would decline markedly at assets where
improvements are made because the combination of floodproofing and
elevation of key mechanical equipment would vastly reduce anticipated
outage times.
This project protects socially vulnerable populations by promoting continuity
of operations and service provision by key community facilities and
businesses in high and extreme risk areas throughout Sheepshead Bay and
Gerritsen Beach.

Cost-benefit analysis
Modifications to building foundations, mechanical systems, and installation of
flood shields/barriers are expected to last an extended period, ranging from
the useful life of a specific piece of equipment, to the useful life of the
building itself in the case of structural retrofit. Once a given piece of
equipment is no longer functional, it can be replaced in the now-elevated
location above the floodplain. Benefits from the initial elevation or enclosure
of the equipment would therefore continue to accrue.
If key businesses and community facilities are not retrofitted to mitigate
flood risk, they will remain highly susceptible to the extreme damage
patterns that accompanied Superstorm Sandy. Particularly in neighborhoods
such as Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay, which have older, less mobile
populations, the continuous and local availability of retail food and grocery
services, pharmacy services, and other necessities is a basic public health
requirement. Given these considerations, the investment of $2.5 million to
increase the neighborhood’s resiliency and ability to withstand future floods
would result in a significant return on investment. The project is targeted,
efficient, and relatively simple to implement. The project is also scalable,
meaning that it can be expanded on a per-building basis at a relatively low
unit cost.

Page 75

Retrofitting of Key Businesses and Community Services Assets

General time frame
The project is expected to require 16-24 months, depending on the overall
project scope and the number of facilities to be included. This period would
include setting criteria, performing site assessments of candidate locations,
selection of specific measures, permit applications, identification and
selection of building contractors, and construction.

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements

Amendment; NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code, and all
subsequent amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code, and all subsequent
amendments; NYC Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if
applicable.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
neighborhoods of Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings County, in the
City of New York.

The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: New York City (NYC)
Zoning Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 76

Emmons Avenue: Complete Streets
Streetscape and Stormwater Drainage Improvements
(Proposed Project)
This project would address issues associated with
stormwater
drainage,
while
enhancing
the
streetscape and pedestrian experience.
Description
Emmons Avenue is a vital economic corridor in Sheepshead Bay,
and Superstorm Sandy overwhelmed the carrying capacity of its
stormwater and drainage systems. In addition, high winds and salt
water from storm surge damaged hundreds of trees and plantings, many
of which have not yet been replaced.
The Committee and the Community both expressed that street trees are
important assets. Their damage or loss during Sandy has created an
additional challenge for business owners who derive direct economic
benefit from attractive streetscapes. Replacing these trees would also
improve air quality, help control stormwater run-off and retention, provide
shade, and contribute to the overall quality of life of residents. Tree
replacement work would focus on selecting saltwater-resistant trees.
This project would also aim to address some of the issues associated with
stormwater drainage, while enhancing the streetscape and pedestrian
experience along this key economic anchor and public space. The project
would construct streetscape and stormwater drainage improvements along
Emmons Avenue in accordance with City of New York’s Complete Streets
criteria. Enhancements could include street furniture such as benches and
lighting, connected tree beds and grass plantings, and the installation of
green stormwater drainage and attenuation systems. Any improvements
would adhere to the City’s recommendations for salt- and flood-tolerant
vegetation. The Veterans Memorial on Emmons Avenue would be

Street trees with improved planting boxes
Source: Wikimedia

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 77

Emmons Avenue: Complete Streets Streetscape and Stormwater Drainage Improvements
evaluated for new, salt-resistant plantings and upgrades to onsite
stormwater collection equipment.

Cost estimate
This project is estimated to cost $500,000, which includes street
improvements such as tree plantings and planter boxes, recreation features
such as benches, safety features including cross-walk lights, and drainage
improvements such as pervious pavements and new drainage structures.

Benefits
Economic
This project would build on recent streetscape improvements along Emmons
Avenue. In concert with parallel efforts to improve business organization on
this key commercial corridor, these improvements make the physical
environment of Emmons Avenue more attractive to residents, property
owners, and visitors. The project would contribute to the vitality of the
Emmons Avenue corridor, for which an improved retail atmosphere may lead
to increased economic activity for the commercial corridor.
Recent research on urban forestry indicates that street trees confer
significant economic benefit to communities. One analysis from Portland, OR
finds that street trees located in front of buildings can increase those
properties sale price by over $7,000. Another study conducted in Portland
determined that walkability in “tree-lined” neighborhoods elevates home
values six times more than walkability in treeless neighborhoods. Based on
these analyses, this project should deliver substantial return on investment in
the form of increased property values and economic activity.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Environmental
The project would provide significant environmental benefit to the
Community. Trees improve air quality, help control storm water run-off,
reduce the urban heat island effect, provide shade, and improve the overall
quality of life of residents. The project would also retain stormwater that
might run off into Sheepshead Bay and/or contribute to ponding conditions
on Emmons Avenue. Reduction of untreated run-off into local waterways has
a positive environmental effect. According to the City of New York’s Special
Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency (SIRR Report), similar techniques
employed in the City’s Greenstreets program were beneficial during
Superstorm Sandy:
“For example, the stormwater Greenstreet at Nashville Boulevard
and Colfax Street in Queens absorbed water equivalent to 31 times
its own area, including 1,300 gallons of rainwater falling directly on it
and 39,000 gallons of runoff flowing in from surrounding streets – an
amount estimated to represent 3,000 percent more water than a
non-stormwater Greenstreet typically would hold.”29
Measures to be used in this project are expected to have similar results, and
would complement ongoing beautification measures already underway by
the City. Ultimately, this project could serve as a catalyst for continued
revitalization of the corridor under New York City Department of
Transportation’s (NYC DOT’s) Sustainable Streets Program.

Risk reduction
This project may slightly mitigate risks to physical assets on Emmons Avenue
by reducing the volume of stormwater runoff during storms. This reduction
may also improve vehicular and pedestrian safety.

Page 78

Emmons Avenue: Complete Streets Streetscape and Stormwater Drainage Improvements

Cost-benefit analysis
The useful life of stormwater infrastructure improvements is expected to be
at least 30 years. This useful life projection assumes regular cleaning and
scheduled maintenance, both of which would impose operating costs on the
project subrecipient. Trees and other plantings are typically long-lived and
regenerating, if properly tended. A storm surge event would be expected to
damage at least a portion of plantings. Plant species would be selected for
salt tolerance to increase longevity.
If the project is not undertaken, street ponding and flooding will continue
after heavy rainstorms, and environmental quality benefits will not be
realized. The project cost of $500,000 to improve the aesthetic and
environmental qualities of a primary commercial and tourist corridor in
Sheepshead Bay represents a cost-effective means of delivering economic
and environmental benefits to the Community.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

General time frame
The project could be completed within 12 months, including site assessment,
design, permit applications, and construction.

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: 2012 NYC
Department of Environmental Protection Standards for Green Infrastructure,
NYC DOT Street Design Manual, and Administrative Code of the City of New
York.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Sheepshead Bay neighborhood of Brooklyn
Community District 15, in Kings County, in the City of New York.

Page 79

Elevating and Retrofitting of Homes (Proposed Project)
The project would provide direct financial assistance
to fund elevation and/or retrofitting of homes in
high-risk areas to increase resiliency against future
floods.
Description
Storm surge and inundation damaged many homes in Gerritsen
Beach and Sheepshead Bay. Elevation above the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s (FEMA’s) Base Flood Elevation (BFE) is required
both to mitigate flood risk and to alleviate the financial burden of
increased flood insurance premiums. The project would provide direct
financial assistance through a community organization to fund elevation
and/or retrofitting of homes in high-risk areas to increase resiliency
against future floods. The project would include an outreach and public
education component to inform homeowners about available assistance
and new zoning regulations that permit building elevation within the
floodplain. The project would complement existing City programs for
home repair. Specific criteria to identify and evaluate candidate homes are
to be developed.
Specific action items would include:

Cost estimate
This project is estimated to range in cost from $2.5 million to $3.5 million.
This allocation would fund the retrofitting of homes through a variety of
measures, including the installation of flood barriers, and elevation of the
building to or above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) on pilings, piers, or
extended foundation walls. The number of buildings to be included in the
project has not been established.

Single-family home elevated after Superstorm Sandy, Highlands, NJ
Source: URS

 Assess remaining need;
 Define target area and target clientele;
 Administer applications process; and
 Elevate homes and/or perform other floodproofing.

.
Single-family home elevated on pilings and reinforced concrete
block after Superstorm Sandy, in Highlands, NJ
Source: URS

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 80

Elevating and Retrofitting of Homes

Benefits
Health and social
The project would benefit socially vulnerable households. These households
may include, but are not limited to, individuals with limited English
proficiency, households with children or elderly residents, households of low
or moderate income, and individuals with access and functional needs.
Additionally, given the costs of retrofitting and elevating homes, low and
moderate-income households in particular would benefit from direct financial
assistance through this project.

Cost-benefit analysis
Benefits associated with elevation of homes above the floodplain would be
tied to the useful life of the structure. Potential impacts to neighborhood
character and visual characteristics do arise with building elevation. These
issues can be alleviated if entire blocks of homes are elevated. Building
elevation would require the addition of access ramps/lifts to ensure easy
access for the mobility-impaired and senior citizens.
Homes not elevated and/or retrofitted will remain as susceptible to damage
as they were before Superstorm Sandy.

Economic

General time frame

Elevation and/or retrofitting homes to mitigate flood damage would make
more homes habitable in the aftermath of an emergency event. The
expected reductions to short- and longer-term vacancy rates are likely to
have a positive impact on local economic activity. Elevation serves a direct
economic benefit to homeowners, and homes elevated above the BFE, in
accordance with National Flood Insurance Program criteria, may be eligible
for reduced flood insurance premiums.

Because this project requires further definition and scope, some of which is
dependent on outcomes and lessons learned from existing City and State
housing programs, this project is expected to take 24 months to complete.
This time period would include activities such as screening and selection of
buildings for retrofit, site assessment, design, permit applications, and
construction.

Risk reduction

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements

Proper elevation of homes raises living areas above the BFE, which would
address all but the most severe floods. Therefore, any homes benefitting
from the financial assistance proposed by this project would have significant
reductions in risk and vulnerability scores. The Risk Assessment Tool shows
changes in risk and vulnerability scores for the single-family home asset class
in both neighborhoods.

The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: New York City (NYC)
Zoning Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text
Amendment; NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code, and all
subsequent amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code, and all subsequent
amendments; NYC Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if
applicable.

Regardless of whether a home is elevated above the BFE, this project
assumes that all residents will adhere to official evacuation orders. Although
this project does not account for reduction of risk to the population during
flood events, the project would reduce the incidence of building damage that
causes hazardous situations for occupants, emergency response personnel,
and others.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
neighborhoods of Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings County, in the
City of New York.

Page 81

Installation of Backflow Prevention Measures on City
Infrastructure (Proposed Project)
This project would install valves or flap gates at
stormwater outfall locations to prevent backflow flooding
of interior areas.
Description
Backflow from sewer systems during Superstorm Sandy caused
extensive damage, particularly in the inland sections of the
neighborhood. Floodwater and storm surge pushed into the stormwater
sewer system through outfall pipes, preventing water and wastewater from
escaping and causing backup into houses, businesses, and streets. Backflow
prevention technology works to keep backflow from inundating building
interiors during periods of flooding, including extreme high tides, such as fullmoon tides. This project would install valves or flap gates at appropriate
stormwater outfall locations throughout Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay.
The project would also modify catch basins to maximize capacity while
preventing overflow. The primary phases of the project would be:
 Hydraulic analysis of existing stormwater infrastructure;
 Site survey to determine condition of pipes; and
 Identification of most suitable backflow prevention devices (gates, flap
valves, etc.).
Using data from the New York City Department of Environmental Protection, 16
candidate locations have been identified that would experience reduced or
eliminated backflow flooding during storm surge events.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Backflow prevention devices: Metal closure gates (above) and selfsealing rubber valve (below)
Source: AWMA Industries (top), Tideflex Technologies (bottom)

Page 82

Installation of Backflow Prevention Measures on City Infrastructure

Cost estimate
The project is estimated to cost $740,000, which includes the site analysis
and installation of backflow prevention devices such as rubber tide valves or
flap gates on select City of New York stormwater outfalls and other drainage
devices. The cost estimate is based on installation of components on five
outfalls in Sheepshead Bay and 11 outfalls in Gerritsen Beach.

Benefits
Economic
This project would mitigate risk to local businesses that are currently
susceptible to flooding from stormwater inundation. Local employment
patterns may be positively affected by reduced business outage times in
post-disaster scenarios. Minimizing floodwater/stormwater backflow during
and after storm events would positively impact the local economy by
minimizing business outage time and by reducing the number of residents
forced from their homes for long periods of time.
Health and Social
Effective backflow prevention systems can reduce risks to public health
posed by flooding of building interiors, including cross-contamination from
comingled sewage or other pollutants. Socially vulnerable populations,
including children, individuals with disabilities, senior citizens, and low- and
moderate-income persons, would benefit from this project. Health and social
service facilities would more easily be accessed during and after flooding
events as a result of implementing backflow prevention technologies.
Environmental
This project would reduce the risk of contamination from stormwater,
floodwater, and wastewater flowing into floodwaters or local water bodies,
including Sheepshead Bay and Gerritsen Inlet.

Risk reduction

of measures such as rubber tide valves and flap gates. When this analysis is
complete, quantifying the reduction of risk to assets will be possible.
Floodwater and stormwater backflow into buildings creates health hazards
for building occupants. Residents would benefit from reduced exposure to
these hazards and from reduced flooding risk associated with backflow.

Cost-benefit analysis
The project useful life is limited to the effective life of backflow prevention
devices, which is assumed to be 30 years. Maintenance and replacement of
individual components, as needed, would be required to keep backflow
prevention systems operating. The useful life can be extended indefinitely
through maintenance and ongoing replacement of individual valves/devices.
If this project is not implemented, the Community will remain vulnerable to
backflow inundation during and after acute storm and flooding events.

General time frame
The project is estimated to require up to 12 months to complete, including
site assessment, hydraulic modeling, selection of specific measures to be
installed, and construction.

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: New York State
Department of Health Guidelines for Designing Backflow Prevention
Assembly Installations and Cross-Connection Control Program.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
neighborhoods of Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings County, in the
City of New York.

This project would reduce risk to physical assets by preventing floodwater
and/or wastewater backup into homes, businesses, and streets. Further
spatial analysis is required to determine the optimal locations for installation

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 83

Study of Street and Drainage Infrastructure
Repair Needs in Gerritsen Beach (Proposed Project)
This project would identify and repair or reconstruct
specific street segments in need of repair throughout
Gerritsen Beach.
Description
Flooding from Sandy adversely affected road and utility
conditions in Gerritsen Beach and increased the likelihood of
extended power outages and impassibility of local roads. This
project would identify the necessary repairs and modifications needed to
be made to roadway surfaces, sidewalk, catch basins, and drainage
infrastructure. Project cost assumes an evaluation of repairs needs
throughout Gerritsen Beach.
The New York City Department of Transportation (NYC DOT) has
budgeted in its 10-year capital plan for the repair or reconstruction of
approximately 6,300 linear feet of streets in the “old section” south of the
Gotham Avenue Inlet. These street segments are located along Bartlett
Place, between Cyrus and Seba Avenues.
This project would identify the needs for repair or reconstruction of the
approximately 13.5 miles of neighborhood streets not included in the NYC
DOT capital plan. The major steps of the project would include:


Review of existing street condition assessments;



Performance of onsite surveys over the approximately 13.5 miles
of roadway in the neighborhood not covered by the scheduled
DOT plan;



Selection of appropriate design standards to conform to site
conditions and NYC DOT standards;



Identification of repairs needed to specific catch basins or other
drainage infrastructure.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Deteriorating side street in Gerritsen Beach
Source: URS

Page 84

Study of Street and Drainage Infrastructure Repair Needs inGerritsen Beach

Cost estimate
The project is estimated to cost $200,000 to perform a detailed inspection
and assessment of current roadway and stormwater drainage conditions for
approximately 13.5 miles of roadway, and recommendations for type and
scope of repairs and improvements.

Benefits
Economic
A properly operating roadway and associated drainage systems would help
to prevent localized flooding of properties through reduction of excess
stormwater runoff and ponding on neighborhood streets. Improvements to
catch basins and stormwater outfalls would reduce backflow flooding of
interior areas. Local property values may be adversely impacted by the
current condition of the neighborhood’s roads and stormwater drainage
infrastructure. A project that returns these systems to good working order
may increase local property values.
Health and Social Services
The identification of specific street segments in need of repair may lead to
improvements that make it easier for emergency services (e.g. fire and
ambulance) to respond to calls. Driving and walking conditions in the
neighborhood are made worse by cracked and uneven pavement and
frequent ponding and nuisance flooding.
Environmental
Improved roadway conditions, including drainage systems, would produce
less stormwater runoff which would in turn have water quality benefits.

would reduce nuisance flooding during heavy rainfalls, and help roadways to
better withstand future flood events by enhancing their foundations.

Cost-benefit analysis
Planning for this project would identify the best use of funds for street and
drainage infrastructure repairs. Once constructed, the useful life of
reconstructed roads is typically 5 years (industry standard) before
maintenance activities, such as addition of asphalt or repaving, are required.
Disruption of traffic patterns/parking would occur in the neighborhood while
work is in progress. If this project and identified repairs are not undertaken,
local roads will deteriorate further. The outage likelihood for asset systems
will increase as road conditions decrease.

General time frame
The project is estimated to require 6-8 months, including detailed roadway
condition surveys and identification of necessary repairs.

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: NYC DOT Street and
Roadway Construction regulations and NYC DOT Street Design Manual.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach neighborhood of Brooklyn
Community District 15, in Kings County, in the City of New York.

Risk reduction
Any physical repairs resulting from this project would reduce risk to physical
assets through improvement of pavement and drainage infrastructure, which

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 85

Installation of Sewer Connection Cut-Off Valves
(Proposed Project)
This project would provide direct financial assistance to
home and business owners and community facilities for
the installation of sewer connection cut-off valves to
prevent sewage backflow during floods.
Description
Floodwater from coastal and surface flooding entered buildings
through sewer lines during Superstorm Sandy, resulting in
sewage backflow into buildings. This resulted in widespread and
extensive building damage, high cleanup costs, and potential exposure to
hazardous materials. This project would provide direct financial assistance
for the installation of sewer connection cut-off valves in homes,
businesses, and community facilities. In addition, this program would
provide education and public outreach related to proper operation and
maintenance of these devices.
Valves would be installed within structures and operated by the building
owner, tenant, or operator. Installation requires cutting existing sewer
pipe, installing the cut-off valve, resealing the pipe, and creating an access
panel for valve operation. Limited excavation to access in-ground pipes is
required; structures have either in-ground or aboveground sewer
connections. As part of this project, both self-deploying and manually
operated valves would be evaluated for consideration. The project cost
estimates assumes that several thousand structures would be retrofit in
the Community.
Performance of this work could be coordinated with existing programs
administered by the City of New York and non-profit organizations active
in the Community. Installers could be hired locally and trained. Use of
local labor would directly address the workforce development needs

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Self-deploying cut-off valve that prevents sewage backflow into buildings
during floods
Source: AWMA Industries

Page 86

Installation of Sewer Connection Cut-Off Valves
identified by the Committee throughout the NYRCR planning process. For
example, if workers were supervised by licensed master plumbers, their time
spent working on the project would count towards the experience
requirements for their own licensure.
This project was consistently rated as a top priority at both Public
Engagement Events and Planning Committee Meetings. Planning Committee
Members who emphasized the importance of infrastructure improvements
were particularly supportive of this project because of its low unit cost and
scalability. This project can be applied to the full range of building types in
the Community, including businesses, single-family homes, multi-unit
apartments, supportive housing, and assisted-living facilities.

Cost estimate
This project is estimated to cost $5.7 million, based on installation of sanitary
sewer connection cut-off valves (also known as backflow prevention devices)
to several thousand buildings. Project cost includes materials, installation,
and coordination with building owners, occupants, and relevant City
agencies.

Benefits
Economic
Minimizing sewage backflow during and after storm events would positively
impact the local economy by reducing or eliminating direct damage to
building interiors through sewage backflow. In addition, it would minimize
business outage time and reduce the number of residents forced from their
homes for long periods of time. Local employment patterns may also be
positively affected by reduced business outage times in post-disaster
scenarios and through the workforce development component of the project.
Health and social
Effective backflow prevention systems can reduce risks to public health
posed by cross-contamination. This project would reduce flooding inundation
caused by backflow. Socially vulnerable populations, including but not limited
to children, individuals with disabilities, senior citizens, and low- and
moderate-income persons, would benefit from this project. Health and social

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

service facilities would remain open and functional as a result, and be better
positioned to provide essential services to residents.
Environmental
The project would achieve environmental benefits by reducing the flow of
untreated sewage into homes, businesses, and onto roadways.
Contamination of floodwater through sewage overflow was a hazard faced
by residents during Superstorm Sandy. In addition, reduction of backflow
would reduce the flow of untreated waste into local water bodies, including
Sheepshead Bay and Gerritsen Inlet.

Risk reduction
This project would reduce risk to physical assets by preventing water and/or
wastewater backup into buildings. This project is currently scoped to provide
risk mitigation benefits to up to 4,000 buildings within the Gerritsen
Beach/Sheepshead Bay Community, depending on site conditions and
specific cut-off valve units required. However, the project is scalable and can
provide direct benefit to any number of buildings, given the appropriate
funding. Backflow inundation during Superstorm Sandy resulted in potential
exposure of Community residents to hazardous materials. This project would
reduce similar risks to the population in future storm and flooding events.

Cost-benefit analysis
The project’s useful life is limited to the effective life of backflow prevention
devices. Maintenance and replacement of individual components, as needed,
would be required to keep backflow prevention systems operating. Useful life
is estimated to be 50 years, but can be extended further through
maintenance and ongoing replacement of individual valves/devices. Proper
usage of sewer connection cut-off valves requires homeowner education and
understanding of the technology.
If the project is not implemented, homes and businesses within the
Community will remain susceptible to backflow inundation and associated
building damage and cross-contamination.

Page 87

Installation of Sewer Connection Cut-Off Valves

General time frame

Jurisdiction

The project is estimated to take 18 to 24 months to complete, depending on
the number of buildings to be retrofit.

The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
neighborhoods of Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings County, in the
City of New York.

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: New York City
Department of Environmental Protection (NYCDEP) water and sewer
regulations; NYC building code requirements.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 88

Repair and Reconstruction of Canton Court Bulkhead
(Proposed Project)
This project would reconstruct the failing bulkhead at
the end of Canton Court in Gerritsen Beach and
repair the adjacent roadway.
Description
The bulkhead at the southern end of Canton Court, which
supports the roadway, was severely damaged during Superstorm
Sandy. As a result, the street has begun collapsing, creating a potentially
unsafe condition for residents, drivers, and pedestrians. This project would
reconstruct the failing bulkhead at the end of Canton Court and repair the
adjacent roadway. Both structures would be returned to full working order
in compliance with New York City Department of Transportation (NYC
DOT) standards. A new foundation for the bulkhead would be constructed,
the existing bulkhead replaced, and the affected portion of the roadway
excavated and replaced with standard materials for a residential street.

Cost estimate
This project is estimated to cost $490,000, including the removal of the
existing, deteriorated bulkhead, installation of a new bulkhead, and repair
of the roadway and drainage system. Engineering and design, and
construction management costs are included.

Benefits

Failing bulkhead and roadway at Canton Court

Economic

Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/gerritsenbeach/792646054/

Property values on Canton Court may be adversely impacted by the
deteriorating and unsafe condition of the roadway and bulkhead. A project
that returns the road and bulkhead to good working order may increase
property values for adjacent and nearby buildings, and would prevent
further damage to the road and bulkhead during future storm events.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 89

Repair and Reconstruction of Canton Court Bulkhead
Health and social

Jurisdiction

This project would benefit the residents of adjacent homes, other residents
on Canton Court, and less directly, other residents of Gerritsen Beach. In its
present condition, the roadway may be unsafe for emergency vehicles such
as ambulances and fire trucks.

The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach neighborhood of Brooklyn
Community District 15, in Kings County, in the City of New York.

Risk reduction
This project would reduce risk to single-family homes located on Canton
Court, to the bulkhead at the road end, and to the street itself. In addition, it
would reduce risks to residents; at present, the roadway may not be capable
of supporting emergency service vehicle traffic and is in danger of collapse.

Cost-benefit analysis
A reconstructed bulkhead is expected to last at least 30 years; the existing
bulkheads are substantially older than that. Reconstructed road segments
would need standard maintenance; limited repaving/repainting may be
needed within 5 to 10 years.
If the project is not implemented, the bulkhead and roadway may fully
collapse into Plumb Beach Channel. Serious damage to homes and local
infrastructure systems would likely result from a total street collapse. The
longer this project is deferred, the more likely it is that an increasingly costly
intervention would eventually be required.

General time frame
The project is estimated to take 6 to 9 months to perform site inspection,
design replacement measures, obtain permitting, and perform the
construction.

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: NYC DOT Street and
Roadway Construction regulations and NYC DOT Street Design Manual. This
may also involve the New York State Department of State, U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, and Coastal Zone Management consistency concurrence.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 90

Feasibility Study to Improve the
Resiliency of the Courts in Sheepshead Bay (Proposed Project)
The feasibility study would identify and evaluate the
full range of options to reduce potential future
damage to the Courts in Sheepshead Bay.
Description
The storm surge and flooding from Superstorm Sandy devastated
the bungalow courts along Emmons Avenue in Sheepshead Bay.
Between East 29th Street, Coyle Street, the Belt Parkway, and the
waterfront, more than 200 homes are grouped in six courts. These courts
are approximately 5 feet below the street level of Emmons Avenue and
are not connected to City drainage infrastructure. Ponding and nuisance
flooding are common during and after heavy rains. During Superstorm
Sandy, floodwater from storm surge was trapped in the courts north of
Emmons Avenue, causing significant damage to homes. Overall, the courts
are at a higher risk of flooding than adjacent areas, particularly those on
the waterfront south of Emmons Avenue. Additionally, increased flood
insurance premiums would pose financial challenges to many residents
and owners. The feasibility study would aim to address the following:
resiliency modifications to buildings, walkways, and shared services within
the courts; the potential benefits of officially mapping the courts as City
streets or pathways; and operations and maintenance responsibilities of
homeowners and the City in regard to connecting to the City’s utilities
infrastructure. The Committee identified the need to address this problem
at its initial meeting and have received strong public support for the
project.

Stanton Court, Sheepshead Bay
Source: URS

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 91

Feasibility Study to Improve the Resiliency of the Courts in Sheepshead Bay

Cost estimate

Risk reduction

This project is estimated to cost $150,000. The cost is based on performing
a risk assessment of the buildings in the courts, and performing an
evaluation of potential measures to reduce risk. The feasibility study would
also identify methods for improving drainage and other utility services, and
identify and evaluate potential large-scale modifications, such as elevation of
the homes and walkways. This project could be completed within 12 months,
and the cost estimate assumes extensive coordination with residents and
relevant City of New York agencies.

The study component of this project would identify measures to reduce risks
to physical assets, namely the single-family homes in the courts. In addition,
it would identify measures to improve stormwater drainage and help alleviate
the persistent nuisance flooding that occurs during rainfall.

Benefits
Economic
This project would identify methods to reduce risk (primarily flooding) and
improve drainage and other infrastructure services. Such methods would
reduce direct damages to buildings and contents, and improve the overall
resiliency of the courts. These changes would reduce future repair costs for
residents, and would likely increase the value of the building stock.
Health and social
The proposed study may identify a range of structural solutions that would
reduce risks to socially vulnerable resident populations of the Sheepshead
Bay courts. These vulnerable populations include, but are not limited to,
children and the elderly, low- and moderate-income households, and
individuals with access and functional needs. More generally, the project may
eventually benefit all residents of the Sheepshead Bay courts by facilitating
access to health and social services facilities.
By evaluating and identifying a range of measures to address the flood risk,
drainage problems, and remaining physical damage to homes, the project
would significantly advance overall risk reduction for both the residences and
their occupants. Any resulting physical modifications, such as connections to
City utilities or elevation of homes and walkways, which result from the plan,
would be of direct benefit to residents.

The risk-reduction measures identified by the plan would also reduce risks to
the occupants of the courts, which is a greater concern than reduction in
structural damage.

Cost-benefit analysis
No negative externalities have been identified. Opportunity costs may arise if
a given alternative is not explored in sufficient depth to determine whether it
would be an effective measure to increase resiliency of the courts. The study
may determine the advisability of implementing structural solutions for which
funding is not currently available or identified.
Planning solutions are badly needed to protect the safety and economic wellbeing of the courts’ residents and property owners. Any solution or range of
solutions identified through this planning process would require cooperation
or participation by a broad range of governmental and private entities.

General time frame
The project could be completed within 12 months.

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
Applicable City of New York land uses laws and procedures, such as Uniform
Land Use Review Procedure, local zoning, City building codes, and Federal
Emergency Management Agency floodplain mapping and insurance
requirements.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Sheepshead Bay neighborhood of Brooklyn
Community District 15, in Kings County, in the City of New York.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 92

Reconnaissance Study for Storm Surge
Reduction and Flood Barrier Systems (Proposed Project)
This project would evaluate a range of options for
reducing storm surge and flooding.
Description
During Superstorm Sandy, storm surge and floodwaters
inundated most of Gerritsen Beach and the southern sections of
Sheepshead Bay through Gerritsen Inlet, Sheepshead Bay, and
low-lying portions of Plumb Beach. This project would evaluate a
range of options for reducing storm surge and flooding in these
neighborhoods, including the neighboring community of Manhattan Beach,
just across Sheepshead Bay.
Specifically, both green and grey infrastructure options would be
examined, including flood barriers and gates, dune enhancements and
wetlands, and sea walls and road improvements. The study would also
determine the potential effectiveness of deployable flood walls and passive
flood barrier systems to mitigate flood damage along the Emmons Avenue
corridor and neighboring Manhattan Beach.
If the reconnaissance study identifies viable options, it may warrant
Federal participation in a more detailed engineering phase, and a
construction phase could follow. This project would complement the
larger, ongoing U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) study of flood
reduction measures for the Rockaway Peninsula and Jamaica Bay. In
addition, the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Brighton
Beach, Coney Island, Manhattan Beach, Sea Gate Planning Committee has
agreed to partner and cost-share this project.

Study area for reconnaissance study of storm surge reduction
measures
Source: URS

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 93

Reconnaissance Study for Storm Surge Reduction and Flood Barrier Systems

Cost estimate
This project is estimated to cost $100,000, which is the limit for
reconnaissance studies under USACE guidelines.

Benefits
Health and social
The study may lead to identification and construction of structural measures
that would protect socially vulnerable populations, including but not limited
to children and the elderly, individuals with access and functional needs, and
low- and moderate-income households. As listed in the asset inventory, and
described via the Risk Assessment Tool, a considerable number of essential
health and social services are located in areas currently defined as high- or
extreme-risk by New York State. A theoretical structural intervention to
mitigate local flood risk might benefit multiple socially vulnerable populations
by reducing risk to these assets during and after acute events.
Economic
Economic benefits would not directly be realized through this reconnaissance
study. However, infrastructure constructed based on the study could realize
several economic advantages, including: mitigation of costs associated with
flooding repairs to home and business owners; reduction of flood insurance
premiums; increase to property values; and the increase of economic
activity through the mitigation of business outages and displacement of the
local population due to flooding.

Risk reduction
The study seeks to identify structural interventions that would reduce risk to
the residents of Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay. In addition, it would
seek measures that would reduce risk to a wide range of physical assets,
including homes, businesses, community facilities such as schools, and
infrastructure.
This study offers the opportunity to identify long-term approaches to reduce
the potential for future flood damage. Environmental impact analysis would

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

be required at a later stage to evaluate any effects of floodgate, seawall,
levee, or related measures. Additionally, the City of New York has indicated
that it may prefer to explore alternate means of mitigating flood hazards to a
broader geographic area.
If the project is not undertaken, there would be no basis for conducting a
more in-depth feasibility study.

Cost-benefit analysis
This study offers the opportunity to identify long-term approaches to reduce
the potential for future flood damage. Environmental impact analysis would
be required at a later stage to evaluate any effects of floodgate, seawall,
levee, or related measures. Additionally, the City of New York has indicated
that it may prefer to explore alternate means of mitigating flood hazards to a
broader geographic area.
If the project is not undertaken, there will be no basis for conducting a more
in-depth feasibility study.

General time frame
A reconnaissance study may require up to 12 months for completion.

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The study would conform to the all relevant methodological and process
requirements as defined by USACE. It will also involve New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation and New York State Department
of State.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach, Sheepshead Bay, and
Manhattan Beach neighborhoods of Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings
County, in the City of New York.

Page 94

Supplemental Community-Driven
Emergency Response Programs (Featured Project)
This project focuses on assisting local organizations
to prepare neighborhood-level response plans and
expand their response capacity. In Sheepshead Bay,
it involves the creation of a neighborhood-level
emergency response organization.
Description
The City of New York has an existing city-wide emergency
response protocol. The neighborhoods of Gerritsen Beach and
Sheepshead Bay believe a localized response mechanism should be
developed to work in concert with the New York City Office of Emergency
Management (NYC OEM) protocol to provide a more nimble solution in the
immediate aftermath of disaster. This project would include capacity
building for designated community groups. Specifically, the project would
develop or enhance neighborhood-level plans for emergency response;
identify means to acquire needed training for responders; and focus on
meeting the needs of vulnerable populations. While Gerritsen Beach has
an existing local response group in the Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department
(GBFD) (also known as the Vollies), Sheepshead Bay lacks its own
neighborhood-level response organization. Key project components would
include the establishment of a neighborhood-level emergency response
team for Sheepshead Bay, which would include a block captain system.
Specific measures to be implemented include:


Development of a community alert mechanism;



Translator identification and recruitment;



Identification of medical care/supply needs of residents; and



Advance planning and training for evacuating and assisting
vulnerable populations.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Training session for volunteer first responders

Volunteers assisting disaster victims at a local shelter
Source: Creative Commons (top and bottom)

Page 95

Supplemental Community-Driven Emergency Response Programs

Cost estimate
The project is estimated to cost $150,000, which would fund the creation of
a Sheepshead Bay Emergency Response Team, training, and the various
other tasks described above.

Benefits
Health and social
The project provides emergency planning, community organization, and
emergency response services that are specifically customizable to the needs
of socially vulnerable populations. These benefits would accrue to
Sheepshead Bay residents through preparation of localized response plans
and creation of a neighborhood-level response organization. Given the large
physical area and population density of Sheepshead Bay, these benefits
would improve the resiliency of a substantial population.

Risk reduction
This project would directly benefit residents of Sheepshead Bay, many of
whom would derive direct benefit from one or more of the project
subcomponents. This project would specifically reduce risk to residents by
creating a neighborhood-level team to provide efficient delivery of
emergency response and through the preparation of local response plans.

of the expanded capacity may require training, equipment upgrades, and
continued planning efforts. The benefit of this expansion would be
particularly welcome in Sheepshead Bay, which does not have a
neighborhood-level emergency response organization.
If this project is not implemented, the ability of neighborhood to provide
critical emergency services would be expected to remain at current levels.
However, opportunities to enhance these capacities would be missed.

General time frame
The project could begin within 1 month, with expected completion within
12 months.

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
Neighborhood-level emergency management planning would be done with
technical assistance from NYC OEM and other relevant entities.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
neighborhoods of Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings County, in the
City of New York.

Cost-benefit analysis
Once achieved, the benefits of the expansion of local emergency
management capacities would continue to accrue indefinitely. Maintenance

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 96

Support the Resiliency and Maintenance of Plumb Beach
(Featured Project)
This two-part project calls for an expansion of the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers study of Upper
Jamaica Bay, as well as for the development of a
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with all
relevant parties at Plumb Beach. Together, these
efforts will ensure the long-term sustainability of
Plum Beach and beyond.
Description
Plumb Beach is a centrally-located open space asset in
Sheepshead Bay that provides opportunities for recreational use,
economic benefits, and natural protection from floodwaters and
waves. During Superstorm Sandy, Plumb Beach and the Belt Parkway
were subject to overtopping, leading to flooding of adjacent
neighborhoods and roads.
This project urges the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) to include
Gerritsen Beach, Sheepshead Bay, and Manhattan Beach, in the USACE
East Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway Inlet Reformulation Study. This would
include Plumb Beach and the water body of Sheepshead Bay, which were
points of entry for storm surge during Superstorm Sandy. The expanded
study would evaluate potential flood risk-reduction measures in these
areas. This request is also supported by Jamaican Bay Working Group
recommendations outlined in Section I.
Maintenance and upkeep of the beachfront is limited, and the sole building
(the Roundhouse) was closed as a result of structural deterioration. City of
New York agencies and the National Park Service (NPS) lack clarity on the
ownership, jurisdiction, and maintenance of this area. Thus, this project

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Aerial view of Plumb Beach, looking west, with Gerritsen Inlet bridge
in foreground

Page 97

Support the Resiliency and Maintenance of Plumb Beach
calls for the development of an MOU with relevant agencies, including the
New York City Department of Parks and Recreation and NPS.
An effective maintenance and operations plan at Plumb Beach could increase
public safety through the increased presence of Parks personnel, more
frequent removal of trash from the beachfront, and establishment of
enhanced visitor facilities. The plan would identify which parties are
responsible for implementation of potential future storm damage reduction
measures, such as dune enhancements.
The development of an MOU would provide a mutually agreeable, legally
binding framework for the future use and maintenance of Plumb Beach. This
project would require the involvement of staff and legal counsel from the
relevant agencies to research the existing jurisdictional arrangements and
identify revisions for future arrangements. This MOU will help to obtain a
clear understanding of jurisdiction and maintenance responsibilities at Plumb
Beach to ensure the long-term sustainability of this asset, and identify ways
to further increase its value to the community.

Cost estimate
This project is estimated to be a zero cost item, as it requires only
coordination between various agencies, and includes no construction costs.

Benefits
Environmental
Inclusion of Plumb Beach in the USACE Jamaica Bay Reformulation Report
would entail analysis of the environmental conditions on site, and
identification of any potential negative effects from project measures on
environmental resources. The MOU may identify potential opportunities to
enhance the natural habitat values of Plumb Beach.. According to the New
York City Audubon Society, Plumb Beach provides “nesting, foraging or
stopover habitat for common and least terns, black skimmers, red knot,
piping plover, northern harrier, and Nelson’s and saltmarsh sparrows all of
which are state- or federally-listed as threatened, endangered or species of
concern.” The beach also provides key habitat for the largest concentration
of horseshoe crabs in New York State. The MOU may contain provisions for

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

more frequent trash cleanup at Plumb Beach and better maintenance of
building facilities.

Risk reduction
Discussion and analysis under this project may identify methods to reduce
future flood risk to Plumb Beach itself, and may identify measures by which
Plumb Beach can help to further reduce direct wave impacts or inundation to
adjacent developed areas. Increased maintenance and a clearer operations
plan for Plumb Beach may increase the safety of site users, both through
increased site supervision and removal of hazardous materials and debris on
the beachfront.

Cost-benefit analysis
Environmental
A legally binding framework for jurisdiction, maintenance, and operation of
Plumb Beach would have long-term benefits that would theoretically
continue in perpetuity.
If the project does not proceed, the responsible parties for operational and
maintenance tasks related to Plumb Beach would remain unknown.
Committee members and Public Engagement Event attendees report that
Plumb Beach is poorly kept and that conditions dissuade visitors from using
the open space and water resources at Plumb Beach. Without an MOU, any
entity undertaking broader habitat restoration or protection measures at this
location is unlikely.

General time frame
Given the need to coordinate among multiple parties, the drafting and
adoption of an MOU is anticipated to require 3 to 6 months for completion.
The expansion of the USACE study to include Plumb Beach and adjacent
areas may require 6 to 12 months.

Page 98

Support the Resiliency and Maintenance of Plumb Beach

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: New York State
Coastal Policies and relevant provisions of the NYC Waterfront Revitalization
Program.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in Brooklyn Community District 15, in the Sheepshead
Bay neighborhood of Kings County (Brooklyn), in the City of New York.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 99

Homeowner Education Program

(Featured Project)

This project would inform the Community of existing
resiliency programs, policies, and practices that
would protect homes.
Description
This project would provide a targeted and coordinated
distribution of information already available to homeowners
through existing City, State, and Federal programs. This project
would also provide tailored information sessions to local residents on the
programs, policies, and building practices that increase resilience and
protect community assets. The project would coordinate with existing
programs administered by the City of New York and non-profit
organizations. The project could be managed by existing entities such as
local civic associations, volunteer groups, and the Community Board to
supplement the ongoing outreach programs operated by City, State, and
federal agencies.
By collecting and streamlining the wide array of available information, this
project would help local residents to better understand the requirements
for retrofit and rebuilding, and the various forms of assistance available.
Topics would include available insurance programs and relevant
regulations, developing familiarity with resilient building techniques, and
evolving zoning regulations related to flood risk reduction. Outreach
strategies would be developed to ensure equitable access to information
for the Community members of both Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead
Bay.
Early action items could include a survey of local homeowners, an
evaluation of structural repair and rebuilding needs in the community, and
a review of available information on resilient building techniques.
Additional first-phase activities could include a targeted outreach to inform
homeowners of changes to the National Flood Insurance Program and
local floodplain mapping.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Resilient Building Techniques for Homes in the Floodplain
Source: NYC Building Resiliency Task Force

Page 100

Homeowner Education Program

Cost estimate

Cost-benefit analysis

This project is estimated to cost $30,000, based on anticipated costs for
printing and distribution of educational materials, limited labor costs for
distribution, renting facilities to hold community information sessions, and
related costs.

Homeowner benefits associated with retrofits, resiliency measures, and flood
protection efforts would be tied to the useful life of the structure.

Benefits

Homes that are not elevated, retrofitted, or made subject to flood resiliency
measures would remain as susceptible to damage as they were before
Superstorm Sandy.

Health and social

General time frame

The project would benefit socially vulnerable households that may include
individuals with limited English proficiency, households with children or
elderly residents, low- or moderate-income households, and individuals with
access and functional needs. In particular, low- and moderate-income
households would benefit from information on insurance programs, relevant
regulations, and building techniques.

This project could continue as needed, up to 2 years.

Economic
If implemented, information and programs pertaining to resilient building
techniques and the elevation or retrofitting of homes to mitigate flood
damage would make more homes habitable in the aftermath of an
emergency event. Reduced flood insurance premiums and greater familiarity
and comfort with insurance policies and zoning regulations would help to
encourage stabilization, growth, and investment in the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Community.

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The program would distribute literature and information that discussed
applicable City zoning and building codes, and federal flood insurance
requirements. No construction would occur under this project.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
neighborhoods of Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings County, in the
City of New York.

Risk reduction
The project streamlines communication about programs, policies, and
building practices addressing resiliency. Therefore, any residences benefitting
from the assistance proposed by this project would have reductions in risk
and vulnerability scores.
Regardless of whether programs are adopted, this project assumes that all
residents would adhere to official evacuation orders in the future. Although
this project does not account for reduction of risk to the population during
flood events, the project could reduce the incidence of structural damage
that causes hazardous situations for occupants and emergency response
personnel.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 101

Construct a Resilient Comfort Station at Brigham Park in
Sheepshead Bay (Featured Project)
This project would expand on the current plans
(Phase 1) at Brigham Park to include a comfort
station.
Description
The Brigham Street Park, now a vacant tract of land, is
undergoing a transformation to a vibrant green, local park with a
playground, walking path, and picnic tables. This new park would
serve as the gateway to Plumb Beach. The New York City Department of
Parks and Recreation’s plans are an important investment in the
economic, natural, and cultural wealth of Sheepshead Bay. This project
would expand on the current plans (Phase 1) at Brigham Park to include a
flood-resilient comfort station (bathrooms). The year-round facility would
be built and elevated above the Federal Emergency Management Agency
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and would be maintained by the New York City
Department of Parks and Recreation. This would make the park more
appealing for local and non-local visitors. During times of flooding in the
area, the comfort station would be a useful resource for residents of
flooded buildings.

Cost estimate
The cost of the Phase II resilient comfort station is estimated by the New
York City Department of Parks and Recreation to be $2.7 million dollars.
This cost includes all site preparation, utility connections, and construction
of the comfort station building.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Rendering of Brigham Park after Phase I construction; future site of a
comfort station is indicated by a red circle
Source: NYC Department of Parks

Page 102

Construct a Resilient Comfort Station at Brigham Park in Sheepshead Bay

Benefits
Health and social
The project makes park use safer and more convenient for local and nonlocal visitors.
Economic
The project would benefit local economic activity by enhancing recreational
opportunities and increasing visitation and tourism to the area. The Brigham
Park site is immediately adjacent to a City-owned bike path, Plumb Beach,
and the Gateway National Recreation Area; thus, users of these facilities
would also benefit from the comfort station.
Environmental

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: New York City (NYC)
Zoning Resolution, including the 2013 Flood Resiliency Zoning Text
Amendment; NYC Mechanical Code; 2008 NYC Construction Code, and all
subsequent amendments; 1968 NYC Building Code, and all subsequent
amendments; NYC Fire Code; and the International Building Code, if
applicable.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Sheepshead Bay neighborhood of Brooklyn
Community District 15, in Kings County, in the City of New York.

The project enhances recreation value of adjacent areas, including the
Emmons Avenue waterfront and New York City Parks Department Bike Path.

Risk reduction
This project would construct a useful public amenity (comfort station)
elevated above the BFE and constructed with resilient and flood-resistant
materials. The facility would be expected to sustain minimal damage during
future floods.

Cost-benefit analysis
The useful life of the comfort station is limited to the useful life of the
hosting building, which can be estimated to be 50 years or more. The
plumbing, toilets, sinks, and other fixtures would require maintenance and
replacement as needed during this period.

General time frame
Construction would be expected to be complete within 6 to 9 months.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 103

Establish Merchants Associations (Featured Project)
This project would help to increase cooperation
among merchants and commercial stakeholders by
establishing associations, or other formal business
organizations, on key commercial corridors.
Description
Superstorm Sandy damaged or destroyed a significant number of
small businesses in Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay. Key
commercial corridors had prolonged business closures that were partially
attributable to a lack of preexisting business organization and
coordination. The ability of businesses to mitigate storm damage and
reopen quickly is often linked to access to information about available
loans/grants, insurance programs, and or other resiliency measures. This
project would increase cooperation among merchants and commercial
stakeholders by establishing associations, or other formal business
organizations, on key commercial corridors. These corridors could include
Emmons Avenue, Coney Island Avenue, Sheepshead Bay Road, Kings
Highway, Avenue U, and Gerritsen Avenue. These organizations could
disseminate best practices to their members, identify and implement
actions aligning with shared goals, and provide information to their
constituencies. Early steps in the project could include a survey of local
businesses, residents, and visitors and conducting an assessment of
business owners’ needs for information and remaining challenges faced
from damage due to Superstorm Sandy.

Cost estimate
The project is estimated to cost $35,000, based on anticipated activities
such as surveys of business owners, public meeting, information
distribution, and preparation of association charters or similar documents.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Along the Sheepshead Bay Road business corridor
Source: URS

Page 104

Establish Merchants Associations

Benefits
Economic
Business Improvement Districts (BIDs) and other, less formal, merchants
associations have been correlated with increased economic and job activity.
Establishment of merchants associations would promote a more vibrant retail
and commercial climate. The evolution of new merchants associations into
full-fledged BIDs may result directly in the addition of new permanent jobs.
Indirectly, the economic development effects of merchant organization may
lead to the creation of new jobs.

Risk reduction

Local, State, and Federal Government regulatory
requirements
The following is a partial list of applicable requirements: regulations
pertaining to formulation of BIDs and the Administrative Code of the City of
New York.

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
neighborhoods of Brooklyn Community District 15, in Kings County, in the
City of New York.

This project would enhance coordination among businesses to promote
sharing of information on resiliency and disaster preparedness, reducing
threats to physical assets. In addition, the project would improve
coordination among businesses to promote sharing of information on
resiliency and disaster preparedness in the face of future disaster threats to
the Community.

Cost-benefit analysis
The benefits of local merchants associations, once established, would
continue indefinitely. The merchants associations can adapt to face new
challenges as needed.
If this project is not implemented, businesses and commercial areas would
lack the framework and organization for proper information sharing and
coordination for disaster preparedness and resiliency. This may reduce the
potential for future investment and business growth.

General time frame
It is estimated that completion of formal arrangements of Merchants
Associations would occur within 12 months.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Along the Gerritsen Avenue commercial corridor, Gerritsen Beach
Source: URS

Page 105

Section V:
Additional Materials

Section V: Additional Materials
A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations for Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
Strategy

Project Name

Short Project Description

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Estimated Cost

New investments in
infrastructure that most
effectively improve services
to the community, resilience,
and economic growth

Feasibility Study on
Suitability of Microgrid
Power Generation in
Hospitals and Senior
Citizen Housing

Educational outreach to local non-governmental organizations,
community groups, and building operators on the benefits and
drawbacks of microgrid power generation systems for key facilities
and multi-unit buildings; use Brightwaters Towers (Coney Island)
micro-grid project as a local area case study

N

$150,000

Assist residents returning to
storm-damaged housing and
identify available funding
sources for residents to
address post-disaster
housing needs, such as
repair and retrofit

Financial Assistance for
Supportive Housing
Facility Owners

Develop grant and/or loan program(s) to help residents and facility
owners of housing for socially vulnerable populations to elevate or
floodproof mechanical systems, including boiler; heating, ventilation,
and air conditioning systems; and electrical panels

N

$100,000

Organize Community
Volunteer Teams to
Assist with Repair of
Damaged Homes

Organize community volunteer teams to perform necessary repairs of
damaged properties in post-disaster settings

N

$100,000

Preserve and promote
affordable homeownership
within the existing
neighborhood fabric and
character

Incentives to Promote
Development of
Affordable Housing
and/or Community
Facilities

Investigate potential effectiveness of financial or other incentives to
encourage owners of never-occupied residential units in Sheepshead
Bay to allow redevelopment as affordable housing and/or community
facilities

N

$150,000

Protect and make resilient
seniors and other potentially
vulnerable populations (e.g.,
disabled) through increased
access to basic health care,
emergency needs, and basic
daily necessities (e.g., food
and shelter) both on a longterm basis and after
disasters

Obtain Mobile
Pharmacies and Medical
Treatment Vans

Organize agreements to deploy mobile pharmacies and medical
treatment vans to provide necessary services in post-disaster setting

N

$100,000

Establish Emergency
Transportation Services

Establish emergency transportation services to take residents to
shelters, medical facilities, and supply distribution locations
N

$500,000

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Page 107

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Master Table of Projects
Table V-2: Master Projects for Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay
Strategy

Foster a thriving and resilient
small business community

Project Name
Installation of
Backup Generators
at Key Community
Facilities

Install generators at schools, shelters, assisted living
facilities, etc. to reduce downtime and provide services
post-emergency

Retrofitting of Key
Businesses and
Community Services
Assets

Provide funds to elevate mechanical equipment and
prevent interior flooding of key locations (criteria to be
developed)

Establish Merchants
Associations



Increase community
preparedness and emergency
response capabilities

Section V: Additional Materials

Short Project Description

Increase coordination among businesses to promote
sharing of information on resiliency, disaster preparedness,
and economic development

Identification and
Retrofit of a Building
for Use as an
Emergency Response
and Recovery Center
in Sheepshead Bay

Identify a facility to serve as emergency response and
recovery center and distribution point for supplies and
information

Retrofitting of Vollies
Hall and Gerrittsen
Beach Fire
Department Station

Add second floors, wet floodproofing, and install equipment
for sheltering and 24-hour emergency response to both
buildings

Supplemental
Community-Driven
Emergency Response
Programs

Augment emergency response capabilities at a
neighborhood level in Sheepshead Bay, including
development of block captain system, advance preparation
of response plans, and creation of a Sheepshead Bay
Emergency Response Team. Collaborate with New York City
Office of Emergency Management to prepare a local level
response plan.

Project
Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Proposed

$2,550,000

N

Proposed

$2,500,000

N

Featured

$35,000

N

Proposed

$2,400,000

N

Proposed

$2,400,000

N

Featured

$150,000

N

Page 108

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 (Continued)
Strategy

Project Name
Emmons Avenue:

Complete Streets

Project Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Proposed

$500,000

N

Install rubber tide valves, flap gates, and similar
devices to prevent stormwater backflow through
drainage system and, thus, reduce flooding of
interior areas

Proposed

$740,000

N

Install sewer connection cut-off valves to prevent
sewage backflow into buildings during extreme high
tides and storm surges

Proposed

$5,700,000

N

Provide funds to elevate homes above base flood
elevation or retrofit to reduce flooding, using criteria
to be developed

Proposed

$2.5 to
$3.5 million

N

Provide a targeted and coordinated distribution of
the information already available from existing City,
State, and Federal programs, and provide tailored
information sessions to local residents, on the
programs, policies, and building practices that
increase resilience and protect community assets.

Featured

$30,000

N

Proposed

$150,000

N

Short Project Description
Replace Sandy-destroyed street trees and planting,
improve stormwater infrastructure

Streetscape and
Stormwater
Drainage
Improvements
Identify methods to mitigate
chronic sewer-related
damage

Installation of
Backflow Prevention
Measures on City
Infrastructure
Installation of Sewer
Connection Cut-Off
Valves
Elevating and
Retrofitting of
Homes

Support a resilient housing
stock

Support a resilient housing
stock
Identify methods to mitigate
chronic sewer-related
damage

Section V: Additional Materials

Homeowner
Education Program

Feasibility Study to
Improve the
Resiliency of the
Courts inSheepshead
Bay

Identify and evaluate full range of options to reduce
potential future damage to courts and improve utility
and drainage services.

Page 109

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 (Continued)
Project Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Identify and evaluate full range of options to reduce
storm surge in Gerritsen Beach, Sheepshead Bay,
and Manhattan Beach

Proposed

$100,000

Y

Study to identify specific street segments in need of
repair or reconstruction in Gerritsen Beach, due to
damage by Superstorm Sandy or otherwise not in
acceptable condition; includes identification of
repairs and modifications to catch basins and other
drainage infrastructure

Proposed

$200,000

N

Reconstruct failing bulkhead and roadway to prevent
major damages to homes on Canton Court in
Gerritsen Beach

Proposed

$490,000

N

Proposed

$50,000

N

Strategy

Project Name

Short Project Description

Identify methods to reduce
future flood risk and damage

Reconnaissance
Study for Storm
Surge Reduction and
Flood Barrier
Systems

Repair and improve
community infrastructure

Study of Street and
Drainage
Infrastructure Repair
Needs in Gerritsen
Beach
Repair and
Reconstruction of
Canton Court
Bulkhead

Ensure adequate evacuation
routes and advance planning

Restore and improve
recreational opportunities

Section V: Additional Materials

Evacuation Planning
for Gerritsen Beach

Determine evacuation capacity of existing road
network and any operational changes needed to
conduct an orderly evacuation

Support the
Resiliency and
Maintenance of
Plumb Beach

This project calls for an expansion of the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers study of Upper Jamaica Bay, as
well as for the development of a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) with all relevant parties at
Plumb Beach

Featured

$0

N

Fund the construction of a flood-resilient comfort
station at Brigham Park

Featured

$2,700,000

N

Construct a Resilient
Comfort Station at
Brigham Park in
Sheepshead Bay

Page 110

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 (Continued)
Project Category
Strategy
Assist residents returning to
storm-damaged housing and
identify available funding
sources for residents to
address post-disaster
housing needs, such as repair
and retrofit

Project Name

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Develop grant and/or loan program(s) to help
residents and facility owners of housing for socially
vulnerable populations to elevate or floodproof
mechanical systems, including boiler, heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning systems; and
electrical panels

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$100,000

N

Organize Community
Volunteer Teams to
Assist with Repair of
Damaged Homes

Organize community volunteer teams to perform
necessary repairs of damaged properties in postdisaster settings

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$100,000

N

Preserve and promote
affordable homeownership
within the existing
neighborhood fabric and
character

Incentives to
Promote
Development of
Affordable Housing
and/or Community
Facilities in
Sheepshead Bay

Investigate potential effectiveness of financial or
other incentives to encourage owners of neveroccupied residential units in Sheepshead Bay to
allow redevelopment as affordable housing and/or
community facilities

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$150,000

N

Protect and make resilient
seniors and other potentially
vulnerable populations (e.g.,
disabled) through increased
access to basic health care,
emergency needs, and basic
daily necessities (e.g., food
and shelter) both on a longterm basis and after disasters

Obtain Mobile
Pharmacies and
Medical Treatment
Vans

Organize agreements to deploy mobile pharmacies
and medical treatment vans to provide necessary
services in post-disaster setting

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$100,000

N

Establish emergency transportation services to take
residents to shelters, medical facilities, and supply
distribution locations

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$500,000

N

Section V: Additional Materials

Financial Assistance
for Supportive
Housing Facility
Owners

Short Project Description

Establish Emergency
Transportation
Services

Page 111

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

C. Public Engagement Process
To ensure the success of the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Plan for Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay, a broad-reaching Public
Engagement Strategy was established and implemented. The Gerritsen
Beach and Sheepshead Bay communities were provided extensive
opportunities for collaboration during three Public Engagement Events
between September 2013 and February 2014.
The Public Engagement Events were designed to solicit feedback from the
Gerritsen Beach/Sheepshead Bay Community on the NYRCR planning process
and deliverables and on conducting outreach through a variety of mediums
and methods.
Meeting notices for Public Engagement Events were posted as follows:


Website:
http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr/community/gerritsenbeach-and-sheepshead-bay



Press Release: Local news outlets and newsletters



Twitter: @NYStormRecovery



Facebook: NYStormRecovery

First Public Engagement Events
Public Engagement Events were held on October 7 and October 8, 2013, and
attended by more than 150 residents of the two communities. The October 7
event was held in Sheepshead Bay, and the October 8 event was held in
Gerritsen Beach. Both events opened with an introduction of the Committee
Members. An overview of the NYRCR planning process was provided,
followed by a report on the Committee’s progress to date.
Most of the meeting time was devoted to facilitated breakout sessions at
multiple tables, during which participants were asked for feedback on the
Vision Statement, needs and opportunities, key strategies, community
assets, and ideas for potential projects. The feedback helped guide the
Committee and was incorporated into the NYRCR Gerritsen
Beach/Sheepshead Bay Conceptual Plan, particularly with respect to needs
and opportunities, key strategies, and project ideas. The local blog Brooklyn
Daily published an article on the October 7 Public Engagement Event titled
“Civic storm plans: Locals help state prepare for next Sandy.” 30

Flyers and posters were translated into four languages (English, Russian,
Chinese, and Spanish) and distributed both manually and electronically to
NYRCR Planning Committee Members, who subsequently distributed flyers
within their neighborhoods. In addition, they distributed flyers and electronic
notices to local community groups, health and social service agencies,
community centers, libraries, civic organizations, schools, and previous
meeting attendees.
The Committee held 12 Planning Committee Meetings between September
18, 2013, and March 7, 2014. The Committee provided input on local issues,
opportunities, and communication strategies, and offered the public
opportunities to provide comments at the conclusion of each Planning
Committee Meeting. Information developed at the Planning Committee
meetings was then in turn shared with the public at the three public
engagement events, which are described below.

Public Engagement Event on October 7, 2013
Source: Elizabeth Graham

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 112

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Second Public Engagement Event
The second Public Engagement Event was held on November 20, 2013, at
the Brooklyn Amity School in Sheepshead Bay and had approximately 100
public attendees. The purpose of this event was to share key elements of the
NYRCR Conceptual Plan, with a focus on resiliency strategies and potential
projects. The meeting format included a short presentation; small, structured
working groups; and a short open house session.

meeting. They circulated paper versions of the brochures and feedback
forms in the community. Additionally, an electronic version of the survey has
been posted through the internet and other social media outlets. Over 50
additional feedback forms were completed online and through additional
outreach, and this information was compiled and shared with the Committee.
Overall, post-meeting feedback was aligned with that received during the
meeting.

Following the short presentation, participants were encouraged to explore
three different recovery functions in three short, 20-minute, small group
rotations. Each rotation included a facilitated discussion followed by
personalized project and strategy ranking and feedback. Emphasis for the
activity was on review and refinement of strategies and identifying gaps. The
last portion of the event was an open house session in which participants
explored other recovery functions, asked questions, and provided input.
Third Public Engagement Event
The third Public Engagement Event was held on February 27, 2014, at the
Brooklyn Amity School in Sheepshead Bay and had approximately 55
attendees. The open house format included the following:


A Welcome Station with program history and work-to-date;



A Project Evaluation Station with overview of the criteria, ranking,
inventory process, and any other factors that went into the ranking
process;



Nineteen Project Stations, including Proposed Projects and Featured
Project Boards; and



An Exit Station at which participants could map their address and
submit feedback forms.

Attendees discuss a Proposed Project for a study of flood risk-reduction
measures at 3rd Public Engagement Meeting, February 22, 2013
Source: URS

Fifty-five project feedback forms were collected at the end of the night and
the information was tallied for presentation to the Committee prior to the
next Planning Committee Meeting on March 7, 2014.
The public was invited to visit each project board station and use the Project
Evaluation Guide to provide public comments and rank projects. This
feedback was captured and is summarized in the tables on the following
pages. The Committee also continued to capture project feedback after the

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 113

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

D.

Community Asset Inventory
Asset Information

Landscape Attributes

Critical
Facility
No

Community
Value
Low

Erosion Rate
≥1 foot per
year or
unknown
No

Risk Assessment

Dunes
absent, below
Shore
BFE, eroding,
defenses
Protective
little
Waterline
absent, not
vegetation
vegetation;
frequently at
constructed
between
bluff slope
shore defense to anticipated
asset and
unstable,
or upland
conditions, or flood source
little
vegetation
deteriorating
absent
vegetation
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Asset on
coastal
barrier
island or
filled
wetland
Yes

Landscape
Attribute
Score
("Yes" =
+0.5)
2.5

Asset
Brooklyn Yacht Club

Risk Area
Extreme

Economic

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations
No

Tamaqua Bar and Marina

Extreme

Economic

No

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

Fishing Charters

Extreme

Economic

No

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

Sheepshead Bay Yacht Club

Extreme

Economic

No

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

Comfort Inn

High

Economic

No

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Lundy's Restaurant

High

Economic

No

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Loehmann's Plaza

High

Economic

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

United Artists Theater

Moderate

Economic

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Nostrand Avenue Commercial
Corridor
Avenue U Commercial Corridor

High

Economic

No

No

Medium

No

No

Moderate

Economic

No

No

Low

No

Marine Pharmacy

High

Economic

No

Medium

No

New Dutch Farms

High

Economic

No

No, locally
significant
No

Low

Brenman's Prime Meat Market

High

Economic

No

No

Derek's Deli

High

Economic

No

Doreen Greenwood Realty Office

High

Economic

Brooklyn Amity School

Moderate

IS 98 Bay Academy

Vulnerability
Score
5

Risk Score
68

4.50

5

68

4.50

5

68

3

4.50

4

54

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

3

23

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

1

8

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

St. Mark School

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.50

2

15

PS 52 Sheepshead Bay

Moderate

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

PS 254 Dag Hammarskjold School

Moderate

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

2

12

Brooklyn Blue Feather Elem. School

Moderate

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

PS 277 Gerritsen Beach

Moderate

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

Sheepshead Bay HS

Moderate

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

PS 209 Margaret Mead

Moderate

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

Yeshiva of Kings Bay

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

Coney Island Hospital

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

5

45

Sheepshead Nursing & Rehab
Center
Kings Bay Daycare

Moderate

Health and Social Services

Yes

Yes, FEMA

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

1

8

Moderate

Health and Social Services

Yes

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

2

12

Day Care

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Strana Chudes Day Care Center

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Engine 246, Ladder 169

High

Health and Social Services

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Section V: Additional Materials

Asset Class

Hazard Exposure
Score
Score
3
4.50

Page 114

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

D. Community Asset Inventory (continued)
Asset Information

Critical
Facility
Yes, FEMA

Community
Value
High

Erosion Rate
≥1 foot per
year or
unknown
No

Landscape Attributes
Dunes absent,
Shore
below BFE,
defenses
Protective
eroding, little
Waterline
absent, not
vegetation
vegetation;
frequently at constructed to
between
bluff slope
shore defense anticipated
asset and
unstable,
or upland
conditions, or flood source
little
vegetation
deteriorating
absent
vegetation
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Risk Assessment

Asset on
coastal
barrier
island or
filled
wetland
No

Landscape
Attribute
Score
("Yes" =
+0.5)
1.5

Asset
Engine 254, Ladder 153

Risk Area
Moderate

Asset Class
Health and Social Services

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations
No

Engine 321

Moderate

Health and Social Services

No

Yes, FEMA

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

61 Precinct

Moderate

Health and Social Services

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

Gerritsen Beach FD

High

Health and Social Services

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

Sheepshead Bay Footbridge

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

B44 Bus

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant
No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

B31 Bus

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

B4 Bus

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Sanitation Sub Garage

Hazard Exposure
Score
Score
3
2.00

Vulnerability
Score
2

Risk Score
12

2.50

2

15

2.50

1

8

3

3.00

3

27

3

4.50

4

54

2

3

3.00

1

9

Yes

2

3

3.00

1

9

Yes

2

3

3.00

1

9

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Coney Island Wastewater Treatment High
Plant
Gas Stations on Knapp Street
High

Infrastructure Systems

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Infrastructure Systems

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Fuel - Tamaqua Marina

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant
No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

3

36

Sheepshead Bay Stormwater
Facilities
Gerritsen Beach Stormwater
Facilities
Sheepshead Bay Power Facilities

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

2

21

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

Gerritsen Beach Power Facilities

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Communications Facilities Community Wide
Co-ops

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

Moderate

Housing

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

3

23

Venice Marina House Boats

Extreme

Housing

No

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54

Harbor View Home for Adults

Moderate

Housing

Yes

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

3

23

Bungalow Colonies

High

Housing

No

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

5

53

Single-Family Residences High
Sheepshead Bay
Single-Family Residences - Gerritsen High
Beach
The Waterford Home on the Bay
High

Housing

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

Housing

No

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

Housing

Yes

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

NYCHA Sheepshead Bay

Moderate

Housing

Yes

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

2

12

NYCHA-Nostrand

Moderate

Housing

Yes

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

2

12

Bay Family Center

High

Housing

Yes

No, locally
significant
No, locally
significant
No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Kings Bay 1 (Mitchel-Lama Subsidy
Housing)
Kings Bay 2 (Mitchel-Lama Subsidy
Housing)
Bel-Air (Lefrak Housing)

Moderate

Housing

Yes

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

3

23

Moderate

Housing

Yes

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

3

23

High

Housing

Yes

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

The Annapolis Housing Complex
(Lefrak Housing)

High

Housing

Yes

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 115

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

D. Community Asset Inventory (continued)
Asset Information

Asset
Risk Area
The Dover Housing Complex (Lefrak Moderate
Housing)
Ahi Ezer Apartments
Moderate

Housing

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations
Yes

Critical
Facility
No

Community
Value
Low

Erosion Rate
≥1 foot per
year or
unknown
No

Asset Class

Landscape Attributes
Dunes absent,
Shore
below BFE,
defenses
Protective
eroding, little
Waterline
absent, not
vegetation
vegetation;
frequently at constructed to
between
bluff slope
shore defense anticipated
asset and
unstable,
or upland
conditions, or flood source
little
vegetation
deteriorating
absent
vegetation
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Risk Assessment

Asset on
coastal
barrier
island or
filled
wetland
Yes

Landscape
Attribute
Score
("Yes" =
+0.5)
2

Hazard Exposure
Score
Score
3
2.50

Vulnerability
Score
3

Risk Score
23

Housing

Yes

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

3

18

Catholic Charities Home

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Congregation Bnai Israel

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.50

2

15

Emmanuel Episcopal Church

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.50

2

15

The United Methodist Church

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

St. Marks Church

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.50

2

15

Resurrection Church

Moderate

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

St. James Evangelical Lutheran

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Kings Bay Library

Moderate

Natural and Cultural Resources

Yes

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

1

6

Homecrest Library

Moderate

Natural and Cultural Resources

Yes

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

1

8

Sheepshead Bay Library

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

Yes

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

Gerritsen Beach Library

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

Yes

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

Bill Brown Playground

Moderate

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No, locally
significant
No, locally
significant
No, locally
significant
No, locally
significant
No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

2

12

Galapo Playground

Moderate

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

2

12

Grady Playground

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Herman Dolgon Playground

Moderate

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

2

12

Yak Playground

Moderate

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

Homecrest Playground

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Marine Park

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Mellett Playground

Moderate

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

Amity Little League Stadium

Moderate

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

3

23

Sheepshead Playground

Moderate

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

Larry Veling Memorial Field

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Seba Avenue Skate Park

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Kiddie Beach

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

4

48

VFW Post 107 and Ladies Auxiliary

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

AOH, Ancient Order of Hibernians

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

Cort Club, Inc

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

Vollies Memorial Hall

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Floyd Bennett Field

Moderate

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

2

21

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 116

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

E.

Endnotes

14

City of New York Department of City Planning, Sustainable Communities: Climate
Resilience Studies – Designing for Flood Risk (2013)
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/html/sustainable_communities/sustain_com6.shtml

15

New York City Office of Emergency Management New York City Natural Hazard
Mitigation Plan (2009)
http://www.nyc.gov/html/oem/html/planning_response/planning_hazard_mitigatio
n_2014.shtml
City of New York Department of City Planning PlaNYC 2030 (2007) and PlaNYC Full
Report (2011) Available at
http://www.nyc.gov/html/planyc2030/html/theplan/the-plan.shtml
City of New York Department of City Planning Vision 2020: New York
Comprehensive Waterfront Plan (2011) Available at
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/html/cwp/cwp_2.shtml
City of New York Department of City Planning New York City Waterfront
Revitalization Program (2012, updated 2013)
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/html/wrp/wrp_revisions.shtml
www.schools.nyc.gov.
American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates (2008-2012), Table DP04 Selected
Housing Characteristics in the United States. Available at
http://factfinder2.census.gov. Accessed November 2013.
U.S. Census, Summary File 1 (2010).

Citations
1

National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Sandy (AL182012) 2229. October 2012 (February 12, 2013). Available at
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182102_Sandy.pdf. Accessed October 2013.
2
North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) Business Patterns data,
2012. Available at https://www.census.gov/. Accessed November 2013.
3
State of New York. State of New York Action Plan for Community Development
Block Grant Program Disaster Recovery. Prepared by the New York Homes and
Community Renewal Office of Community Renewal. Federal Register Docket No.
FR-5696-N-01. April 2013
4
EQECAT. Post-Landfall Loss Estimates for Superstorm Sandy. November 1, 2012.
Available at http://www.eqecat.com/catwatch/post-landfall-loss-estimatessuperstorm-sandy-released-2012-11-01/. Accessed October 2013.
5
Kaplan, T. and R. Hernandez, “Cuomo Cites Broad Reach of Hurricane Sandy in
Aid Appeal”, New York Times (November 26, 2012). Available at
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/27/nyregion/governor-cuomo-says-hurricanesandy-was-worse-than-katrina.html. Accessed October 2013.
6
http://www.brooklyneagle.com/articles/treyger-urges-state-use-sandy-funds-coneyisland-plant-upgrade-2013-05-09-123000
7
Climate Central, Sewage Overflows From Hurricane Sandy. April 2013. Available
from http://www.climatecentral.org/pdfs/Sewage.pdf. Accessed March 2013.
8
Ibid.
9
Brooklyn Community Foundation. Brooklyn Recovery Fund Releases Summary of
Initial Findings from Post-Sandy Forum (2013). Available from
http://www.brooklyncommunityfoundation.org/news/in-the-news/brooklynrecovery-fund-releases-summary-initial-findings-post-sandy-forum (Accessed
February 26, 2014).
10
The City of New York Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency. PlaNYC: A
Stronger More Resilient New York (2013). Available at
http://www.nyc.gov/html/sirr/html/report/report.shtml. Accessed October 2013.
11
Ibid.
12
New York City Regional Economic Development Council 2011 and 2012 Plans and
2013 Project Report. Available at http://regionalcouncils.ny.gov/content/newyork-city
13
City of New York Department of City Planning, Urban Waterfront Adaptive
Strategies, (2011) Available at
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/html/sustainable_communities/sustain_com7.shtml

Section V: Additional Materials

16

17

18

19
20

21
22

23
24
25
26
27

28

http://gis.nyc.gov/nycha/im/wmp.do;jessionid=52B59E41DC0482BD757BD99664
D09C6E?.
http://www.mta,info/nyct/facts/ridership/ridership_sub_annual.htm.
http://nycroads.com/roads/belt/.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program. NYRCR Program Guidance to Firms,
Project Evaluation, December 30, 2013. p.3.
These costs could relate to reduced emergency and recovery expenditures in the
future less implementation costs for the life of the project.
Socially vulnerable populations may be derived from the following criteria:
poverty/low income, racial/ethnic minority status, immigrant status, education
level, institutionalization, renter-occupied household status, single senior-citizen
household status.
Lore Croghan and Rachel Silberstein, "No Power for hundreds of B’klyn Con Ed
Customers; ‘Life seems dim for these people,’ sez Sen. Marty Golden," New York
Daily News, November 28, 2012, Brooklyn Section. Available from
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/brooklyn/power-hundreds-bklyn-edcustomers-article-1.1209636>. Accessed on March 4, 2014

Page 117

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

29
30

The City of New York. A Stronger, More Resilient New York. (2013). P. 195.
Brooklyn Daily, “Civic storm plans: Locals help state prepare for next Sandy”,
http://www.brooklyndaily.com/stories/2013/bn_stormrecoverymeeting_2013_10_
11_bk.html. Accessed October 2013.

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 118

Gerritsen Beach and Sheepshead Bay NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

F.

Glossary

BFE – Base Flood Elevation

NYRCR – New York Rising Community Reconstruction Program

CDBG-DR – Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery

NYSHCR – New York State Homes and Community Renewal

CERT – Community Emergency Response Team

NYS DOS – New York State Department of State

FEMA – Federal Emergency Management Agency

OCR – Office of Community Renewal

FIRM – Flood insurance Rate Map

REDC – Regional Economic Development Council

GB – Gerritsen Beach

SB – Sheepshead Bay

GBFD – Gerrittsen Beach Fire Department

SBA – Small Business Administration

GIS – Geographic Information System

SBHS – Sheepshead Bay High School

HUD – Department of Housing and Urban Development

SLOSH – Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from Hurricanes

HTFC – Housing Trust Fund Corporation
MOU – Memorandum of Understanding
MTA – Metropolitan Transportation Authority
NOAA – National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NDRF – National Disaster Recovery Framework
NFIP – National Flood Insurance Program
NRDF – National Disaster Recovery Framework
NRF – National Response Framework
NWS – National Weather Service
NYC – New York City
NYC DOT – Department of Transportation
NYCHA – New York City Housing Authority
NYC OEM – New York City Office of Emergency Management
NYPD – New York Police Department

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 119

www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr

