a
ESRB SeR CRBS

SSS S068 ea8

—s
7
a
.
=
*
i
»
=
i.
=
@
=

NY RISING COMMUNITY RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAM
Idlewild Watershed Communities
BY Eed afd M Orie aR ORL aa Le Nag Led

NY RISING COMMUNITY RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
DECEMBER 2014

 

Cl || x = ~
a i 4
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Planning Committee Members

Barbara Brown, Co-Chair

Bill Perkins, Co-Chair

John Besant Patrick Evans
Gloria Boyce-Charles Lonnie Glover
Valencia Butler Marcia O’Brien
Jackie Campbell Irnel Stephen

Attributions

This document was developed by the Idlewild Watershed Communities NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program Planning Committee as part of the NYRCR Program within the
Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is supported by New York State (NYS)
Homes and Community Renewal and NYS Department of State. The document was prepared by

 

Perkins Eastman / BFJ Planning in association with the Louis Berger Group, and based on the PERKINS EASTMAN | BFJ
NYR planning process undertaken by a multidisciplinary team consisting of Perkins Eastman, BFJ Eten eaenr eons
Planning, Louis Berger Group, 4Ward Planning, PACO Group and Fitzgerald & Haliday, Inc. THE LOUIS BERGER GROUP

Attributions: All photos are attributed to the Perkins Eastman/BFJ Planning/Louis Berger Group Team unless otherwise specified
2
Foreword

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Introduction

In the span of approximately one year,
beginning in August 2011, the State of New
York experienced three extreme weather events.
Hurricane lrene, Tropical Storm Lee, and
Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the lives
of New Yorkers and their communities. These
tragic disasters signaled that New Yorkers are
living in a new reality defined by rising sea
levels and extreme weather events that will
occur with increased frequency and power.
They also signaled that we need to rebuild our
communities in a way that will mitigate against
future risks and build increased resilience.

To meet these pressing needs, Governor
Andrew M. Cuomo led the charge to develop
an innovative, community-driven planning
program on a_ scale unprecedented and
with resources unparalleled. The NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR} Program,
within the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery
(GOSR), empowers the State’s most impacted
communities with the technical expertise and
funding resources needed to develop thorough
and implementable reconstruction plans to
build physically, socially, and economically
resilient and sustainable communities.

Program Overview

The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor
Cuomo in April of 2013, is a more than $700
million planning and implementation program
established to provide rebuilding and resiliency
assistance to communities severely damaged
by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee,
and Superstorm Sandy. Drawing on lessons

learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR
Program is a unique combination of bottom-up
community participation and State-provided
technical expertise. This powerful combination
recognizes not only that community members
are best positioned to assess the needs and
opportunities of the places where they live and
work, but also that decisions are best made
when they are grounded in rigorous analysis
and informed by the latest innovative solutions.

Launched in the summer of 2013 and completed
in March 2014, Round | of the NYRCR planning
process included 50 NYRCR Planning Areas,
comprising 102 storm-impacted localities. In
January 2014, Governor Cuomo announced a
second round of the planning process, serving
an additional 22 storm-impacted localities. Four
of these localities were absorbed into existing
Round | NYRCR Planning Areas, bringing the
number of localities participating in Round |
up to 106; the other 18 localities formed 16
new Round II NYRCR Planning Areas. Between
Rounds | and Il, there are 66 NYRCR Planning
Areas, comprising 124 localities. The program
serves over 2.7 million New Yorkers and covers
nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent
to 14% of the overall State population and 12%
of the State’s overall geography.

In Rounds | and II, the State allotted between
$3 million and $25 million to each participating
locality for the implementation of eligible
projects identified in the NYRCR Plan. The
funding for these projects is provided through
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) Community Development

Block Grant — Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
program. !

Each NYRCR Planning Area is represented by a
NYRCR Planning Committee composed of local
residents, business owners, and civic leaders.
Members of the Planning Committees were
identified in consultation with established local
leaders, community organizations and, in some
cases, municipalities. The NYRCR Program sets
a new standard for community participation
in recovery and resiliency planning, with
community members leading the planning
process. Across the State, more than 650 New
Yorkers have represented their communities by
serving on Planning Committees. Nearly 650
Planning Committee Meetings have been held,
during which Planning Committee members
worked with the State’s team to develop
community reconstruction plans, which identify
opportunities to make their communities more
resilient. All meetings were open to the public.
An additional 250+ Public Engagement Events
attracted thousands of community members,
who provided feedback on the planning
process and resulting proposals. The NYRCR
Program’s outreach has included communities
that are traditionally underrepresented, such
as immigrant populations and students. All
planning materials are posted on the program’s
website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr},
providing several ways for community members
and the public to submit feedback on the
program and materials in progress.

1. Five of the Round | Planning Areas—Niagara,
Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery
Counties—are not funded through the CDBG-DR
program.
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Throughout the planning process, Planning
Committees were supported by staff from GOSR,
planners from New York State (NYS} Department
of State and NYS Department of Transportation,
and consultants from world-class planning firms
that specialize in engineering, flood mitigation
solutions, green infrastructure, and more.

The NYRCR Program does not end with this
NYRCR Plan. Governor Cuomo has allotted
over $700 million for planning as well as
implementing eligible projects identified in
NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Planning Areas are also
eligible for additional funds through the NY
Rising to the Top Competition, which evaluates
applications from Round Il NYRCR Planning
Committees across three categories—Regional
Approach, Inclusion of Vulnerable Populations,
and Use of Green Infrastructure. The winner
of each category will be allotted a share of the
competition’s $3.5 million to fund additional
eligible projects.

In April 2014, Governor Cuomo announced
that projects identified in NYRCR Plans would
receive priority consideration through the
State’s Consolidated Funding Application (CFA}
process and charged the Regional Economic
Development Councils (REDCs}, which play an
advisory role in the CFA process, to support
NYRCR projects. In December 2014, Governor
Cuomo announced that 24 NYRCR projects
received nearly $12 million in CFA funding. This
announcement is an example of the Governor
honoring his commitment to leverage the
work of the NYRCR Planning Committees to
incorporate resilience into other State programs
and to find additional sources of funding for
NYRCR projects. The NYRCR Program is also
working with both private and public institutions
to identify existing funding sources and to

4

create funding opportunities where none existed
before.

The NYRCR Program has _ successfully
coordinated with State and Federal agencies to
help guide the development of feasible projects.
The program has leveraged the REDC State
Agency Review Teams (SARTs}, composed of
representatives from dozens of State agencies
and authorities, for feedback on projects
proposed by NYRCR Planning Commitees.
The SARTs review projects with an eye toward
regulatory and permitting needs, policy
objectives, and preexisting agency funding
sources. The NYRCR Program is continuing to
work with the SARTs to streamline the permitting
process and ensure shovels are in the ground
as quickly as possible.

On the pages that follow, you will see the
results of months of thoughtful, diligent work
by the Idlewild Watershed Communities NYRCR
Planning Committee, which is passionately
committed to realizing a brighter, more resilient
future for its community.

The NYRCR Plan

This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward
rebuilding a more resilient community. Each
NYRCR Planning Committee began the
planning process by defining the scope of
its planning area, assessing storm damage,
and identifying critical issues. Next, the
Planning Committee inventoried critical assets
in the community and assessed the assets’
exposure to risk. On the basis of this work, the
Planning Committee described recovery and
resiliency needs and identified opportunities.
The Planning Committee then developed a
series of comprehensive reconstruction and

resiliency strategies, and identified projects
and implementation actions to help fulfill those
strategies.

The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR
Plan are divided into three categories. The
order in which the projects and actions are
listed in this NYRCR Plan does not necessarily
indicate the Planning Committee’s prioritization
of these projects and actions. Proposed
Projects are projects proposed for funding
through an NYRCR Planning Area’s allotment
of CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects
are projects and actions that the Planning
Committee has identified as important
resiliency recommendations and has analyzed
in depth, but has not proposed for funding
through the NYRCR Program. Additional
Resiliency Recommendations are projects
and actions that the Planning Committee would
like to highlight and that are not categorized
as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects. The
Proposed Projects and Featured Projects found
in this NYRCR Plan were voted for inclusion by
voting members of the Planning Committee.
Those voting members with conflicts of interest
recused themselves from voting on any affected
projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics
Handbook and Code of Conduct.

As part of Round Il of the NYRCR Program,
the Idlewild Watershed Communities NYRCR
Planning Area has been allotted up to $6 million
in CDBG-DR funds for the implementation of
eligible projects identified in this plan.

While developing projects for inclusion in
NYRCR Plans, Planning Committees took into
account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses,
the effectiveness of each project in reducing
risk to populations and critical assets, feasibility,
and community support. Planning Committees
also considered the potential likelihood that a
project or action would be eligible for CDBG-
DR funding. Projects and actions implemented
with this source of Federal funding must satisfy
a Federally-designated eligible activity category,
fulfill a national objective (i.e., meeting an urgent
need, removing slums and blight, or benefiting
low- to moderate-income individuals), and have
a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding
is linked. These are among the factors that
GOSR will consider, in consultation with local
municipalities and nonprofit organizations,
when determining which projects and actions
are best positioned for implementation.

The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR
Plan exceeds the NYRCR Planning Area’s CDBG-
DR allotment to allow for flexibility if some
Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to
environmental review, HUD eligibility, technical
feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of
the projects and actions found in this NYRCR
Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State,
and local laws and regulations, including the
Americans with Disabilities Act. Inclusion of a
project or action in this NYRCR Plan does not
guarantee that a particular project or action will
be eligible for CDBG-DR funding or that it will be
implemented. Projects will be implemented on
a staggered timeline, and the NYRCR Program
will choose an appropriate State or local partner
to implement each project. GOSR will actively
seek to match projects with additional funding
sources, when possible.

In the months and years to follow, many of the
projects and actions outlined in this NYRCR Plan
will become a reality, helping New York not only
to rebuild, but also to build back better.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

NY Rising Communities

«
Capital District / North Country /
Niagara County Mohawk Valley
iid tr }
7
SOs
Southern Tier!
Central New York Ge

ww Hudson Valley /
Catskills

   
  

Greater
New York

City

 

 

Note: Map displays the 66 NYRCR Planning Areas from Rounds | and Il. (Five of the Round | Planning
Areas—Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery Counties—are not funded through
the CDBG-DR program.}

Find out more at:

StormRecovery.ny.gov/Community-Reconstruction-Program
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Contents
Executive Summary 10
Section I. Community Overview 20
A. Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan 20
B. Description of Storm Damage 27
C. Critical Issues 31
D. Community Vision 35
E. Relationship to Existing Plans/Studies 36
Section Il. Assessment of Risk and Needs 44
A. Description of Community Assets and Assessment of Risk 44
B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities 76
Section III. Reconstruction Strategies 94
Strategy A: Alleviate Localized Flooding Conditions 95
Strategy B: Strengthen the Emergency Response Capacity of the Community. 98
Strategy C: Support Environmental Stewardship of the Community’s Natural and Manmade Resources. 100
Strategy D: Provide Safe and Reliable Access to Critical Goods and Services. 102
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section IV. Project Profiles 106
Strategy A: Alleviate Localized Flooding Conditions 108
A1: Green Infrastructure Community Master Plan (with pilot projects) [Proposed Project] 108
Ala: Brookville Park Pond Restoration [Proposed Project] 114
Alb: Community Gateway Green Streets [Proposed Project] 117
Alc: Green Infrastructure Pilot Project (School Green Roof and Raingarden) [Proposed Project] 124
Ald: Twin Pond Park Bluebelt Enhancement [Featured Project] 129
A2: NYC DEP Oyster Restoration in Thurston Basin [Featured Project] 132
A3: Coastal Management Plan [Featured Project] 135
Strategy A: Additional Resiliency Recommendations 140
Strategy B: Strengthen the Emergency Response Capacity of the Community 142
B1: Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan [Proposed Project] 142
Strategy C: Support Environmental Stewardship of the Community’s Natural and Manmade Resources 147

C1: Idlewild Watershed Communities Green Infrastructure Workforce Training Program [Proposed] and Open Space Restoration Fund [Featured] 147

C2: Home and Business Owner Education and Technical Assistance Program [Featured Project] 152
Strategy C: Additional Resiliency Recommendations 156
Strategy D: Provide Safe and Reliable Access to Critical Goods and Services 158
D1: Install Backup Power Supply Systems at Critical Facilities [Proposed Project] 158
D2: Study to Elevate Brookville Boulevard (Snake Road) between 149th Boulevard and Rockaway Boulevard [Featured Project] 162
Strategy D: Additional Resiliency Recommendations 168
Section V. Additional Materials 172
A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations 172
B. Master Table of Projects 174
C. Public Engagement Process 176
D. Community Asset Inventory 182
E. Endnotes 193
F. Glossary 198

7
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Figures
Figure 1.1: Regional Watersheds 21
Figure 1.2: Planning Area 23
Figure 1.3: Map of New York Bay and Harbor and the Environs, 1844 24
Figure 1.4: Land Use 25
Figure 1.5: Superstorm Sandy Impacts 28
Figure 1.6: Low Lying Areas and High Water Table Contribute to Recurring Flooding 30
Figure 1.7: Community Vision Word Cloud 35
Figure 1.8: Regional Projects 40
Figure 1.9: Local Projects Al
Figure 2.1: Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment Process 44
Figure 2.2: Asset Categories 45
Figure 2.3: Risk Areas 46
Figure 2.4: DOS Risk Assessment Map 47
Figure 2.5: FEMA Flood Hazard Areas 50
Figure 2.6: Exposure—Moderating Effect of Topography and Shoreline 51
Figure 2.7: Vulnerability—Ability to Resist or Recover from Future Storm Events 52
Figure 2.8: Hazard—Likelihood of Future Storm Events 53
Figure 2.9: Economic Assets 56
Figure 2.10: Risk to Economic Assets 57
Figure 2.11: Health and Social Services Assets 60
Figure 2.12: Risk to Health and Social Services Assets 61
Figure 2.13: Housing Assets 64
Figure 2.14: Risk to Housing Assets 65
Figure 2.15: Infrastructure Assets 68
Figure 2.16: Risk to Infrastructure Assets 69
Figure 2.17: Natural and Cultural Resource Assets 72
Figure 2.18: Risk to Natural and Cultural Resource Assets 73
Figure 2.19: Socially Vulnerable Populations 74
Figure 2.20: Retail Leakage to Adjacent Communities 79
Figure 2.21: Notices of Foreclosure (Rate, 1-4 Family Buildings), May 2014 84
Figure 4.1: NYRCR Planing Process—The Road to Projects 107
Figure 4.2: Green Infrastructure Community Master Plan 109
Figure 4.3: Phases of Restoration at Brookville Park Pond 114
Figure 4.4: Community Gateway Green Streets 117
Figure 4.5: Conceptual Rendering of Rosedale Station Community Gateway Green Street, Francis Lewis Boulevard 118
Figure 4.6: Scope of Gateway Green Street at 225th Street 119
Figure 4.7: Scope of Gateway Green Street at Rosedale Station 120

8
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Figure 4.8: Scope of Gateway Green Street at Farmers Blvd and Guy R Brewers Blvd 120
Figure 4.9: Proposed Green Infrastructure at PS 231 124
Figure 4.10: Proposed Green Infratstructure at PS 195 125
Figure 4.11: Twin Pond Park Bluebelt Restoration 129
Figure 4.12: NYC DEP Oyster Restoration in Thurston Basin 132
Figure 4.13: Conceptual Coastal Management Plan 136
Figure 4.14: Advocate for Construction of Thurston Basin Park 140
Figure 4.15: City Purchase of Privately Owned Parcels 140
Figure 4.16: Idlewild Park Preserve Culvert Expansion 141
Figure 4.17: Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan 143
Figure 4.18: Elevate and Wet Floodproofing—Semi-Detached Homes 153
Figure 4.19: Idlewild Park Preserve Trail Network and Overlook Restoration 156
Figure 4.20: Map of Proposed Greater JFK IBID 157
Figure 4.21: Potential Locations of Backup Generators 158
Figure 4.22: Conceptual Rendering of Snake Road Elevation 163
Figure 4.23: Map of Brookville Boulevard from 149th Ave to Rockaway Boulevard (Snake Road) 165
Figure 4.24: Elevate 147th Avenue Bridge at Brookville Park 168
Figure 4.25: Rockaway Turnpike/Nassau Expressway Resilient Corridor Study 169
Tables
Table 1.1: Demographic Profile 26
Table 2.1: Assessed Value of Commercial Property by Risk Area 54
Table 2.2: Assessed Value of Residential Properties by Risk Area 62
Table 2.3: Affordable Housing Facilities in the Community 63
Table 3.1: Strategy A: Alleviate Localized Flooding Conditions 96
Table 3.2: Strategy B: Strengthen the Emergency Response Capacity of the Community 99
Table 3.3: Strategy C: Support Environmental Stewardship of the Community’s Natural and Manmade Resources 101
Table 3.4: Strategy D: Provide Safe and Reliable Access to Critical Goods and Services 103
Table 4.1: Summary of Mitigated Flood Zone 137
Table 4.2: Facilities and needs that various generators can accommodate 160
Table 4.3: Potential emissions from Natural Gas Generator 160
Table 5.1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations 172
Table 5.2: Master Table of Projects 174
Table 5.3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment 183
Idlewild Watershed Communities

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Idlewild Watershed Communities (the
Community) of Springfield Gardens, Brookville,
and Rosedale are uniquely close-knit New
York City neighborhoods noted for their strong
sense of civic activism, enviable network of
open space and wetland habitat, and diverse
neighborhood character. Although the area
is primarily suburban and residential in
character, this Community in the borough of
Queens also includes a significant industrial
and manufacturing district directly adjacent to
John F Kennedy International (JFK) Airport. The
nearby presence of JFK Airport to the south and
their low-lying topography and high water table
play a formative role in shaping the landscape
of the Community. The nearly 95,000 residents
within the Idlewild Watershed Communities
experience constant reminders of both of
these features.

The Idlewild Watershed Communities NY
Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Plan features a suite of projects identified as
having the greatest benefit in increasing the
Community’s resilience to future climate related
events. The Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery
has allotted $6,000,000 in U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
Community Development Block Grant-Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR} dollars to fund eligible
projects identified in the NYRCR Plan. The
NYRCR Plan is a community-based plan, which
is the product of a robust public engagement
effort involving consensus-building among
residents, civic leaders, and elected officials.
Finally, the NYRCR Plan is comprehensive,

10 Executive Summary

Idlewild Watershed Communities NYRCR Boundary

    
     

Fi
Me, ? / 1s
eo oy é 7 eh
& 31 128 RD] &
Nie oer 4 if
“~~ 7, St
may s™, pen ]
BAISLEY NE 2, = Meher QUEENS SHG w0}
POND PARK zs on Sey, Ef S
gS ao & of ge "20 /
P 2 ™, ofS
se . Boag ~~, GUE 34, #
aN & é
7 @ cocust manor © g ~, 4 es /
* LNA STATION MONTBELLI fo. Ff at
Ey a
he % tae !
’ J a
9 s ara Mey
/ AAW % <i a # ss ¥o¢ 8 mr,
, % % G 4 4 ¢ & ow be
Mey ee $ on IF f|
Sie’ % % = % & wy oS S
| j w % i en i & + NASSAU
. tier @ © | COUNTY
BELT PKW' ROSEDALE
Sw" CONDUIT AVE sean gO awe
= HWY
Fa ¥ SPRINGIELD "Baye lin SE ety a % eee wn
sae Of @GARDENS© eee val
~ y Ms Dg © & og Ale 8 4 ee 4
C7 a es 8 jy ts 5 4 So %
* 2 eo % = a> ye “2
N “ - "819 ee PRIMARY “GROOKVIE Ry, & % \
a <2 PARK aye BP XS s
© 38 onde PLANNING ARBAC™ = <% N
4
Nog 0 Bean , ee €.° . © 2%, _ ‘SOUTH VALLEY
3 Be SURED Me ee é + f
a ee Ses 8 ae, QQ; “STREAM
P Ave
NY a BROOKVILLE ROSEDALE 147 Ave ‘
a ic Wn « oe
ae & Wor g
, i abave
“~~ . & 2 % \
s i Ss 146 DR of
Nay IDLEWILD * % J
'* PARK Wy 149m ROSEDALE ary
Ss
2% HOOK CREEK 1 of
ta WILDLIFE SANCTUARY 2 eee eee
ap@, ot
aN, . 4
* 8 «
7 i g J NORTH WOODMERE
> **. a
, 2
JFK me, 3 i
AIRPORT '
*
. )
oe
oN
OF 4
CAN
wv «+
addressing six Recovery Support Functions:
Community Planning & Capacity Building;
Economic Development; Health & Social
Services; Housing; Infrastructure; and Natural
& Cultural Resources.

The Community includes three neighborhoods:
Springfield Gardens, Brookville, Rosedale,
as well as the southern section of Laurelton
below Merrick Boulevard. To the south, the
Community Boundary is Rockaway Boulevard
and JFK Airport. The western boundary is
Baisley Boulevard, which extends north from
the Belt Parkway and curves eastward to the
intersection with Merrick Boulevard. Merrick
Boulevard serves as the northern boundary of
the Community through Springfield Gardens
and Laurelton until it reaches Laurelton
Parkway. From Laurelton Parkway, Rosedale
extends north, bounded to the east by Hook
Creek Boulevard. The southern section of
Rosedale, which includes the Idlewild Park
Preserve and Meadowmere, is also included in
the Community.

The Idlewild Watershed Communities NYRCR
Planning Committee (Committee) organized
the Community into a Primary Study Area and
Secondary Study Area to reflect different needs
and opportunities that are present in different
areas. The neighborhoods to the south of the
Belt Parkway and Sunrise Highway have been
designated as the Primary Study Area, while
the area to the north has been designated as
the Secondary Study Area. The Primary Study
Area experienced significant flooding, damage,
and destruction during Superstorm Sandy and
Hurricane Irene and is more prone to frequent
stormwater flooding.

The Community experienced tidal flooding
during Superstorm Sandy due to storm surge
that flowed through Jamaica Bay and into
the wetlands and water bodies that extend
throughout the Community. Inundation due to
tidal flooding during Superstorm Sandy ranged
from one to four feet, with the most severe
flooding occurring in low-lying areas and tidal
wetlands, including Idlewild Park Preserve.
Flood waters extended from Hook Creek nearly
as far north as the intersection of Rockaway
Boulevard and the Belt Parkway in Springfield
Gardens, to 145th Road and through Brookville
Park in Brookville, and past 147th Avenue in
Rosedale. Brookville Boulevard was washed
out with floodwaters, as were segments of
Rockaway Boulevard.

Tidal flooding from creeks and inlets, referred
to as “backwater flooding,” caused backups in
the stormwater systems in low-lying areas. The
Rosedale Pumping Station was flooded during
Superstorm Sandy, requiring reconstruction,
including replacing pump controls, sump
pumps, ventilation and heating equipment,
and compressors. The storm also resulted in
downed trees, damaged roofs, and damage to
power lines due to sustained winds estimated at
greater than 60 mph.

In comparison to Superstorm Sandy, the
impacts from Hurricane Irene in the fall of 2011
were largely a result of precipitation and wind.
Localized rainfall totals during Irene ranged
from seven to ten inches while storm tide levels
ranged from three to six feet. Maximum wind
gusts in New York City ranged from 60 to 70
mph. Stormwater flooding from Hurricane

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Irene was exacerbated due to a summer of high
precipitation and saturated soils.

The Community is vulnerable to extreme weather
events such as Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane
Irene, but it also experiences frequent stormwater
flooding on a smaller scale during high tide
events, heavy rainstorms, and nor’easters. The
Idlewild Watershed Communities are low-lying,
have a high groundwater table, are partially
built on historic wetlands, and are interwoven
with tidal wetlands.

Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene exposed
several challenges within the Community,
which the NYRCR Plan addresses. These
critical issues were identified throughout the
NYRCR Process during Planning Committee
Meetings, Public Engagement Events, and
meetings with representatives of New York
City and state agencies. These issues helped
to guide the development of the NYRCR Plan
and identification of implementable projects to
address problems faced by the Community.

In particular, the Plan addresses the need for
expansion of green infrastructure to mitigate
stormwater flooding, coordination of green
infrastructure initiatives with ongoing City storm
sewer projects, increased local capacity for
disaster recovery, support for local businesses
that provide critical services, adequate resources
and planning for local disaster recovery
organizations, and education and training to
help home and business owners better prepare
for disasters.

Executive Summary 1
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Community-Driven Process

 

In July 2014, a Committee of residents and
civic leaders from the Idlewild Watershed
Communities convened with the goal of
creating a plan to help the Community rebuild
from the damage caused by Superstorm Sandy
and prepare the area for a more resilient future.
Since that time, the Committee has worked
closely with a team of planning consultants
and representatives of the Governor’s Office
of Storm Recovery to develop this NY Rising
Community Reconstruction Plan.

The Committee created a Community Vision to
guide the NYRCR Process and ensure that the
plan was responsive to the Community’s long-
term needs to reduce flood risks and improve
disaster recovery.

Public outreach during the NYRCR Process
for the Idlewild Watershed Communities was
structured to encourage broad community
participation. Through advertisements, flyers,
and—most importantly—the Committee’s
broad network of contacts, public engagement
events were publicized broadly throughout
the Community. During public engagement
events, attendees were encouraged to review
the Committee’s process at key steps along the
way, providing feedback on the Community’s
needs and opportunities to increase resilience,
reconstruction strategies to guide project
development in support of the Community
Vision, and the projects identified by the
Committee for inclusion in the NYRCR Plan.

12 Executive Summary

 

 

Community Vision

The Idlewild Watershed Communities of Brookville, Rosedale, and Springfield Gardens are
dedicated to the creation and maintenance of resilient neighborhoods that guarantee a high
quality of life for all who live and work within them, both now and in the future. Towards this
end, our vision calls for the following:

Fully Functional Infrastructure

Communities in which our natural and manmade systems are maintained, improved, extended,
and maximized so that they are fully functional in terms of flood prevention, control, and
alleviation throughout the target Idlewild Watershed Communities of Brookville, Rosedale, and
Springfield Gardens.

Appropriate Levels of Social Supports and Services
Communities that have effective, efficient systems in place to address the needs of all of the
people, with special emphasis on our vulnerable populations.

Effective Emergency Management

Communities which, in the event of natural, manmade, and technological disasters, have in
place coordinated disaster recovery, response plans that operate effectively before, during, and
after the emergency.

 

 

Public input on the Community Vision and Proposed Projects at Public Engagement Events

 
NYRCR Plan: A Blueprint for
Implementation

 

The NYRCR Plan for the Idlewild Watershed
Communities includes an Assessment of Needs
and Opportunities to evaluate the potential for
increased resilience to flooding and extreme
weather in the short-, medium-, and long-term.
The Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
was refined through detailed analysis of the
assets and risks within the Community, analysis
of demographic and economic data, guidance
from the Committee, site visits, and input from
attendees at Public Engagement Events.

The Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
identifies areas in which the Community could
improve its resilience to major storms and
other disasters. This analysis helped to guide
the Committee in identifying Reconstruction
Strategies and Proposed and Featured Projects
that will increase the Community’s resilience.

The Committee developed Reconstruction
Strategies based on the findings of the
Assessment of Needs and Opportunities and
feedback from Public Engagement Events. The
Reconstruction Strategies represent a framework
that guided development and evaluation of the
Proposed and Featured Projects included in the
NYRCR Plan.

The key strategies that guided the NYRCR Plan
for the Idlewild Watershed Communities are:

Strategy A: Alleviate Localized
Flooding Conditions

The objective of Strategy A is to develop a
comprehensive approach to address localized
flooding in the Community that leverages
ongoing and planned stormwater infrastructure
projects conducted by City agencies, identifies
gaps in protection from flooding that are not
addressed by ongoing and planned projects,
and identifies additional projects that will
increase stormwater retention capacity of
parks and wetlands, address coastal flooding,
and expand the green infrastructure network
throughout the Community.

  

EXISTING SIDEWALK BENCH BIOSWALE/RAIN GARDEN CURB EXISTING ROAD

Rosedale Station Community Gateway Green Street

LIRR: ROSEDALE STATION CROSSWALK IMPROVEMENTS PARALLEL PARKING LIGHT POST/SIGNAGE

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy B: Strengthen the
Emergency Response Capacity of the
Community

The objective of Strategy B is to expand the ability
of existing Community Based Organizations
(CBOs) to assist in disaster preparation and
recovery by providing training and education
to local non-profit organizations, ensuring
that critical facilities have resources they
need to help vulnerable populations recover
from major storms, expanding the services
of CBOs to include disaster preparedness
and response, and increasing coordination
between local groups and the New York City
Office of Emergency Management (NYC OEM}
to increase the reach of existing educational
materials, training programs, and recovery
assistance.

   

   

CONNECT TO EXISTING DRAIN

Executive Summary 13
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Strategy C: Support Environmental
Stewardship of the Community’s
Natural and Manmade Resources

The objective of Strategy C is to lay out a plan
that gives the Community the resources it needs
to promote, support, and enforce stewardship
of the environment to foster sustainability and
assure that natural and manmade resources
can provide protections from flooding. Strategy
C enhances the environmental stewardship
of the Community by better maintaining
and improving the ecosystem of Community
parks and wetlands, supporting increased
enforcement of illegal dumping and other
threats to the health of parks, open space,
and wetlands, and expanding educational
campaigns about environmental stewardship.

Strategy D: Provide Safe and Reliable
Access to Critical Goods and Services

The objective of Strategy D is to provide for
reliable transportation, communication, and
backup power networks so that the Community
is not isolated from critical goods and services
after disasters. This objective is achieved through
Strategy D by supporting retail/commercial
districts so that businesses can quickly recover
from disasters and residents have access to
essential goods after storms, strengthening
the area’s transportation infrastructure, power
grid, and communications networks, and
strengthening key connections to critical support
services and regional shopping districts outside
of the Community.

Based on the framework provided by these
four strategies, projects evolved that addressed
the needs of and risk to Community assets.

14 Executive Summary

Proposed Projects and Featured Projects have
been assessed for their ability to mitigate future
risk, were vetted by the Planning Committee
and the public, and were categorized by their
capacity to address needs within one or more
of the Reconstruction Strategies.

Proposed Projects are projects proposed for
funding through the Community’s allotment of
Community Development Block Grant-Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding.

Featured Projects are projects and actions that
the Committee has identified as important for
the Community’s resilience and has analyzed

dasse

230TH Ave

 
 
 

ee

"aro ME®

SPRINGFIELD
PARK

JFK
AIRPORT
LEGEND

 

EAST/WEST ROUTES
e——_~—s—ROUTES IN AND OUT
eh FREQUENTLY FLOODED ROADS
FREQUENTLY FLOODED AREAS.

EXTENT OF FLOODING FROM
SUPERSTORM SANDY

 

 

 

Access to Critical Goods and Services

  
  
  
  
   
  
 
 

in depth, but has not proposed for funding
through the NYRCR Program.

Additional Resiliency Recommendations are
projects and actions the Committee would like
to highlight for further consideration.

With a fundamental focus on implementation,
the NYRCR Planning Process incorporated
extensive discussions with New York City and
State agencies to discuss project feasibility. As a
result, the projects featured in the NYRCR Plan
are supportive and complementary of ongoing
and planned projects, rather than duplicative.

~

   

cosh GREEN ACRES
MALL

 

ot
, \ SOUTH
aie be #4 4 VALLEY
/ S STREAM
(DLEWILD ie
PARK ins 149 ko
z wien et®
ww”

  

ROUTE TO SOUTH
VALLEY STREAM FLOODS

HOPPING
ate

HEAD OF BAY
The NYRCR Plan is aimed at not only addressing
short-term needs in the aftermath of Superstorm
Sandy, but also the long-term resilience of the
Community. The NYRCR Plan includes a menu
of short-term projects that can be implemented
immediately; medium-term projects that can be
implemented within two-five years; and long-
term actions that require resources beyond
the NYRCR funding allotment and are largely
addressed through planning projects and
advocacy initiatives.

Projects are not listed in order of priority.

FARMERS BD SND
Our & Betwee
GREIM STREET

(GEREN IMFRAS TOLLE
(PS 231 COMMUNITY 21S

a= bs edb

Sanna &

EWILD WAT:

Green Infrastructure Community Master Plan

Sy ROOFS, ‘oe

 
      

Strategy A: Alleviate Localized Flooding
Conditions

Al: Green Infrastructure Community Master
Plan [Proposed]

Ala: Brookville Park Pond Restoration [Proposed]

Alb: Community Gateway Green Streets

[Proposed]

Alc: Green Infrastructure Pilot Project [Proposed]

Ald: Twin Pond Park Bluebelt Enhancement
[Featured]

ete iia City
cine an

TWIN POND Ame
OLUGRERT @ESPORATION:

HROOKVILLE Ror
POND RESTORATION

CO MUNITIES

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

A2: DEP Oyster Restoration in Thurston Basin
[Featured]

A3: Coastal Management Plan [Featured]

Strategy B: Strengthen the Emergency
Response Capacity of the Community

Bla: Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan
[Proposed]

Recommendations of the
Disaster Recovery Plan

Blb: Implement
Southeast Queens
[Proposed]

Strategy C: Support Environmental
Stewardship of the Community’s Natural and
Manmade Resources

C1: Phase 1— Green Infrastructure Workforce
Training Program [Proposed]

C1: Phase 2—Idlewild Watershed Communities
Open Space Restoration Fund [Featured]

C2: Home and Business Owner Education and
Technical Assistance Program [Featured]

Strategy D: Provide Safe and Reliable Access
to Critical Goods and Services

D1: Install Backup Power Supply Systems at
Critical Facilities [Proposed]

D2: Study to Elevate Brookville Boulevard
(Snake Road) [Featured]

Executive Summary 15
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Proposed and Featured Projects

  

Strategy A slieltegyy

Alleviate Localized Flooding SSE Msn re EMT FSaY

Conditions

Response Capacity of the
oro en iba

Master Plan Plan

Plan

Community Gateway Green Streets

Green Infrastructure Pilot Project

Twin Pond Park Bluebelt
Enhancement *Featured Project

DEP Oyster Restoration in Thurston
Basin *Featured Project

Coastal Management Plan
“Featured Project

Green Infrastructure Community @ Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery

Implement Recommendations of the
Brookville Park Pond Restoration Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery

Strategy C

Support Environmental
Stewardship of the Community’s
Natural and Manmade Resources

Strategy D

Provide Safe and Reliable Access
to Critical Goods and Services

 

Phase 1: Green Infrastructure Install Backup Power Supply Systems
Workforce Training Program at Critical Facilities
C) Case hier Onan core © Study to Elevate Brookville Boulevard
‘ :
Restoration Fund *Featured Project (Snake Road) “Featured Project

Home and Business Owner
Education and Technical Assistance
Program *Featured Project

 

Additional Resiliency Recommendations

Advocate for the Construction of

Thurston Basin Park

City Purchase of Privately Owned
(Alf) Parcels on Edges of Idlewild Park

Preserve for Preservation as Wetland

Idlewild Park Preserve Culvert
Expansion

16 Executive Summary

Advocate for Idlewild Park Preserve .
©) frei Network and Overlook Blovate 47th Avenue Bridge at
estoration

. Support Rockaway Turnpike/Nassau
Qovonel for Mune ART cg (D4) Expestvoy esiion! Comsor ivy
(NYRCR Plan for Five Towns)

(s) Support for Creation of Greater JFK
IBID
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Eight Proposed and five Featured Projects included in the NYRCR Plan for the Idlewild Watershed Communities

 
   
  
     
 
  
  
 

   
    
    
   
    

      

J~ 4
2 s

© a Se, é / 0,

Z ise 2 eocccccefobesspocccccccccccccccce
€ * 428
g, -_ - NX

4 BAISLEY ay RAILROAD 4 mae?

@ x: 4

POND PARK SS oe

aa?

as
@iocusrmavor &
STATION

ALLEVIATE LOCALIZED
FLOODING

ROCKAWAY Bev

'435r ap

130TH Ave

sory gy

NASSAU

  

e
64,0
ROSEDALE

  
     

vg, - %
“ep, or St, s

“<., ROSEDALE %,
re © 4%. ‘SOUTH VALLEY

STREAM

    
  
     
  

8
a,
Oo

   

 

SUPPORT ENVIRONMENTAL
STEWARDSHIP

*PROJECT AREAS NOT DEFINED

oe"

ROS ave gy

HOOK CREEK eect
WILDLIFE SANCTUARY

  

S

NORTH ODMERE
4 RK

  

 

PROVIDE SAFE AND
RELIABLE ACCESS

STRENGTHEN EMERGENCY
RESPONSE CAPACITY

 

9 0.25 0.5

 

HEAD OF BAY

Executive Summary 17
 
 

 
Idlewild Watershed Communities

SECTION I. COMMUNITY OVERVIEW

A. Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan

The NY Rising Community Reconstruction(NYRCR}
Idlewild Watershed Communities—Springfield
Gardens, Brookville, and Rosedale— (the
Community) are primarily suburban in character,
made up of single-family and two-family homes,
with small retail/commercial districts and one
significant industrial and manufacturing district
adjacent to John F Kennedy International (JFK)
Airport. Although the residential neighborhoods
are buffered from JFK Airport by the Springfield
Gardens industrial area and the Idlewild Park
Preserve wetlands (including the Hook Creek
Wildlife Sanctuary), the presence of the airport is
frequently felt, due to low flying planes making
their approach to land.

Springfield Park, Brookville Park, and Idlewild
Park Preserve provide opportunities for both active
and passive recreation, but are also indicative
of the area’s origins as low-lying wetlands.
Idlewild Park Preserve is still predominantly a
wetland, while Springfield and Brookville Parks
both contain large ponds that serve as collection
points within the Jamaica Bay Watershed. The
Community lies within two subwatersheds of the
larger Jamaica Bay Watershed (Figure 1.1}. The
eastern portion of the Community (Rosedale and
Brookville) lies mainly within the Hook Creek-
Head of Bay subwatershed, while the western
portion (Springfield Gardens) lies mainly within
the Grassy Bay-Jamaica Bay subwatershed. The
Community is located at the southernmost point
of both subwatersheds, adjacent to Head of Bay.

20 Section |: Community Overview

Water flows downstream from northern tributaries
through water bodies in the Community, such as
Hook Creek, to reach Jamaica Bay. Retention
of stormwater upstream in Queens and Nassau
Counties is necessary to reduce downstream
flooding impacts in the Community.

The Community is predominantly suburban in
character similar to neighborhoods in eastern
Queens and parts of Nassau County, which is
directly east of Rosedale, separated by Hook
Creek. However, while most neighborhoods are
characterized by single-family and two-family
residential homes with large parks separating
neighborhoods (Figure 1.4}, the Community
also includes Rochdale Village, a large co-
operative housing facility with nearly 6,000 units,
independent power supply, and retail facilities. In
addition, the Community includes a significant
retail corridor along Merrick Boulevard at its
northernmost boundary. There are small retail/
commercial corridors along 243rd Street and
Francis Lewis Boulevard in Rosedale, South
Conduit Boulevard in Brookville, and on parts
of Farmers Boulevard, Guy F Brewer Boulevard,
and Rockaway Boulevard in Springfield Gardens.
A large segment of Springfield Gardens across
from JFK Airport is zoned for manufacturing
and is predominantly made up of industrial
uses related to the air cargo industry. All three
neighborhoods have a strong local civic presence,
with numerous active civic, neighborhood, and
religious organizations.

 

Residential Area on 229th Street, Brookville
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 1.1: Regional Watersheds

 

LEGEND

COIZT] primary PLANNING AREA
[77] SECONDARY PLANNING AREA

ELEVATION ABOVE SEA LEVEL
(SOURCE: USGS)

FLOW OF STORMWATER

 

 

 

 

  
   

»

== = ~=WATERSHED BOUNDARIES 2
deeuueensenees 10’ CONTOURS 6 50’

}

\

, ¢
\
}
[

onl 6) 00}
wb
nee 7 - woowcreen, €
we J HEAD OF BAY \
oe GRASSY BAY | 7 WATRRSHER ;
i JAMAICA BAY i 7
772 WATERSHED. 50,4 )
Creek in Springfield Park { fo Amn A )
2 coral I 1
neha rea y
( ae Prin (a ele \
SN Nt anning Ar Pk wy J
~— aX.
1 Aipon ASS SE ™
\ 10% CN
\ J > lyr
\ G itead of co VO. |
Ws ~ 7 wy
Jamaica BO? oy” 4
5 ee 7

 

| \. at

Hook Creek at 259th Street

Section |: Community Overview

21
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Idlewild Park Preserve

NYRCR Community Boundary

 

The Idlewild Watershed Communities Planning
Area (Planning Area) include the neighborhoods
of Springfield Gardens, Brookville, Rosedale,
and the southern section of Laurelton below
Merrick Boulevard (Figure 1.2). To the south, the
Community boundary is Rockaway Boulevard
and JFK Airport. The western boundary is
Baisley Boulevard, which extends north from
the Belt Parkway and curves eastward to the
intersection with Merrick Boulevard. Merrick
Boulevard serves as the northern boundary of
the Community through Springfield Gardens
and Laurelton until it reaches Laurelton Parkway.

22 Section |: Community Overview

From Laurelton Parkway, Rosedale extends north,
bounded to the east by Hook Creek Boulevard.
The southern section of Rosedale, which includes
the Idlewild Park Preserve and Meadowmere, is
also included in the Community.

The Community boundary has been divided
into a Primary Planning Area and Secondary
Planning Area to reflect different needs and
opportunities that are present in different areas.
The segment of the Community south of the
Belt Parkway and Sunrise Highway has been
designated as the Primary Planning Area, while
the area to the north has been designated as the
Secondary Planning Area. The Primary Planning

Area experienced flooding during Superstorm
Sandy and Hurricane Irene and is more prone
to frequent stormwater flooding. Therefore, the
NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) has
identified this area as one in need of projects
and programs that directly address issues
related to flooding. The Secondary Planning
Area is less likely to experience flooding,
but presents opportunities to provide critical
recovery resources to residents within the
Primary Planning Area.
Figure 1.2: Planning Area

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

   
 
 

   
   
 
  

 

 

 

Idlewild Watershed Communities
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
{2 e
* &
Nm : i ., Legend
oe Aue om, e , Oa, ve mmm mim PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
og key 315 / 128 RO te
ant * —s AK . cen ot ms om ~SECONDARY PLANNING AREA
& oo rat ym, Me ae ]
4 ms ss aeas: FS Men QUEENS EEG von
Z POND PARK. e aos ae 3 4 1, eG Se .
5 ee aot xa 24 ayy © Sty &f GE 1302 ]
af Ze » £ . S44
- | ae wee , = say. ~~, Sf & pp
y @rocusr manor 3" 4 oa /
4 STATION a 28
* oy & 2 ™~, J ’
a 2. 3
ROCKAWAY atv v4 i . . cae on !
yo sath 3 9 1
2 / Sgt WE A & i \
& Swat % LVe iil te we aie el ‘Sa,
g » B % a ey & fp
mi % 4 % Fa a g 8 oss
a a 4 % ho = we &
q %, a 9 Mave a Sy NASSAU
Nap - |
BELT routoe COUNTY
cr ScONDUTT AM = Que Sed
—
: ; «SPRINGFIELD. tas y0 a, 8 Seamer |
é = Say
seu, © fx GARDENS” SEF “ee &%
. * y Kg & em FS Alg . % 1 250s
Sey °K e @ vs & v % % 2 Pate 5 5% *
cy 2 ~ oo Te, ae p> r
\ wo & 16a ee PRIMARY  ROOKVILLES v4 wax 3% % \
~ 2D PARK & Rey ph *
: 22 smiles PLANNING AREAS. 3%
Ng Been , , Bu 4» 3%, 4)SOUTH VALLEY
af 2 2 we  . & & Y e of 4
Ni OL ee? ee. ‘ Sa ey
Ne Br BROOKVILLE ROSEDALE 147 ave s
~ By Fd me i |
Pe f a ee 14790 l
7 7 8
\, ih fT. iene \
. 5 8
By IDLEWILD # {4 2 ae i x
©, ~~ PARK % a sed ROSEDALE ey
B
2% HOOK CREEK 5 Pcie
OF WILDLIFE SANCTUARY \ grin meee
HN e, x nO
+ *
a
Y% ~ ‘ a
*, \e .
2 J NORTH WOODMERE
 ~s, 5 PARK
YW 2
JFK So. a i
AIRPORT N !
+
‘, )
2?
ee \
¢ Aone
we ,
v e's
dna
HEAD OF BAY

 

 

 

Section |: Community Overview 23
Idlewild Watershed Communities

History

 

The Idlewild Watershed Communities are located
in southeastern Queens adjacent to JFK Airport
and just west of Nassau County. The Community
is also considered to be part of the broader
region of Jamaica, which encompasses a large
segment of Southeast Queens. Historically, the
landscape within the Community included tribal
wetland and tributaries that fed into Jamaica
Bay. Before European settlers arrived, the area
now known as Jamaica is thought to have
been sparsely populated by members of Native
American Rockaway and Canarsie indigenous
peoples.' The area was first settled by the Dutch
in 1660, who were drawn to the area by several
fresh water ponds and creeks. The settlers were
able to use this network of waterways to create a
crop irrigation system which resulted in an area
dominated by farmland until the 20th century.”
The area, which was known as the Springfield
Settlement during colonial times, remained
sparsely populated through the 1800s, with
minimal municipal infrastructure such as sewers
and other utilities (Figure 1.3).

The Springfield Gardens Long Island Railroad
(LIRR) station initially opened in the 1870s
and the line was electrified in 1925, which
brought increased residential development
to the Community in the 1920s and 1930s.3
The newly constructed commuter rail network,
along with construction of major thoroughfares
such as Francis Lewis Boulevard and Sunrise
Highway, provided easier access to Manhattan
and began to change the character of the
area, as residential development boomed in
the 1920s. The area became known for its
population of working-class immigrants in the

24 Section |: Community Overview

1940s, including Italian, German, and Irish
families. In the 1950s and 1960s, the African
American population increased. More recently,
the population of Caribbean Americans has
grown, representing immigrants from Jamaica,
Haiti, and other countries of the West Indies. #5

New York City began construction of Idlewild
Airport in the spring of 1942.¢ The airport
was named for a resort and golf course which
previously occupied the area. Initially planned
to cover 1,000 acres of filled wetland, the
airport ultimately grew to cover nearly 5,000

acres. Idlewild Airport was rededicated as John
F Kennedy International Airport in December
1963, one month after the  President’s
assassination. The presence of JFK Airport is
constantly felt within the Community, from low-
flying planes making their descent towards
the runways, to the many air cargo-related
businesses located in the Springfield Gardens
industrial area, and the environmental threats
faced by the Idlewild Park Preserve due to
air traffic.

Figure 1.3: Map of New York Bay and Harbor and the Environs, 1844

Se al ie “ “ai

Manhattan

 

wanes

 

i a
7
: ag
P
ew :
i
Brooklyn...
‘ 4
LEGEND aes °
[| wettano i a3
[7] FARMLAND
[2S] woonen area

 

 

 

Queens

4
ov ae iE 4 a or

Secondary ———#
Planning Area

(nana
Primary ——“a&, 4
Planning ‘Area mm! : \
i
‘

Jamaica Bay

Atlantic Ocean

N
2 a |
a 1 2 Ami

Source: © Cartography Associates, David Rumsey Collection
Demographic Profile

 

According to the 2010 Census, there were
nearly 95,000 people living in over 31,000
households in the Community. As shown in
Table 1.1, the median household income in the
Community is nearly $65,000 per year, which

Figure 1.4: Land Use

¥
4
% BAISLEY es
q POND PARK,
vs

Economic

Heat ann soca

i NATURAL AND CULTURAL JFK
AIRPORT

Cnrrastructure

wou strit

HOUSING

VACANT

1-2 FAMILY
MULTI-FAMILY WALK-UP

MULTI-FAMILY ELEVATOR

 

 

  
   
     
 

is 18.2% greater than Queens County and
28.8% greater than New York City as a whole.
The Community also has a relatively high rate
of homeownership as compared to Queens
County and the City with more than half of all
housing units owner-occupied. However, the

»,
Me
8
‘ep

NASSAU
COUNTY

$OSeOae wo

NORTH WOODMERE

Zz

ae eA
HEAD OF BAY 0 0.25 05 4 mi

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

median home value is 17.6% less than New
York City—approximately $425,000.’

Housing trends in the Community indicate that
the area was heavily impacted by depreciation
and foreclosures following the recession in
2007-2009. Further, home values have yet to
recover in the Community. The median home
price per square foot within the Community
has depreciated by nearly 40% over the last
five years, even as median prices in Queens
County have appreciated by more than 11%.8
Meanwhile, the percentage of foreclosures is
greater within the Community than in Queens
County. According to 2010 data released by
the Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban
Policy, 18.7% of all housing units within the
Community are affordable to low or moderate-
income residents.? These affordable units are
primarily concentrated in the northwest portion
of the Community with 97% of all affordable
units located within Rochdale Village, a mixed-
use cooperative built in 1962.

According to 2010 U.S. Census data, more
than 86% of the population in the Community
identifies as Black orAfrican American. Moreover,
78% of residents report speaking only English.
After English, the next most common languages
spoken are other Indo-European languages
and Spanish. However, of residents who speak
more than just English, the vast majority identify
as speaking English well or very well. The
median age of 37.8 is roughly equivalent to
the median age in Queens County, but older
than New York City as a whole. More than 23%
of the population is under the age of 18, while
nearly 12% is over the age of 65. A Naturally
Occurring Retirement Community (NORC) was

Section |: Community Overview 25
Idlewild Watershed Communities

established at Rochdale Village to provide social
services to elderly residents at Rochdale Village.
A NORC is characterized by a concentration of
residents over 65 and health and social service
assets that are easily accessible to an aging
population.’ Jamaica Service Program for
Older Adults (JSPOA) operates senior centers
and provides social services to elderly residents
throughout Southeast Queens. JSPOA also
advocates for the creation of additional NORCs
to provide localized support services.

As of 2011, there were approximately 43,000
employed residents in the Community. The vast
majority—about 97% of employed residents—
are employed outside of the Community, while
just over 2% of residents are employed at JFK
Airport.'' Nearly half of employed residents
commute to work by car, while less than
40% take public transit. Reliance on cars for
commuting calls attention to the importance of
reliable evacuation routes in the event of severe
weather or flooding. Additionally, since there
are no subway stops within the Community
and limited service by the Long Island Railroad
(LIRR), reliable bus service becomes a critical
connection to the rest of the city—for economic
opportunities, social networks, and access
to high ground during flood events. Bus
connections are especially vital for residents
who do not own cars or in the event that cars
are damaged by flooding.

Residents experience long commute times,
with more than half of employed residents
spending over 45 minutes commuting one-
way (daily). Of the more than 15,000 jobs
within the Community, Transportation and
Warehousing is the largest industry. Less than

26 Section |: Community Overview

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1.1: _Demographic Profile
Idlewild Queens County | New York City
Watershed
Communities
Demographics
Population 92,776 2,230,722 8,175,133
Median Age 37.3 37.2 35.5
Population <18 years of age 23.7% 20.7% 21.6%
Population >65 12.2% 12.9% 12.1%
Economics
Median Household Income $68,990 $56,780 $51,865
Pct. of Household Incomes >$75,000 46.4% 37.2% 35.4%
Unemployment Rate 7.8% 8.7%
Housing
Median Home Value $426,325 $462,800 $501,500
Percent Owner-Occupied 51.1% 40.2% 28.6%

 

 

 

 

 

Source: Esri Community Analyst; U.S. Census Bureau

 

7% of workers within the Community are also
residents of the Springfield Gardens, Brookville,

or Rosedale neighborhoods.

 
B. Description of Storm Damage

Superstorm Sandy

 

On October 29, 2012, Superstorm Sandy made
landfall in Brigantine, New Jersey and hit the
New York Metropolitan Region directly, causing
flooding and power outages in the Idlewild
Watershed Communities (Figure 1.5}. Although
Superstorm Sandy was no longer categorized
as a hurricane when it made landfall in New
Jersey, it was still a large and dangerous storm
that brought damaging winds and high tidal
surges. The severity of Superstorm Sandy’s
impact was made more extreme by four
uncommon factors:

= The storm’s landfall in the New York City
area coincided with a “spring” tide—a
high tide that occurs during a full moon;

«The storm was quite large, extending
approximately 1,000 miles in diameter,
which contributed to an elevated storm
surge; and

= Superstorm Sandy followed an unusual
path, tracking from the east rather than the
south, leading to a direct hit on the New
York Metropolitan Area, instead of veering
eastward into the Atlantic Ocean.

Flooding in the Community during Superstorm
Sandy resulted largely from tidal storm surge
that flowed into Jamaica Bay and through Hook
Creek in a northerly direction through its marshes
and tidally influenced streams, overflowing
stream banks in areas where the elevation was
lower than the storm surge levels of three to six
feet.'? A high water mark was recorded at Head

of Bay at an elevation of 10.60 feet above sea
level or approximately 4.6 feet above ground
level. Inundation in the Community ranged from
one to four feet, with the most severe flooding
in low-lying areas and tidal wetlands, including
Idlewild Park Preserve.'* Flood waters covered
the runways at JFK Airport and extended
from Hook Creek nearly as far north as the
intersection of Rockaway Boulevard and the
Belt Parkway in Springfield Gardens, to 145th
Road and through Brookville Park in Brookville,
and past 147th Avenue in Rosedale. Brookville
Boulevard was washed out with floodwaters, as
were segments of Rockaway Boulevard.'°

Tidal flooding from creeks and inlets, referred
to as “backwater flooding,” caused backups
of the stormwater system in low-lying areas.
Further, much of the land in the Community is
impervious (approximately 83%),"° as is much
of the land upstream in the Hook Creek/Head
of Bay watershed. The lack of permeability
upstream leads to runoff that collects in low-
lying areas. As a result, rainwater runoff caused
overflows of the stormwater system and led to
flooding in areas that were beyond the range
of the tidal flooding. Within the Community,
approximately 30 complaints of sewer
issues were reported to New York City’s 311
Reporting System following Superstorm Sandy,
ranging from clogged catch basins, raised or
overflowing manholes and flooding, to sewer
backups. The Rosedale Pumping Station was
flooded during Superstorm Sandy, requiring
reconstruction, including replacing pump

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

controls, sump pumps, ventilation and heating
equipment, and compressors.

Although the primary cause of damage from
Superstorm Sandy was flooding, the storm
also resulted in downed trees, damaged roofs,
and damaged power lines in the Community.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) reported that the
sustained winds were estimated at greater than
60 mph.” The broad wind field extended for
hundreds of miles from the center, bringing
damaging wind gusts and coastal surges.
According to New York City’s 311 database,
more than 720 trees were reported as damaged,
uprooted or fallen as a result of Superstorm
Sandy within the Primary Study Area.'8

Section |: Community Overview 27
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Idlewild Watershed Communities

Figure 1.5: Superstorm Sandy Impacts NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 
 
   
         
     
     
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
   

Nig é i Legend
oe vont “Qe, & vf hea Phe vet et met mt PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
aasnt Q td a rn 4 1 = = es & SECONDARY PLANNING AREA
2 a f fiz
a aN . * s 7
Ea Ga: s ~ &, SS 5 Mob a QUEENS She vel STORM SURGE
6 ae £ & "24g Say, &f GE 1302
© < . Sf
a oS Mae ~~. YUE Pant OUTFLOW TO NEIGHBORHOODS
@ ocust manor © & ~, £ os /
STATION oa ES) = ve ,
oe ey zl '
& 6
ROCKAWAY atva TS Sap ! —=—=—= = EXTENT OF FLOODING
ra .
e &
: g on ay ge se | “ep INUNDATION AREA
= s f° 6S v a %
? fo x ° SS <
30TH Ave 4g "S48 £8 y, £ | 1-3 FEET
3 z -
a Sa NASSAU
™ 3-6 FEET
e * 1 county
s 13 a
>6 FEET
— wef =
JSPRINGFIELD.
os
&
A
2
< fs
3

a
‘

ROSEDALE gp

 

ORTH WOODMERE
PARK

 

IN.
Le weaiiintooes JFK
AIRPORT

 

 

 

 

 

28 Section |: Community Overview
Hurricane Irene

 

In comparison to Superstorm Sandy, the impacts
from Hurricane Irene were largely a result of
precipitation and wind. On August 28, 2011,
Hurricane lrene made landfall in New York City
near Coney Island. While it was downgraded
to a tropical storm, it produced heavy damage
over much of New York City due to flooding
from substantial rainfall totals, storm surge
in coastal areas, and wind gusts in excess of
hurricane force. Localized rainfall totals during
Irene ranged from 7 to 10 inches!? while storm
tide levels ranged from 3 to 6 feet.2° Maximum
wind gusts in New York City ranged from 60
to 70 mph, but New York City escaped severe
wind-related damage because lrene’s strongest
winds were over water east of the path’s center.
However, Hurricane Irene followed a summer
of high precipitation and saturated soils, which
exacerbated stormwater runoff and brought
down trees.?' Power outages were widespread in
the Borough of Queens. Approximately 92,368
Con Edison customers in the City were reported
without power on November 1, 2012—three
days after the storm.??

The Community is vulnerable to major flooding
during large precipitation events, which bring
greater volumes of rainfall than what occurred
during Superstorm Sandy. This was evident
during Hurricane Irene, which brought more
than three times the rainfall of Superstorm
Sandy.?? Rainfall during Hurricane Irene caused
stormwater flooding in low-lying areas, covered
the tidal wetlands, overtopped Brookville
Boulevard, and extended in some areas as far
north as 147th Avenue.

L —

— ml

 

Flooding of Brookville Boulevard in the Idlewild Park Preserve Area

Recurring Flooding

 

Although Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane
Irene were uniquely powerful events, the
sources and causes of flooding observed during
Superstorm Sandy occur frequently (albeit on a
smaller scale) during high tide events, heavy
rainstorms, and nor’easters. The Idlewild
Watershed Communities are low-lying, have a
high groundwater table, are partially built on
historic wetlands, and are interwoven with tidal
wetlands (Figure 1.6}. Due to the low elevation
of the Community and its proximity to tidal
marshes, the shoreline provides incomplete
protection against high levels of tidal flooding.
Inundation from tidal waters occurs in some
areas of the Community on a regular basis
during spring tides.

Precipitation accompanied by everyday high
tides in low-lying areas generates recurring

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Source: NY Daily News

flooding of many local roads where the existing
stormwater system has inadequate capacity or
is not operating properly, as well as where the
sewer system is not yet built out. Such localized
stormwater flooding may result from a lack
of stormwater infrastructure, with peak flows
exacerbated by impervious coverage upstream
and low-lying areas near the shoreline.

Capturing stormwater upstream is necessary
to minimize peak stormwater flows entering
the stormwater infrastructure system in the
Community. To help reduce the impact of water
entering the stormwater system, the New York
City Department of Environmental Protection
(NYC DEP) is beginning to install Bluebelt Best
Management Practices (BMPs} in Springfield
Park to detain stormwater upstream which
would prevent flooding. The Bluebelt BMP is
part of a larger capital infrastructure plan for
Southeast Queens which includes installation of

Section |: Community Overview 29
Idlewild Watershed Communities

storm sewers and green streets throughout the
Community.

Since 2002, NYC DEP has spent $538 million
to construct 84 miles of new storm sewers in
Southeast Queens. The current four-year capital
budget allocated $134 million to construct
24 miles of additional new storm sewers in
Southeast Queens and the future capital budget
will allocate additional funding. Construction
has focused on major trunk lines, which are
nearly complete. Now the focus will shift to
building out lines on residential and commercial
streets that feed into the trunk lines. Despite this
progress, a complete sewer system build out is
expected to take as long as 20 years. Therefore,
NYC DEP is investigating smaller, targeted
drainage projects to resolve specific flooding
“hotspots,” or areas of recurring flooding.
However, the Community will remain vulnerable
to localized flooding until these improvements
are completed.

Further, recurring flooding is exacerbated by
the high groundwater table, which prevents
stormwater from infiltrating into soils. The
groundwater table is less than three feet in
depth in approximately 15% (571 acres) of the
Community, of which approximately 8% (264
acres) is less than one foot below the surface.
The U.S. Geological Survey classifies these
soils as “very frequently flooded” or “frequently
ponded.”?5 Sewer backups, basement flooding,
and flooding of driveways and yards at lower
grade than the roadways occurs routinely,
especially when the Community receives greater
than 1.5 inches of rain in one hour. To remedy
this issue, NYC DEP has begun installing
reverse seepage basin pilot projects in areas

30 Section |: Community Overview

with high groundwater that connect to existing
sewer lines to drain groundwater via the sewer
system. These pilot projects are designed to test
the effectiveness of reverse seepage basins and
identify suitable locations based on geotechnical
constraints and engineering feasibility (i.e.,
they need to be installed in locations with
steep enough slopes for a gravity-driven sewer
system).

Figure 1.6:

  
     

Recurring flooding is expected to increase as a
result of climate change, which is anticipated
to result in a continued rise in sea levels and
increased frequency of extreme events such as
high wind-induced surges. Increasing resilience
against tidal flow is thus a key component of
improving the Community’s overall resilience.

Low Lying Areas and High Water Table Contribute to Recurring Flooding

 

 

7
rs
Q
. Ge <
g. 2
le % = $ gl
baer % 2 at
| % % £ £|
° é
j "8, Sy & § j NASSAU
a
pe enon ve BED ER, : Sq! COUNTY
ma } "Say, ‘SUNRISE Hi +
a, *
SN SPRINGFIELD eaegt SA |
wf “GARDENS P & 2% t
a te
a é "Sp = %, \ oO
‘. Wai BROOKVILLE ¢ ROSEDALE, POUTH VALLEY
§
~“, % \ STREAM
N 147 avE s
.
‘“. 1
NY \
~ z .
~. % J
a © cA
Mie ee Fe
ey aa
Pn os
To
JEK NS
AIRPORT N LEGEND
‘\ saan 10’ CONTOURS
st Ss ELEVATION ABOVE SEA LEVEL
2 - {SOURCE: USGS}
Fe N CURRENT WETLANDS
° _~ *
* ZN. NOAA HISTORIC WETLANDS|
BS
ms WATER TABLE LESS THAN
9’ FROM GROUND LEVEL

 

 

 
C. Critical Issues

Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene exposed
several challenges within the Community that
this NYRCR Plan addresses. These critical
issues, which can be categorized by the six
Recovery Support Functions described below,
were identified throughout the NYRCR Process
during Planning Committee Meetings, Public
Engagement Events, and meetings with
representatives of New York City agencies.
These issues helped to guide the development
of the NYRCR Plan and informed the selection
of Proposed and Featured Projects to address
key issues faced by the Community.

The following critical issues were identified
during Planning Committee Meetings, Public
Engagement Events, and through meetings with
relevant agencies.

   

Latter Rain Christian Fellowship, Springfield Gardens

Community Planning and Capacity
Building

 

Community Planning and Capacity Building
refers to the ability of organizations within
the Community to organize, plan, manage,
and implement recovery strategies. This
Recovery Support Function includes the role of
local municipalities in improving emergency
preparedness, communications capacity during
a disaster, collaboration between disaster
recovery organizations, and the importance of
resilience as an objective in planning processes.

Critical Issues

«There is a large population of seniors
in the Community, many of whom live
in single-family homes in areas that are
prone to flooding. These residents may

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

lack the resources to age in place while
upgrading their homes to withstand future
flooding. Many seniors in the Community
are also at greater risk during extreme
weather due to a lack of adequate
transportation or social networks.

There is a general lack of homeowner/
tenant education to teach residents about
flood protection, tenant advocacy to ensure
that landlords are properly maintaining
their property, and strategies to work with
insurance companies.

Community members feel that designated
evacuation centers and shelters are too far
from the Community (e.g. York College},
especially for residents who do not have
cars or access to reliable transportation.

Section |: Community Overview 31
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Economic Development

 

Sustainable economic developmentthat provides
jobs and important services for local residents
depends upon the ability of the Community’s
key retail and commercial corridors to recover
after major disasters. Economic Development
is important in the Community for three key
reasons. First, businesses that are able to
recover quickly after disasters are more likely
to keep their doors open in the future. Second,
it businesses are closed for extended periods
of time, employees will suffer from lost wages,
even as they struggle to recover themselves.
Third, businesses provide important services
that residents need so that they can also
quickly recover.

Critical Issues

«There is leakage of retail spending due
to residents traveling outside of the
Community (e.g., Nassau County) to
purchase everyday goods and services.
Retail leakage limits the potential for
economic development within the
Community.

«= Supporting the health and viability of mom
and pop neighborhood clusters is needed.

= There is limited retail diversity within
the Community, forcing residents to travel
to outside neighborhoods to meet their
daily needs.

ey

Health and Social Services

 

Health and Social Service organizations provide
critical resources to the Community, especially
services for socially vulnerable populations.
Medical facilities, senior centers, religious
institutions, and non-profit organizations
provide resources for the entire Community, but
are even more important to the well-being and
ability to recover from disasters for vulnerable
populations, such as people with disabilities,
low-income populations, those with limited
English proficiency, and the elderly.

Critical Issues

« First responders require adequate
resources and funding to communicate
and coordinate in the event of any type
of disaster.

«The presence of industrial neighborhoods
and JFK Airport in close proximity
to residential neighborhoods causes
disproportionate environmental burden on
the Community.

its .i a.

rea

TEP eprint
_ ms a
bal al

=
B
eel a a

 

Springfield Gardens Industrial Area at 175th Street

32 Section |: Community Overview
Housing

 

Housing refers to individual assets such as
senior homes, multifamily housing, and
affordable housing facilities, but also refers
to residential neighborhoods that are at high
or severe risk in the event of future storms
like Superstorm Sandy. Neighborhoods in the
Community that were impacted by Superstorm
Sandy and Hurricane Irene continue to be
at risk of flooding due to storm surge and
stormwater backups. Homeowners in these
same neighborhoods are also facing significant
increases in flood insurance rates, which pose a
threat to neighborhood stability.

 

Single-family Homes on 225th Street, Brookville

Critical Issues

= Over 84% of homes within the Planning
Area were built prior to 1983 when flood-
resistance standards were added to the
New York City Building Code. As a result,
many older homes may still be in need of
floodproofing building retrofits.

- As property owners pass on increasing
flood insurance premiums or floodproofing
costs to rental tenants in the form of rent
increases, additional households in the
Community may become rent burdened if
additional affordable rental housing is not
made available.

«= — Although the Community has a high
homeownership rate, recent decreases
in home sale prices has raised concerns
among homeowners over depreciation of
home values.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Infrastructure

 

Infrastructure refers to assets that are identified
for restoration, repair, and management
of essential services, such as_ stormwater
systems, transportation networks, and coastal
defenses. While some _ infrastructure issues
can be addressed by the NYRCR Plan for the
Community, other projects will require additional
study, significant regional coordination, and
greater capital investment.

Critical Issues

« Many streets are in disrepair or are not
properly graded, therefore heavy rains
cause frequent flooding and ponding.

«Since no subways serve the Community,
bus routes provide a critical transit link
for residents and workers in the area.
Reliable bus routes provide an important
connection for local residents, especially
those who do not own cars or in the event
that cars are damaged by severe flooding.

= Several large capital projects are underway
or planned by NYC DEP and New York City
Department of Transportation (NYC DOT}.
More information is needed regarding the
impact new or upgraded storm sewers will
have on frequent stormwater flooding.

« The Rosedale Pumping Station is
completely below grade, with the exception
of some ventilation equipment housed in
an onsite brick structure. Failure of the
Rosedale Pumping Station would affect
an area of approximately 990 acres with
a population of 17,683. According to
the NYC Wastewater Resiliency Plan, “the
critical flood elevation would inundate the

Section |: Community Overview 33
Idlewild Watershed Communities

area surrounding the facility with over 4
feet of water. This would damage electrical
controls and the non-submersible pump
motors. The Rosedale Pumping Station
receives flow from another pumping
station. Therefore loss of function at
Rosedale increases the vulnerability of an
additional pumping station.” The pumping
station requires hardening measures

to protect against future storm events,
including elevating the electrical equipment
and pump motors, and constructing a
new building, at an estimated cost of
$9,943,000.

Natural and Cultural Resources

 

Natural

and Cultural Resources address

the management of natural and cultural
resources from a risk reduction and economic
development perspective.

Critical Issues

Due to the expansion of JFK Airport,
trees are being removed from Idlewild
Park Preserve per Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) vision regulations,
contrary to the critical issue of improving
the health of the Idlewild Park Preserve to
maximize stormwater storage capacity.

Existing ponds lack adequate capacity for
stormwater capture, an issue which NYC
DEP is working on through Bluebelt and
green infrastructure projects.

Development on historic wetlands and fill
reduces the water storage capacity of soils,
leading to increased flooding, especially in
areas where the water table is high.

Preserving the integrity of existing wetland
systems and connectivity to the Jamaica
Bay ecosystem are critical to buffering the
impacts of tidal flooding.

 

Clogged Catch Basin at Hook Creek Boulevard, Rosedale

34 Section |: Community Overview

Brookville Park Pond
D. Community Vision

The Idlewild Watershed Communities of
Brookville, Rosedale, and Springfield Gardens
are dedicated to the creation and maintenance
of resilient neighborhoods that guarantee a high
quality of life for all who live and work within
them, both now and in the future. Towards this
end, our vision calls for the following:

Fully Functional Infrastructure

Communities in which our natural and
manmade systems are maintained, improved,
extended, and maximized so that they are
fully functional in terms of flood prevention,
control, and alleviation throughout the target
Idlewild Watershed Communities of Brookville,
Rosedale, and Springfield Gardens.

Appropriate Levels of Social Supports
and Services

Communities that have effective, efficient
systems in place to address the needs of alll
of the people, with special emphasis on our
vulnerable populations.

Effective Emergency Management

Communities which, in the event of natural,
manmade, and technological disasters, have in
place coordinated disaster recovery, response
plans that operate effectively before, during,
and after the emergency.

 

Visioning Board at the first Public Engagement Event

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 1.7: Community Vision Word Cloud

    

aha Hines 2. aE g
: ldrz2 2 maiygotaracter
i bdbe We 2S 5 etommunity
nigh *S a
i  —
soo — =), css
iS =e es = maintained ea mts
E i = Isto = 4 eammunit
= 3.2 a4 —= = t A — =2
MIC" setex 3 90!l(0!SEeqnomic *
bye "2 Families pmycigh = love
2

 

Community Feedback at Public Engagement Events

Section |: Community Overview 35
Idlewild Watershed Communities

E. Relationship to Existing Plans/Studies

Multiple regional projects that impact the
wetlands of Jamaica Bay or storm surge
response that would protect the airport or other
communities in Nassau County have been
evaluated and assessed to ensure thatthe NYRCR
Plan for the Community does not duplicate or
conflict with other efforts. Additionally, there
are several ongoing or planned capital projects
within the Community that could provide
some benefit from stormwater flooding and
other issues.

The most significant current and proposed
projects, such as installation of storm sewers
by NYC DEP and construction of the Springfield
Bluebelt by New York City Economic Development
Corporation (NYC EDC) will impact the
proposed reconstruction strategies developed
through the NYRCR planning process.

Noted regional initiatives and organizations
reviewed or engaged through this process
include (Figure 1.8):

= City of New York, State of New York, and
Federal agencies,

= New York City Special Initiative for
Rebuilding and Resiliency (SIRR),

«= U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, North
Atlantic Coast Comprehensive Study,

« U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development Sandy Rebuilding Task Force,
Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Strategy, and

= NYC Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program.

36 Section |: Community Overview

List of Existing Projects

 

There are a_ significant number of plans,
policies, procedures, and resources that address
the existing conditions, regulatory frameworks,
Community goals and issues, and resiliency
opportunities in the Community, including
approximately $175 million worth of storm
sewer infrastructure upgrades currently being
undertaken by NYC DEP These resources have
been produced by a variety of stakeholders
including public agencies at all levels (Federal,
State, and City), regional planning groups,
nonprofit organizations, academic institutions,
and Community stakeholders. Reconstruction
strategies and projects included in the NYRCR
Plan recognize the planning work completed
to date in the region and are compatible with
and complementary of these other efforts
(Figure 1.9).

NYRCR Projects

NYRCR Plan: The Five Towns

The NYRCR Plan for The Five Towns includes
a Proposed Project which would fund the
Rockaway —_ Turnpike/Nassau Expressway
Resilience Corridor Study. This study would fund
a regional study of flood protection alternatives
along Rockaway Turnpike at Hook and Motts
Creeks and extending northwest along Thurston
Basin adjacent to Rosedale and Brookville. The
scope of this regional action plan includes the
following objectives:

= Analyze the construction of floodgates
and elevation of Rockaway Turnpike and
Nassau Expressway to prevent tidal surge
from inundating adjacent commercial
properties and surrounding communities
while also protecting critical evacuation
routes from flooding.

 

Springfield Gardens Bluebelt Construction (Expected Completion: Spring 2015)
"Conduct a traffic management study to
improve traffic and congestion along
Rockaway Turnpike and the Nassau
Expressway. These roadways are
subject to intense congestion during
normal conditions and poor traffic flow
poses additional risk in the event of
an evacuation.

» Study opportunities for economic
development in the retail/commercial
zones along Rockaway Turnpike and the
Nassau Expressway corridors to improve
the economic resilience of the area.

City-wide Initiatives

PlaNYC: A Stronger, More Resilient New York
(SIRR Report)

PlaNYC: A Stronger, More Resilient New York
(SIRR Report} was produced by former Mayor
Michael Bloomberg’s Special Initiative for
Rebuilding and Resiliency (SIRR} and is a nearly
$20 billion plan that provides a framework for
providing greater coastal protections, more
resilient infrastructure systems, and more
responsive municipal services. The goal of the
report is to provide strategies that will help New
York City adapt to the impacts of climate change
and ensure that the City is better prepared to
recover from disasters such as Superstorm
Sandy. The report provides a list of initiatives
for increasing resiliency in New York City in the
following categories:

«Coastal Protection,
= Buildings,
«= Critical Infrastructure, and

= Community and Economic Recovery.

In particular, the NYRCR Plan for the Idlewild
Watershed Communities would be impacted
by two proposals. The call for the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE) to develop an
implementation plan to mitigate inundation
risks through Rockaway Inlet, exploring a
surge barrier and alternative measures would
benefit the Community by limiting storm surge
that enters Jamaica Bay through the Rockaway
Inlet. The proposal to call on and work with
the USACE to complete existing studies of the
Rockaway Peninsula and implement coastal
protection projects would prevent storm surge
from overtopping the Rockaway Peninsula—
as occurred during Superstorm Sandy—
passing through Jamaica Bay, and inundating
the Community.

New York City Department of City
Planning Initiatives

The New York City Comprehensive Waterfront
Plan—Vision 2020

The New York City Comprehensive Waterfront
Plan—Vision 2020 (CWP) is an analysis and
overall vision for New York City’s 520 miles
of shoreline. It includes a strategic framework
for the City’s waterfront, short- and long-term
strategies, and is used to guide land and water
use decisions. Priorities in the plan focus on
expanding public access, supporting the working
waterfront, improving water quality, restoring
the ecology of the waterfront, enhancing the
Blue Network (the waterways between the five
boroughs), and increasing the resiliency of
the City in respect to climate change and sea-
level rise.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Recommendations for Idlewild Park Preserve in
the CWP include:

* Advance park master plan to enhance
public access including an environmental
education center.

= Explore opportunities for an additional
human-powered boat launch based on the
criteria described in the Citywide Strategy.

The New York City Waterfront Revitalization
Program

The New York City Waterfront Revitalization
Program (WRP} is the city’s principal coastal
management tool, and implements the CWP. It
establishes the City’s policies for development
and use of the waterfront, and provides the
framework for evaluating the consistency of all
discretionary actions in the coastal area. When
a proposed project is located in the City’s
designated waterfront area, and it requires a
local, state, or federal discretionary action, a
determination of the project’s consistency with
the policies and intent of the WRP must be made
before the project can move forward.

Urban Waterfront Adaptive Strategies

The Urban Waterfront Adaptive Strategies
(UWAS) report, prepared by the New York
City Department of City Planning, provides
a systematic assessment of the coastal flood
hazards from climate change and sea-level rise
that face New York City. The UWAS lays out
a risk-based, flexible process for identifying,
evaluating and implementing _ potential
coastal protection strategies. It recognizes that
waterfronts vary, and may require a range
of strategies at different scales. The report
also identifies a range of potential adaptive

Section |: Community Overview 37
Idlewild Watershed Communities

strategies, and analyzes each for their ability to
protect waterfront communities.

Designing for Flood Risk

Designing for Flood Risk identifies key principles
to guide the design of new buildings in flood
zones so that construction will be more resilient
to the effects of climate change and coastal flood
events. Recognizing the distinct character and
needs of higher-density urban environments,
the report provides recommendations for
how regulations and individual project design
can incorporate these principles. The study
informed the New York City Department of City
Planning’s (NYC DCP) Flood Resilience Zoning
text amendment adopted by the City Council
in 2013.

Retrofitting Buildings for Flood Risk

This document, prepared by the NYC
Department of City Planning in 2014 provides
guidance to property owners on how to retrofit
their buildings in accordance with applicable
Federal, State and City regulations relating to
flood risk. The report provides homeowners with
measures they can take to meet these requirements
and make their buildings more resilient to
coastal flood risks. Solutions address building
and mechanical equipment elevation, freeboard
requirements, alternative uses of ground floor
space, and parking issues. These guidelines
are provided for a wide range building types
found in New York City.

Federal Initiatives

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Atlantic
Coast of New York, East Rockaway Inlet to

38 Section |: Community Overview

Rockaway Inlet and Jamaica Bay Coastal
Storm Risk Management Feasibility Study

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE}, in
partnership with the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC}, is
carrying out the Atlantic Coast of New York,
East Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway Inlet and
Jamaica Bay Coastal Storm Risk Management
Feasibility Study which is assessing the feasibility
of coastal storm risk management alternatives
to be implemented within Jamaica Bay. This
larger study area includes the entire Rockaway
peninsula as well as back bay communities
around Jamaica Bay. The study aims to
improve community resiliency by reducing the
vulnerability of back bay communities to storm
surge impacts, enhancing the natural storm
surge buffers, and reducing coastal risk. The
USACE is evaluating a variety of measures to
reduce coastal storm risks, such as hurricane
storm surge barriers, local flood gates at
inlets, flood walls or levees, and nature based
features (e.g., green infrastructure and living
shorelines). The USACE is currently screening
and developing different combinations of risk
management alternatives, which will be shared
with the community in late 2014. The short
list will ultimately be narrowed down to one
alternative for implementation.

Special Purpose Plans that Impact the
Community

Eastern Queens Alliance White Paper: A
Comprehensive Plan—Maximizing Quality of
Life in Southeast Queens

In 2006, Eastern Queens Alliance (EQA)
released a comprehensive plan for the area
that included recommendations for:

« Economic, Political, Social and Cultural
Environment,

« Crowding, Aesthetics, Zoning, and Control,

» — Infrastructure, Public Safety, and Group
Residential Facilities,

= Environment and Health, and

= Open Space, Parks, and Recreation.

The Eastern Queens Alliance White Paper
does not directly address resilience. While the
NYRCR Plan builds upon recommendations
that relate to economic development, housing,
and community planning, the NYRCR Plan also
presents an opportunity to expand the planning
work that community groups have conducted in
the past.

JFK Airport

JFK Best Management Plan (June 2009,
revised August 2010)

The JFK Best Management Plan was
produced to assist JFK Airport’s compliance
with the New York State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (SPDES}, which regulates
the management of stormwater runoff quality.
The JFK Best Management Plan identifies
stormwater management strategies currently
in use at JFK Airport and identifies additional
best management practices that could reduce
or eliminate pollutants entering the stormwater
drainage system. The JFK Best Management Plan
has been reviewed to determine the impact that
implementation of best management practices
could have on surrounding neighborhoods and
the Idlewild Park Preserve.

Rehabilitation of Runway 4L-22R
In the spring of 2014, the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) approved a plan by the Port
Authority of New York and New Jersey (PANYNJ)}
to extend runway 4L-22R at JFK Airport. The
extension would increase capacity of the runway
and brings it nearly 800 feet closer to Idlewild
Park Preserve. FAA regulations have mandated
that the New York City Department of Parks
and Recreation (NYC DPR) to remove trees
in the Park Preserve to comply with the plan.
Residents of Southeast Queens have expressed
concerns that the extension will exacerbate
noise pollution, environmental impacts, and
health impacts caused by low-flying planes,
while tree removal could negatively impact
stormwater flooding.?’

NYC EDC JFK Development Site RFP

As of December 2014, NYC EDC is soliciting
proposals to develop a 180,000 ff? parcel
adjacent to JFK Airport on Rockaway Boulevard.
The objective is for the site to be developed for
an airport-compatible use, such as air cargo or
other airport-related industrial use.78 Although
proximity JFK Airport and other air cargo uses is
one key factor of this project, the site in question
is also in near proximity to Thurston Basin and
is directly across Rockaway Boulevard from
the Idlewild Park Preserve. Development in this
location could represent a missed opportunity
to link the wetlands in the Idlewild Park
Preserve with a broader network of stormwater
management facilities.

Ongoing NYC Projects

There are a number of New York City capital
projects that are either planned or in progress
that will impact stormwater flooding in the
Community. These projects are being undertaken
by a variety of New York City agencies, including
the Department of Transportation (NYC

DOT}, Economic Development Corporation
(NYC EDC}, the Department of Design and
Construction (NYC DDC}, the Department
of Environmental Protection (NYC DEP}, and
the Department of City Planning (NYC DCP}.
Brookville Blvd and Edgewood Triangle (DOT
and DEP}:

: Brookville Area Installation of Storm,
Sanitary and Combined Sewers (NYC
DOT}

« Rosedale Area Street Reconstruction (NYC
DOT)

«Springfield Gardens Area Street
Reconstruction and Replacement (NYC
EDC)

«Proposed Greater JFK IBID (NYC EDC}

¢ Conduit Ave

JFK Airport

 

C J PROPOSED GREATER JFK IBID
DISTRICT BOUNDARY

-—o Miles
a 0.28 as o

 

 

 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Edgewood Triangle Reconstruction Plan
(NYC DDC}

Rosedale Area Roadway Reconstruction
(NYC DDC}

Jamaica Wastewater Treatment Plan
Upgrades (NYC DEP}

Baisley Blvd Storm and Sanitary Sewer
Upgrades (NYC DEP}

147th Ave Sewer Repair (NYC DEP}

Twin Ponds Projects (Sewers in Hook Creek
Blvd) (NYC DEP}

Idlewild Park Preserve Environmental
Science Learning Center (NYC DPR}

New Waterfront Revitalization Program
(NYC DCP}

 

 

IM IBID Class B - Privately Owned Vacantland 103 20%

JFK IBID Class - Property Profile

ificati Total % of
IBID Classification Tex Lots Total

IBID Class A - Industrial/Commercial 199 38%

IBID Class C - Mixed-Use 10 WM

IBID Class D - Residential 154 29%
IBID Class E - Tax Exempt & Non-Profit 59 11%
Total 525 100%

 

 

 

 

Proposed Greater JFK Industrial Business Improvement District

Springfield
Gardens

Source: BFJ Planning

Section |: Community Overview 39
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Figure 1.8: Regional Projects

a

Springfield Gardens, Brookville, Rosedale
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

       
   

=
Fl

TN

rl
ut
Ke

ra

SY

LMR EA EAN ENN
IG TR ARAN
IS SE

Gi SSA
ee . ANG

ity

\

BMT
Dey
Ue
\
ATLL

Mi
Th
If
Hh
Ek
i

+
i

Wy
Ht
re

TE
iy
ISS

\\
un
ty

i

Al

A
i
th
il
ye

tf
UF
if
a
i

is

Up
My 1

if}
if
i

yy
i
(|
ll
|
Mi
rn S

TT
ISM
LE

Li
U

MPL
He
NEG

Sy)
RA
RS \

Ni oN

oe
ye
xs
SY

ay

e

      

SR ey
EE CO
Sa “Oe

<
KS
pO RS
WSR KOS
lett LUTTTV TMT ae RRS
TRH TR! ARRON
Pt bP Canale
YORI
Pc NI ST HON ea gl a RS
ra hs Th ee OS
Hart Ht i SS

Ae
We SY.

 
 

   

a

fo

Vis
jis

ii,
ES
To

ce

as!

L

USL

  

SS
rat RQ
ith aA TN i Se
EAN HTS
RRR
HE wu

ra

oe.
Cs
Sy

oy
7
LE

Gs
Yl

LL

RRA HL
SSA .
ALOU GTA
HARA ER i
a i va
a

Re
Fh

 

40 Section |: Community Overview

Sa oe NOONAN SEN ,
AR Se Sc
AAR re ST
A pers ‘

Pap ay

— ee
SN ts} ot ”
~

ee

Th

AN ay
CSE A Z AIRSET

SAAS Nu aly

x au FF
x

iw
aM Nes : Li
Ds ES Lew ra
Re Bom

SIU AE LTT
‘Naat eae

\
. sn

‘\
SOS eee

a

ahh,
as
ae
in
a RE
aS

ait
SHE
re
ah

e

®

©

e
A ee

ANAK @
SES:
xe

Qe

©

Oe

 

nn

7 Legend
MS WE. PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
ms mm mmm SECONDARY PLANNING AREA

PROPOSED SURGE BARRIER | SIRR
DUNE CONSTRUCTION | NYC DPR

PAERDEGAT BASIN CSO FACILITY
HARDENING AND IMPROVEMENT

JAMAICA WASTEWATER TREATMENT
PLANT UPGRADES ($400 MILLION IN
2011)

PROPOSED ROCKAWAY TNPK/NASSAU
EXPY RESILIENCE CORRIDOR STUDY |
NYRCR: THE FIVE TOWNS

JAMAICA BAY WETLAND RESTORATION
PROJECT | USACE ($11 MILLION)

ROCKAWAY INLET TO EAST ROCKAWAY
INLET REFORMULATION STUDY | USACE

BOARDWALK REBUILD | NYC EDC & DPR

JAMAICA BAY FEASIBILITY STUDY | USACE

 
 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Figure 1.9: Local Projects Idlewild Watershed Communities

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

Legend
won ees im PRIMARY PLANNING AREA

oon ot es = om SECONDARY PLANNING AREA
EXISTING TRUNK SEWERS 60” OR GREATER

%, COMPLETED
“5
— ,
oe

    
      
  
 

Me @ STORM SEWER EXTENSION (2002-2014}
cm CONSTRUCTION/ONGOING PHASE
3 BAISLEY
% POND PARK.

SPRINGFIELD GARDENS BLUEBELT/STORM
SEWER PROJECT | EDC- $69M (2014)

IDLEWILD PARK PRESERVE ENVIRONMENTAL
LEARNING CENTER | $5M (2013-2014)

© BROOKVILLE BLVD AND EDGEWOOD
TRIANGLE (BLUEBELT COMPONENTS) | DOT,
DEP. $18M (2014-2018)

TWIN PONDS PROJECT (SEWER IN HOOK
"Ne. CREEK BLVD) |$18M DEP (2014-2018)
Chas

PROPOSED PROJECTS

BAISLEY BLVD STORM AND SANITATION SEWER
NASSAU UPGRADES | DEP

147TH AVE SEWER REPAIR | DEP
COUNTY REVERSE SEEPAGE BASINS | DEP

STORM AND SANITARY AND COMBINED
SEWERS PROJECT | DOT, DEP

IDLEWILD WETLAND RESTORATION/TRAIL
PROJECT | EASTERN QUEENS ALLIANCE

ROSEDALE AREA STREET RECONSTRUCTION/
SEWER PROJECT | DOT, DDC

PROPOSED STORM SEWER (60” AND ABOVE) |
DEP

an
@ cogust manor ©
STATION

ong

14357 eo,

130TH Ave

     
    

  

“ROSEDALE”

PROPOSED JFK INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS
IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (IBID) | EDC

5
3 teed iy 1 i NY RISING PROPOSED PROJECTS IN
% “ ‘ : SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES
% SI ” \ f : ROCKAWAY TURNPIKE/NASSAU EXPRESSWAY
ot

RESILIENT CORRIDOR STUDY | NYRCR: PLAN FOR
THE FIVE TOWNS

@ CORRIDOR RESTORATION & BANK STABILIZATION]
NYRCR: SOUTH VALLEY STREAM

REPAIR BULKHEADS & RESTORE SHORELINE AT

BROOK ROAD PARK | NYRCR: SOUTH VALLEY
« STREAM

? @ RESTORE NATURAL SHORELINE ALONG “THE PATH”
J NORTH WOODMERE | NYRCR: SOUTH VALLEY STREAM
PARK

@ COMMUNITY EDUCATION REGARDING GREEN
INFRASTRUCTURE & LIVING SHORELINE | NYRCR:
SOUTH VALLEY STREAM

HYDROLOGIC & HYDRAULIC STUDY OF HOOK
CREEK- HEAD OF BAY WATERSHED | NYRCR:
SOUTH VALLEY STREAM

@ GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE IMPLEMENTATION
PROGRAM ON RESIDENTIAL & PUBLIC PROPERTY |
NYRCR: SOUTH VALLEY STREAM

SOUTH SHORELINE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
STUDY | NYRCR

N
a ‘ a
HEAD OF BAY j A 0 0.25 0.5

1 mi

HOOK CREEK
WILDLIFE SANCTUARY

 

a
gaa inom

JFK
AIRPORT

 

 

 

 

 

 

Section |: Community Overview 41
 
Idlewild Watershed Communities

SECTION II. ASSESSMENT OF RISK AND NEEDS

A. Description of Community Assets and Assessment of Risk

The NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Plan for the Idlewild Watershed
Communities (Community) seeks to protect
Community assets and reduce their risk from
future storm events. The NYRCR Planning
Committee (Committee) prioritized assets that
are critically or locally significant and that provide
services for socially vulnerable populations,
such as people with disabilities, low-income
populations, the elderly, and children.

In order to create a plan that protects critically
and locally significant assets, the Committee
considered the relative risk of damage to these
Community assets from future severe weather

Figure 2.1:

 

or

ASSET INVENTORY

¢ Identify community assets,
noting those which:
* Serve socially vulnerable
populations
* Are critical or locally significant
¢ Have a high community value

* Organize assets by Asset
Category

 

 

44 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

events. Knowing the assets at highest risk
helped the Committee to understand the needs
and opportunities within their Community and
empowered the Committee to develop projects
that reduce risk. The Asset Inventory and
Risk Assessment processes are illustrated in
Figure 2.1.

The Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment has
been compiled to measure the current levels
of risk to assets in the Idlewild Watershed
Communities and will serve as a baseline
for determining the risk-reduction benefits of
NYRCR projects.

Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment Process

 

a"

RISK ASSESSMENT

¢ Evaluate overall community risk

RISK=
Hazard x Exposure x

Vulnerability

e Use NYS Risk Assessment Tool to
assess the risk to specific assets

 

 

 

NEEDS & OPPORTUNITIES

¢ Identify community needs for
assets at severe and high risk

¢ Identify opportunities for
potential projects that can
reduce the risk to these assets

 

 
Description of Community Assets °

 

To be more resilient, the Idlewild Watershed
Communities must identify ways to strengthen
and protect their social, economic, and natural
resources that have been, or will be, affected
by extreme weather. Community Assets
include facilities, institutions, or networks
that are essential to the day-to-day life, rapid
disaster recovery, and long-term resilience of
the Community. These assets are places or
facilities where economic, environmental, and
social functions of the Community occur, or
are critical infrastructure required to support
those functions. Assets are features that the
Community values, ranging from commercial
areas, neighborhoods, schools, and healthcare
facilities, to infrastructure, natural habitats, and
cultural resources. The NYRCR Plan seeks to
ensure that new or reconstructed assets are built
to withstand the impacts of future storms, while
programs and policies are designed to increase
the Community’s resilience.

The Committee has identified Community
Assets that were either impacted by Superstorm
Sandy and/or Hurricane Irene, are at risk of
being impacted by future storms, or provided
critical recovery support for residents and
businesses in the inundation zone. Assets were
defined according to the following categories
(Figure 2.2):

«= Economic;

= Health and Social Services;
* Housing;

« Infrastructure Systems;

» Natural and Cultural Resources; and

Assets that Serve Socially Vulnerable
Populations.

Assets were identified through a series of
exercises that involved Community input,
research, and analysis including:

= Discussions at NYRCR Planning Committee
Meetings;

«Feedback at Public Engagement Events;

«= — Neighborhood visits with Committee
members, and meetings with New
York City agencies, local officials, and
Community members; and

= Data analysis.

Assets that were evaluated with the Risk
Assessment tool were limited to only assets
that are located within the Extreme or High
Risk Areas (Figure 2.3), were identified as
Critical or Locally Significant, or were noted as
having High Community Value. See Hazard:
Likelihood of Future Storm Events below for
more information on the Risk Areas and see
Section V: Additional Materials for definitions of
Critical and Locally Significant Assets and Assets
with High Community Value.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Figure 2.2: Asset Categories

Economic
—.

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

 

45
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Assessing Risk to the Community

Risk isthe chancethat an asset will be impacted by
future storm events. Assessing risk to Community
assets helped the Committee identify assets at
high risk, determine Reconstruction Strategies,
and develop projects that will reduce their risk.

Risk is an expression of three factors:

Hazard—the likelihood and magnitude of a
future storm;

Exposure—the moderating effect of topographic
and shoreline features; and

Vulnerability—the ability of an asset to resist
damage from a future storm event.

These factors, which are described in detail
below, were multiplied to calculate the risk
score for each asset:

Risk = Hazard x Exposure x Vulnerability

Hazard: Likelihood of Future Storm Events

Hazards are considered storms that are typical
for the Community. The most typical hazards
in the Idlewild Watershed Communities are
frequent, low-intensity storm events ranging
from above-average rainfall to nor’easters
that cause routine flooding of low-lying areas
and roadways. Less typical hazards include
infrequent, high-intensity storm events such as
Superstorm Sandy or Hurricane Irene. While
these hazards are less frequent now, extreme
weather events are likely to increase due to
climate change. Areas of the Community with
a higher degree of hazard can be seen in both
the New York State Risk Maps and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood

46 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Hazard Areas. These two hazard maps are
explained below and are shown in Figure 2.4
and Figure 2.5.

NYS Risk Maps

The New York State Department of State (NYS
DOS) has developed risk area mapping, which
illustrates the coastal hazards faced by the
Community in relation to theirtopography, FEMA
flood zones, previous storm surge inundation,
sea level rise, National Weather Service (NWS)
shallow coastal flooding advisory thresholds,
and natural shoreline features (Figure 2.3 and
Figure 2.4). The tool classifies three areas of
risk: Extreme, High, and Moderate.

Less than 1% of the Community is located in
the extreme risk area, while 13% is located
in the high risk area, and 75% is located
in the moderate risk area. Only 11% of the
Community is not located in any of the above
risk areas. The most extreme risk areas in the
Community lie along the shorelines of Hook
Creek, Jamaica Bay, and Thurston Basin in
the Meadowmere neighborhood and near
Rockaway and Brookville Boulevards. High risk
areas extend north from Jamaica Bay through
Idlewild Park Preserve and Brookville Park to just
south of Sunrise Highway. High risk areas also
extend north of Hook Creek through low-lying
roadways in Rosedale to 147th Avenue, and
along the southeastern boundary of the Idlewild
Watershed Communities. Moderate risk areas
extend north of the Belt Parkway and Sunrise
Highway to nearly the northern boundary of
the Community.

 

 

Figure 2.3: Risk Areas

Extreme Risk Areas

Areas currently at risk of frequent inundation,

vulnerable to erosion in the next 40 years, or likely to

be inundated in the future due to sea level rise.

«Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
V zone.

"Shallow Coastal Flooding per National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
National Weather Service (NWS) advisory
threshold.

« Natural protective feature areas susceptible to
erosion.

"Sea level rise - Added 3 feet to the Mean Higher
High Water (MHHW) shoreline and extended
this elevation inland to point of intersection with
ground surface.

High Risk Areas

Areas outside the Extreme Risk Area that are currently
at infrequent risk of inundation or at future risk from
sea level rise.

"Area bounded by the 1% annual flood risk zone
(FEMA V and A zones).

"Sea level rise - Added 3 feet to NOAA NWS
coastal flooding advisory threshold and extended
this elevation inland to point of intersection with
ground surface.

Moderate Risk Areas

Areas outside the Extreme and High Risk Areas but at
moderate risk of inundation from infrequent events or
at risk in the future from sea level rise.

"Area bounded by the 0.2% annual risk (500
year) flood zone, where available.

"Sea level rise - Added 3 feet to the Base Flood
Elevation for the current 1%.

"Annual risk flood event and extended this
elevation inland to point of intersection with
ground surface.

" Area bounded by Sea, Lake, and Overland
Surges from Hurricanes (SLOSH) category 3
hurricane inundation zone.

 

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

 

 

  
 
    
 
 

 

 
  
  
  

. . Idlewild Watershed Communities
Figure 2.4: DOS Risk Assessment Map oo . .
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
¢
NX ,
a~ “, é / { Legend
é
oe? A sw "Qo, ° J, hah he we mm mm PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
‘SP,
- vant 3 pa, tle “ers = = — = = SECONDARY PLANNING AREA
3 oe mats: e™:- 7 wae | DOS RISK LEVELS
a BAISLEY s PAUROAD 3G é, Meng QUEENS gl 7s
% POND PARK s & 8 Ste Key, J é 130 / i EXTREME
LK, 5p aaa? ¢ < . $ £ ‘arg HIGH
JPA @rocusr manor 3" / ae ‘ /
ENS Nee ry i MODERATE
PockAWAY atv he in * . ‘“ Es B on v I
, al & ce a M
2 ah 137 S 'y,
5 ara me lala hl ie . #2 el "Se,
£ © $ eee Rw) © wee -
230TH Ay i o. % %, 4 4 4 g && a
4 z | oF % % ia "9 = oe ? f |
2 3 % DS a % x e 6
I at % gO Mtave iy gi NASSAU
¥ ees 3 19 2
ve BELT ROLEDALE 2 “4 | COUNTY
Fea § CONDUT A = sous Pay
F SPRINGFIELD & 145 F ° SUNRISE HWY
5 aot, Tas gk Ape 4m SS a 4 +
sea, © fx. GARDENS fi Sige we. %%
JN Ea eee al 2 . * eee Ce ea
os "62% ee & “BROOKVILLE? gb % \
wen = fo s ¥ 2 Rey oe,
€ 32 SPRINGFIELD * AS, aS ie oe ‘
‘ a8 pak BROOKVILLE €& =“ § “ROSEDALE ** %
Ng Been ae ean £ 4, “ROSEDALE ",  NSOUTH VALLEY
oy & e Ve 2 & & m * 4
Wee en PTTL ELEY ~~ BORNE *” (A STREAM
3 Baro
N eS 29 5 i 147 AVE 1
~‘“, sso f: 4, wd 2 Lege 1
Q g
\, od —y 3 rape
NX 5 z 2
Ey 7 a a
“~~ IDLEWILD ~ % i g
~ PARK E- 190 x *ossDaegp
eae HOOK CREEK , <r
ta a aA Sad ‘
ary.
ON,
Gos
2
A
CN
Wy,
JFK cy
AIRPORT
HEAD OF BAY

 

 

 

 
 

 

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 47
Idlewild Watershed Communities

FEMA Flood Hazard Areas

Since the publication of the NYS Risk Maps,
FEMA has released preliminary Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRMs) for New York City. The
FIRMs show that FEMA Flood Hazard Areas
(Figure 2.5) have increased in size since 2009,
indicating an increase in the hazards that the
Community faces. While approximately 10%
of the Community was located in the 100-
year floodplain in 2009, the current FEMA
preliminary FIRMs illustrate that approximately
14% of the Community is presently located in
the 100-year floodplain.

Exposure: Moderating Effect of Topography
and Shoreline

Exposure refers to local topographic and
shoreline conditions that tend to increase or
decrease the effects of coastal hazards on the
Community. Exposure is measured using the
following factors:

« Shore defense structures,
«Coastal vegetation, and
= Depth to water table.

Local topographic and shoreline conditions
that impact stormwater flooding and coastal
hazards in the Community and its assets are
shown in Figure 2.6 and described below.

The Meadowmere neighborhood has a high
exposure to storm impacts because the water
line is frequently in contact with shore defense
structures (e.g., bulkheads and seawalls).

While seawalls with adjacent natural edges are
found along Brookville Boulevard at Rockaway
Boulevard and various heights of bulkheading

48 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

are present along the Hook Creek and Jamaica
Bay shorelines, these structural defenses are
either deteriorating or are not considered
adequate protection against future storm
events, given anticipated storm or sea level
rise conditions.

Coastal vegetation, illustrated in Figure 2.6,
plays the biggest role in protecting the Idlewild
Watershed Communities, as the tidal marshes in
Idlewild Park Preserve and Hook Creek Nature
Preserve serve as a buffer for tidal flow.

Conversely, one of the Community’s greatest
sources of exposure to flooding is its high
groundwater table in low-lying areas that were
historically wetlands. The Community’s low-
lying topography and development on filled
wetlands creates a “bowl” effect with stormwater,
while water-logged soils prevent water from
infiltrating, leaving it with nowhere to go. These
local topographic and shoreline conditions
increase the impacts of stormwater flooding
and coastal hazards in the Community and on
its assets, as discussed in Section II below.

Vulnerability: Ability to Resist or Recover from

Future Storm Events

The Community’s vulnerability is largely
determined by both its strength to resist
impacts from coastal hazards and its ability to
recover quickly from those impacts. Therefore,
vulnerability is measured by the loss of service,
or amount of time that an asset or Community
was impacted by a previous storm event.

Figure 2.7 illustrates the vulnerability of
the Idlewild Watershed Communities, as
represented by inundation from Superstorm

Sandy and storm surge from Hurricane Irene. It
shows that the most vulnerable areas are those
farthest south along Jamaica Bay; areas near
Brookville Park and 147th Avenue in Brookville;
the neighborhoods east of Idlewild Park
Preserve in Rosedale, generally as far north
as 147th Avenue; and the industrial area and
neighborhood surrounding Springfield Park in
Springfield Gardens.

New York City’s Hurricane Evacuation Areas and
FEMA Base Flood Elevations can be indicators
of future vulnerability to inundation. Figure
2.7 illustrates that Brookville and Rosedale
are highly vulnerable, sharing a base flood
elevation of nine feet, and located in evacuation
zones one and two, respectively.

Vulnerability also reflects factors beyond
inundation, including wind damage and power
outages. Field surveys of business owners
and Community facilities illustrate that power
outages ranged from one week to four weeks
throughout the Community, due to building
damage, power outages, or access issues.

Assessing Risk to Community Assets

The risk to each asset or system of assets has
been quantified using the Coastal Hazard Asset
Inventory and Risk Assessment Tool developed
by NYS Department of State (NYS DOS). This
risk assessment provides a baseline level of
risk for each asset or system of assets. The
levels of risk to assets and systems are detailed
as follows.

Pinpointing the Community’s assets at highest
risk helped to guide the development of
Reconstruction Strategies and Proposed and
Featured Projects that can mitigate risk and
protect the most vulnerable assets. The reduction
in risk caused by implementing a Proposed or
Featured Project will be a key determinant of
the risk-reduction benefit generated by that
project. In addition to risk, other contributing
factors in determining which assets should be
protected include:

«The contribution of the asset(s} to life
safety,

= If the asset(s} are critical or locally
significant,

= The Community value of the asset(s},

= Environmental services provided by the
asset(s),

« — Economic contribution of the asset(s},

* Availability or alternative asset(s) or
facilities, and

«The capacity of the asset{s} to adapt.

See Section V: Additional Materials for the
complete Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment
Tool for the Community.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 49
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Figure 2.5: FEMA Flood Hazard Areas

NY Rising

Idlewild Watershed Communities
Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

   
 
   
     
  
  

  
  

.
/ Cy, &
0 io" &
ao 16.8 ty &
5 NY
2 v3 NE oom ~
5 a 4 J Ds
a EY RY RAILROAD 3 . $ SS Men,
2 A bi a PARK 2 93 ag tes
= y aoe & & 4 Ry .
Ss
o , "64g wet? 8 S.A, &
7 _ > @ iocust manor * , &
e 4 > # os STATION Pay
he e e

ROCKAWAY atv

NG

gnis ¥BNB88 B ANP
8

f

JFK
AIRPORT

~S

 

 

i
J If eae we wee mm PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
a
St " “hr wae men ww SECONDARY PLANNING AREA
¢
& 129 AVE
QUEENS Shs fa! i 100 YEAR FLOODPLAIN(VE,AE,A)
é/ & M2
$
~ i ee 500 YEAR FLOODPLAIN
» S 8)
™~. WE
£ ~, fe 8 "
. 3
ee & "ary '
So & z
Ss é eT) an
= ig SS Ne ane cy.
é ¢ ] oe as os
§ . NASSAU
£ | couNTY

  
  
 
 
  

__, “ROSEDALE

5

NORTH WOODMERE
PARK

  

  

l/s Legend

SOUTH VALLEY
STREAM

 

ROSEDALE pp

 

 

 

 

 

 

50 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs
Figure 2.6: Exposure—Moderating Effect of Topography and Shoreline

WOODMERE,
PARK

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Idlewild Watershed Communities

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Legend
woe eee im PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
cen ot ms om ~SECONDARY PLANNING AREA

FEMA LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE
ACTION

COASTAL VEGETATION (> 300FT?)

FEMA SEAWALLS
CONTOURS- 5° INTERVALS

HIGH WATER TABLE

|

NOAA HISTORIC WETLANDS

NYSDEC CURRENT WETLANDS

COUNTY ESTUARINE AND MARINE

ESTUARINE AND MARINE WETLAND

FRESHWATER EMERGENT WETLAND.

FRESHWATER FORESTED/SHRUB
WETLAND

FRESHWATER POND

i
C4
Ss
Ss
|
=

LAKE

 

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 51
Idlewild Watershed Communities
Idlewild Watershed Communities
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure 2.7: Vulnerability—Ability to Resist or Recover from
Legend

Future Storm Events
wm ee mm PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
eee ot es mt ms SECONDARY PLANNING AREA

mums EXTENT OF SUPERSTORM SANDY
INUNDATION
FEMA BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (IN FEET)

NYC OEM HURRICANE EVACUATION ZONE

NASSAU
COUNTY

SOUTH-VALLEY
STREAM

HOOK CREEK
, | WILDLIFE SANCTUARY

NORTH WOODMERE.
PARK

"HEAD OF BAY

 

52 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

 

 

  
 
  
  
 

 

  
   

Figure 2.8: Hazard—Likelihood of Future Storm Events te Idlewild Watershed Communities
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
ty SJ Legend
tg, SY j wee ees em PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
© iy we ot es mt ms SECONDARY PLANNING AREA
& f £
mee 3) R FEMA Flood Hazard Areas
“| cooo== 7
a $ BL 1_____1 VE- 100 YEAR
SE UNIE] § = AE-100 YEAR
PARI i <
Vice i iy ‘ 500 YEAR
=)
& DOS RISK ZONES
Y | EXTREME
f ly HIGH
if
Sof ™ o SUN MODERATE
qe ae
€ my oy
ff ey 5]
Dent Gri i RK) $
aaah] PARK SM "4 LUEY
ss) ele Ny ay r Ao
(2 Ay “fe [Pies A
a ) Soe GL \
ih, NES ae
As =e
CA Sy v IDLEWILD
\wuburecwncroner Nera
%
%
RTH We MERE,
PA
«
o i
?)
a i
< “est OF aay a FX

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 53
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Assessment of Risk to Assets and
Systems

 

The following is a summary of the assets
within the Idlewild Watershed Communities, as
identified through the asset inventory process
above, and an assessment of their risks to future
storm events.

Economic

Economic Assets include commercial properties,
key economic corridors, and major employers
in the Community. The majority of commercial
properties (8 1%} are located in the moderate risk
area, with a minority of commercial properties
(less than 3%} located in the high risk area. The
assessed value for all commercial properties in
the Moderate, High, and Extreme Risk Areas
totals approximately $300 million (Table 2.1).??

Most Economic Assets inventoried (86% of
asset inventory) are at moderate risk of future
inundation, while a minimal amount (4% of
asset inventory) are at high risk. Figure 2.10
illustrates risk to economic assets identified as
part of the asset inventory process.

Commercial districts along Rockaway and
Brookville Boulevards are at the highest risk
for future inundation from coastal storm
events, as they are closest to Hook Creek and
Jamaica Bay, the Community’s key sources of
coastal flooding. These corridors lack adequate
shoreline defenses to protect them from future
storm events. Interviews with business owners
along Rockaway Boulevard indicated flooding,
sewer backups, and power outages after
Superstorm Sandy, which resulted in a loss of
service of approximately four weeks. Economic
corridors with concentrations of small businesses
include 243rd Street, Francis Lewis Boulevard,
and Guy R. Brewer/Farmers Boulevard.

Significant economic corridors at moderate risk
for future inundation include Guy R. Brewer/
Farmers Boulevard, Sunrise Highway, 243rd
Street, and Sunrise Highway/South Conduit
Avenue. These corridors are farther from flood
sources; however, they are still vulnerable
to impacts from power outages, which were
reported at one week to three weeks in moderate
risk areas.

Major employers and businesses along these
economic corridors at highest risk include
national retailers, restaurants, and industrial
operations. Among these are specific economic
assets that would be key to disaster response and
recovery, such as Lowes Home Improvement,
Regency Recycling Corporation and other
commercial haulers, and pharmacies such as
Walgreens. In addition, small businesses are
especially vulnerable, as they may lack the
capital to recover from storm impacts.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 2.1: Assessed Value of Commercial Property by Risk Area
NYS Risk Area Extreme Risk Area High Risk Area Moderate Risk Area
Commercial Percentage of Percentage of Percentage of
ommer commercial Assessed Value commercial Assessed Value commercial Assessed Value
Properties . : .
properties properties properties
Retail 0% 1% $1,468,800 33% $147,274,463
Industrial 0% <1% $1,025,100 28% $147,772,928
Mixed Use <1% $9,360 <1% $23,100 20% $6,575,351

 

 

 

 

Source: NYC PLUTO

 

 

54 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Farmers Boulevard Retail Corridor, Springfield Gardens

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 55
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

. . Idlewild Watershed C iti
Figure 2.9: Economic Assets ew! arersined /ommuniites

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

   
  

 

4

©
oe 426 NE

   
   
 

A Legend
fo I wm ee mm PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
en es = ms SECONDARY PLANNING AREA
ASSETS
ECONOMIC CORRIDORS
SPRINGFIELD GARDENS INDUSTRIAL AREA
GUY R. BREWER BLVD ECONOMIC
CORRIDOR
GUY R. BREWER / FARMERS BLVD.
ECONOMIC CORRIDOR
SUNRISE HIGHWAY / S. CONDUIT AVE
ECONOMIC CORRIDOR
MERRICK BLVD ECONOMIC CORRIDOR
ROSEDALE STATION ECONOMIC
CORRIDOR
243RD ST ECONOMIC CORRIDOR
BROOKVILLE BLVD ECONOMIC
CORRIDOR

es ROCKAWAY BLVD ECONOMIC
MALL CORRIDOR

wa ne

    
   
    
      
    
 

BAISLEY.

RAILROAD 3
POND PARK.

on sana

ROCKAWAY atv

Maasrep

13054 Ave

150TH gy

“Sp,
oy

NASSAU

. COUNTY
Le

2,
he, a c f) ic oe \soutH VALLEY OTHER IDENTIFIED ASSETS

AJOR ECONOMIC CORRIDOR
é we OS <>
. \ STREAM

147 AVE

\ | an
wouter.

MIXED-USE

#32 5,

g
253 ST

241 ST

a

% 148 AVE
>
B

N IDLEWILD. &

148DR
%
*, PARK on
a

“e—

2
e

fOr os ROSEDALE eo
R HOOK CREEK &
OG F

eke
Re!
tg WILDLIFE SANCTUARY eo nee’
% 9 a HOTEL
‘OMe, 1”
NORTH WOODMERE
PARK

AN

GROCERY

Ne
JFK es
AIRPORT

qare ST IIOMS

r
!
wl

 
 
  
 

FIVE TOWNS
SHOPPING
CENTER

 

 

 

————
HEAD OF BAY A

 

 

 

56 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Idlewild Watershed Communities
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure 2.10: Risk to Economic Assets

RISK SCORE KEY
Sw Wm Wi
0-7 8-31 32-70
ASSETS
ECONOMIC CORRIDORS
@) SPRINGFIELD GARDENS INDUSTRIAL AREA
(2) GUY R. BREWER BLVD ECONOMIC
CORRIDOR
GUY R. BREWER / FARMERS BLVD
ECONOMIC CORRIDOR
SUNRISE HIGHWAY / S. CONDUIT AVE
ECONOMIC CORRIDOR
MERRICK BLVD ECONOMIC CORRIDOR
ROSEDALE STATION ECONOMIC
NASSAU CORRIDOR
COUNTY 243RD ST ECONOMIC CORRIDOR
BROOKVILLE BLVD ECONOMIC
CORRIDOR
ROCKAWAY BLVD ECONOMIC
CORRIDOR

OTHER IDENTIFIED ASSETS
<D MANOR ECONOMIC CORRIDOR

o GROCERY
oO HOTEL

IDLEWILD
PARK

HOOK CREEK
WILDLIFE SANCTUARY

wo me me PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
oon ot oes ms ms SECONDARY PLANNING AREA
DOS RISK LEVELS

MODERATE HIGH [§NEXTREME

———
HEAD OF BAY 0 0.25 0.5 1 mi

 

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 57
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Health and Social Services

Health and Social Services assets include
those that are critical for emergency response
and disaster recovery, as well as government
services, social services, schools and daycare
facilities, and healthcare facilities. Figure 2.12
illustrates risk to Health and Social Services assets
identified as part of the asset inventor process.

Critical facilities in the Community include those
for emergency response and recovery. The
Community has two fire departments, Engine
Companies 311 and 314, as well as the 113th
Precinct of the New York Police Department
(NYPD), the 105th Precinct (Queens South
Task Force}, and the NYPD Community Affairs-
Queens South School Safety Division. Each of
these first responders is at moderate risk for
future coastal hazards. The nearest New York
City Office of Emergency Management (NYC
OEM} Evacuation Center is located outside of
the Community at John Adams High School in
Ozone Park and is not in a risk area.

Several government services facilities are also
at moderate risk, including the Rosedale Post
Office on 243rd Street, the Rochdale Village
Post Office, and the Springfield Gardens Station
Post Office on Merrick Boulevard. According
to field surveys, the Rosedale Post Office
lost power for nearly three weeks following
Superstorm Sandy. Its location near Brookville
Park Pond makes the Post Office vulnerable,
while the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV)
in Springfield Gardens is vulnerable due to its
location near Thurston Basin.

Among the Community’s locally significant assets
are 33 schools. Of these, 29 are at moderate

58 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

risk for future coastal hazards, while four are
not located within risk areas. The school at
highest risk is PS 195 William Haberle on 149th
Avenue and Weller Lane, which experienced
flooding, sewer backups, and power outages.
Field surveys report sewer backups and power
outages in PS 52 in Springfield Gardens, PS 80
Thurgood Marshall Magnet School in Rochdale
Village, PS 156 Laurelton, and Martin De Porres
School in Laurelton, as well as Sunrise Public
School in Rosedale, resulting in loss of service
ranging from one to four weeks.

Healthcare facilities include a variety of disability
clinics, medical offices, and health centers,
totaling 31 assets, 26 of which are at moderate
risk. The Community has four homeless shelters,
all at moderate risk, and 30 daycare centers,
23 of which are at moderate risk.

 

Queens Library, Rosedale Branch
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

PS. 231, Springfield Gardens

   

PS. 181, Brookfield School, Brookville

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 59
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Figure 2.11: Health and Social Services Assets

 

Idlewild Watershed Communities is
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

  
 

   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   

 

 

@
oN
aia Nee, 2 Ws.
© wy ¢ ’ | o,
oe ee x, ¢ "4, / val A
g aaah e omms 80 fi2o ave ]
3 “any .
Ae 7 Sa QUEENS fF Qn!
% POND PA oS, ~ & Sa j
S47
+ 33? * Ra ¢ ane
: bee, Ve |
ao, ee b ® ~ d
rei ce  ° 8 <3 C7 eo:
wai , ae er au? ey t a
2 / " ey ht - z= :
co s # a) 7 + x rae 6p
2 S&T é 32 4 Sf é ae és! 5
a | ow % 4% T 3 5 & |
a x os a % x © o
ye ewe : § 1 NASSAU
Pe a 8 |
we y COUNTY
ke: pene STONDUT :
.
5 ‘, & Ms, ‘uP
tw i SPRINGFIELD & vi os
& ie
\ GARDENS a €.
es
oe "00 EE
. & =9
* 4 ef ay BROOKVILLE a % \
 e
N gave a €s « aR © Bt 8% ,« SSOUTH VALLEY
Es ge Pg S é :
: 2 4 I. 147 AVE 1
Bx 6, d ep T |
- e 147 RD
*, is e eo eR oF
NN co “ae roma
. . Et “|
Ry IDLEWILD e i % t ae i zt
% a
~ PARK oa 149 Ro a oun
Ds a
ae. HOOK CREEK 5 ect
cy WILDLIFE SANCTUARY a ae oa nee’
“ay@, a
&
ON, a
vs me
“Op a NORTH WOODMERE
“Bp a PARK
JFK Geo’, 6 i
AIRPORT
cy :
,) )
aN
oN
CF} "
¢ a y\
Vv ot
2 N
dna A
HEAD OF BAY

 

Legend
woe eee im PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
cen ot ms om ~SECONDARY PLANNING AREA
ASSETS
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
NYC POLICE DEPT 113™ PRECINCT
QS SCHOOL SAFETY DIVISION
FDNY ENG 311, LAD 158
FDNY ENG 314
NYPD QUEENS SOUTH TASK FORCE
(105th PRECINCT SATELLITE)

GOVERNMENT SERVICES
US POST OFFICE - 165100 BAISLEY BLVD.
US POST OFFICE - 21810 MERRICK BLVD.
SPRINGFIEND GARDENS DMV OFFICE
QUEENS FEDERAL CORRECTIONS
FACILITY

@ US POST OFFICE - 14506 243°° ST

SOCIAL SERVICES

@ PSCH INCORPORATED-12811 16157 ST

® QUEENS CHILD GUIDANCE CENTER
RISE

BELT ASSOCIATES LLC

CARE FOR THE HOMELESS

VFW - POST 5298
® AMERICAN LEGION- POST 483
®@ MERCY HOME FOR CHILDREN

VFW - POST 9352

PSCH INCORPORATED- 14357 229™ ST
OTHER IDENTIFIED ASSETS

Af

SCHOOL
Pd HEALTHCARE FACILITY
e DAYCARE

 

0.25 0.5

 

 

 

60

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs
Figure 2.12: Risk to Health and Social Services Assets

IDLEWILD.
PARK

HOOK CREEK
WILDLIFE SANCTUARY

HEAD OF BAY

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Idlewild Watershed Communities
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

NASSAU.
COUNTY

RISK SCORE KEY

Pa cd

8-31 : 71-100

ASSETS

EMERGENCY RESPONSE

(1) NYC POLICE DEPT 113™ PRECINCT

(2) QS SCHOOL SAFETY DIVISION

(3) FDNY ENG 311, LAD 158

(4) FDNY ENG 314

(8) NYPD QUEENS SOUTH TASK FORCE
(105"" PRECINCT SATELLITE)

GOVERNMENT SERVICES
US POST OFFICE - 165100 BAISLEY BLVD.
@ US POST OFFICE - 21810 MERRICK BLVD.
) SPRINGFIEND GARDENS DMV OFFICE
@) QUEENS FEDERAL CORRECTIONS
FACILITY
US POST OFFICE - 14506 243°° ST

SOCIAL SERVICES
0) PSCH INCORPORATED-12811 16157 ST
@ QUEENS CHILD GUIDANCE CENTER

(9 RISE
BELT ASSOCIATES LLC
(5) CARE FOR THE HOMELESS

(6 VEW - POST 5298

AMERICAN LEGION- POST 483
MERCY HOME FOR CHILDREN

VFW - POST 9352

20 PSCH INCORPORATED- 14357 229™ ST

OTHER IDENTIFIED ASSETS

SCHOOL
dh HEALTHCARE FACILITY
oO DAYCARE

wo es mm PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
con ot os ms om ~SECONDARY PLANNING AREA

DOS RISK LEVELS
MODERATE HIGH [§NNNEXTREME

————
0 0.25 0.5 1 mi

 

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 61
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Housing

The Idlewild Watershed Communities are
primarily characterized by single- and two-
family residential neighborhoods, many of which
were constructed on filled wetlands with a high
groundwater table. Residential neighborhoods
that experienced the most damage during
Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene were
those in low-lying areas with basements, yards,
or garages below grade. Many of these homes
experienced sewer backups, flooding, and
power outages.

The majority of residential properties (87%)
are located in the moderate risk area, with a
minority of residential properties (less than
2%) located in the high risk area, and very few
residential properties (less than 1%) located
in the extreme risk area. Among these, one-
and two-family buildings comprise the largest
number of residential properties at risk, as
residential properties in the Community are

nearly all (97% of residential land uses) single-
or two-family homes. The assessed value
for all residential properties at risk for future
inundation totals approximately $505 million.°°
Table 2.2 illustrates the assessed value of
residential properties by risk area.

Residential properties with basements, back
yards, or garages below grade level and those
constructed in low-lying areas near Hook Creek
and tidal marshlands are especially at risk
due to exposure from topographic conditions
and the high groundwater table. Figure 2.14
illustrates risk to housing assets identified as
part of the asset inventory process.

The residential neighborhood of Meadowmere
has the greatest exposure to coastal hazards,
and therefore faces the highest risk for
impacts from future storm events. Residential
neighborhoods in Rosedale, Brookville, and

Springfield Gardens are all at moderate risk for
future storm events.

Affordable housing properties at moderate risk
include Rochdale Village, Locust Manor Senior
Residence, and Northeastern Conference House
(Table 2.3). Locust Manor Senior Residence
experienced a power outage for approximately
three weeks, while Rochdale Village experienced
downed trees. However, Rochdale Village has an
independent power supply that makes it more
resilient than neighboring communities on the
Con Edison grid. The Rochdale Village power
plant is a total energy facility that generates all
the electrical power, heating, air-conditioning,
and domestic hot water services for the entire
residential development and two shopping
malls.

 

Table 2.2: Assessed Value of Residential Properties by Risk Area

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

NYS Risk Area Extreme Risk Area High Risk Area Moderate Risk Area

Percentage Percentage Percentage

Residential Properties of residential Assessed Value of residential Assessed Value of residential Assessed Value
properties properties properties

One & Two Family 6 6

Buildings <1% $303,380 <2% $4,897,660 86% $297 883,270

Multi-Family WalkcUp <1% $30,878 <1% $1,475,807 <2% $15,228,265

Buildings

Multi-Family Elevator <1% $149,360,400

Buildings

 

 

 

 

Source: NYC PLUTO

 

62 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Attached Single-family Homes on 159th Street, Springfield Gardens

 

Table 2.3: Affordable Housing Facilities in the Community

 

 

Property Name Units Year Built Tenure Type Risk Score
Moderate
Rochdale Village 5,860 1963 Coop and Middle Moderate
Income

 

Locust Manor Senior

 

: 59 2008 Rental Senior Moderate
Residence
Northeastern 111 1984 Rental Senior; Low Moderate
Conference House Income

 

 

Source: NYC PLUTO

 

 

Semi-detached two-family Homes on Craft Avenue, Rosedale

 

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 63
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Figure 2.13: Housing Assets

 

 

 

   
 

 

  
 

 

 

Idlewild Watershed Communities
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
? #
FT Nee 2 Ws, Legend
oe Nt “Sa, g v/ Ip| Pe wes me i PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
. . es = = a rn A s = = = SECONDARY PLANNING AREA
% _ £ ] 129 AVE
4 BAISLEY ry 3 RAIROAD 3 3 FN Met QUEENS of Ge | RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
2 POND PARKS” "Vee s ag, oe EK wy oe s * SPRINGFIELD GARDENS
a ee md RO Sip éf @ kp
Sf Is © . Ste BROOKVILLE
ey a a
7 4s) a ane wa 7 g : a / ROSEDALE
7 4 ee ey hah MEADOWMERE
Aaa PE me , !
, ow . ay F AFFORDABLE HOUSING
2 Sorry ° é 5 » LOCUST MANOR SENIOR RESIDENCE
5 j ae % 2 4 8 ie ¥ $8 "SH,
2 FADO ae ee we és oes % NORTHEASTERN CONFERENCE HOUSE
owe } Ae aaah £ of | & | ROCHDALE VILLAGE
q oy, 5 % z e S
5 a %, S 7 Pal § § ' NASSAU LIFESPIRE SPRINGFIELD GARDENS
Pe j &
| - p= DELTA pera © | | COUNTY
Co. scoNDUTT = sou Slaseank 1-2 FAMILY
. 4 SPRINGFIELD GARDENS, 1. ee a a
my h x“ A ; SF MaK % % MULTI-FAMILY WALK-UP
4 5 elas, ee 745° % 2505
. + \ ve Bo & & a Sle = le
Sey A & & “ S.. 2% 2% ag o
+ & a " % s sae oy \ MULTI-FAMILY ELEVATOR
\ ©. (=e ee BROOKVILLE "OOM EG a, oe’
* Ee SPRINGFIELD & ay 26 . %, \
2 z %
No eM Shes Se © 42%, , SOUTH VALLEY
~~ 4 a Rp se Ake? Ney Ao ioe & “4 oe \ STREAM
Ne 2 f ROSEDALE 7 6 ;
“0 SV Fao
‘, ssor im é 4 A at 17 1
XN c (ye Bare 2 i 1
'e Gig 5 % 148 AVE
‘“ y = mn \
SA IDLEWILD _ % J
‘*. ~~ PARK a = en ROSEDALE gp
Ss
Ro ® HOOK CREEK a ok
cy Se oe! see
og °
We a
6
Cy . 2 i NORTH WOODMERE
Op “~~ a PARK
3S a:
JFK es i
AIRPORT NX I
\
7 ‘
Cm
ae
s
Vv’ 7 \
a N
bend ee
Gear A 0 0.25 0.5 1 mi
64 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

 

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Fi 2.14: Risk to Housing A: Idlewild Watershed Communities
igure 2.14: Risk to Housing Assets NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
: RISK SCORE KEY

Okan KAA,

AAT I, OL /

SN eee SSM SST soo
A\\ es { ij I Ley) ASSETS

? RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
u

T
AN
SPRINGFIELD GARDENS
BROOKVILLE
A

   

 

“e,

o

a
SS

%

ROSEDALE
MEADOWMERE

a
xS
as

WS
Xe
oS

AS
oS
&
x

ay

FFORDABLE HOUSING
‘ LOCUST MANOR SENIOR RESIDENCE

Go
SO
yo
us
Se
aS
a
ae
Oy

SAG
cS
a

NORTHEASTERN CONFERENCE HOUSE
ROCHDALE VILLAGE
LIFESPIRE SPRINGFIELD GARDENS

6 Ti oo . L] 1-2 FAMILY HOUSING
es Sa oes = MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING
FOG

 

wo es mm PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
con ot os ms om ~SECONDARY PLANNING AREA

 

DOS RISK LEVELS
MODERATE [THIGH [MININEXTREME

| 0 0.25 0.5 1 mi

 

 

 

 

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 65
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Infrastructure

Infrastructureassetsincludecriticaltransportation
routes and facilities, stormwater and sewer
networks and facilities, and the electrical power
grid. Transportation infrastructure assets at
risk of flooding present danger to residents,
as persistent flooding can damage roads by
forming sinkholes, as is present on several roads
near Idlewild Park Preserve. Brookville, Francis
Lewis, and Hook Creek Boulevards routinely
flood, and Brookville Boulevard south of 149th
Avenue (known locally as “the snake road”)
presents unsafe driving conditions under even
fair weather conditions due to sharp curves and
limited sight distance. Congested transportation
corridors such as Rockaway, Farmers, and Guy
R. Brewer Boulevards can slow evacuation and
prevent access to major highways such as the
Belt Parkway or Sunrise Highway prior to an
extreme weather event, while flooded roadways
can slow recovery time and prevent residents
from returning to their homes.

The Community is largely auto-dependent, with
90% of households owning a vehicle,’ and has
inadequate bus service and limited pedestrian
connections to main retail corridors, community
facilities, or Metropolitan Transportation
Authority (MTA) facilities. Transportation
infrastructure systems lack adequate parking
for multi-modal transportation, and the area is
generally underserved for bus transportation,
resulting in the rise of informal van (jitney)
operators. The bus system includes the main MTA
bus routes 111/113, 114, x63, 85, and the 3
and 6 to JFK Airport, the 77 and various private
operators such as Nassau Inter County Express
(NICE} bus service. Three Long Island Railroad
(LIRR) stations lie within the Community—Locust

66 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

 

Hook Creek at Hungry Harbor Road - Rosedale
Manor, Rosedale, and Laurelton—each at
moderate risk. Two LIRR lines pass through the
Community—Long Beach and Far Rockaway.
Various private transportation operators provide
taxi and limo service, much of which is targeted
to nearby JFK Airport.

Several critical transportation infrastructure
assets are located outside of the Community
that directly impact the Community, such as JFK
Airport and Sunrise Highway, which extends
from South Conduit Avenue into Nassau
County. Residents rely on economic assets in
Nassau County and experienced access issues
after Superstorm Sandy due to flooded cars
and congested or flooded roadways, impacting
the ability of residents to recover. Figure 2.16
illustrates risk to infrastructure assets identified
as part of the asset inventory process.

Storm sewer and water supply networks are
also critical infrastructure systems that are at
risk of tidal inundation. The storm sewer system
increases risk to the Community in areas where
the network does not have enough capacity or
is not well-maintained, resulting in flooding
during average storm events. The lack of sewer
infrastructure in some areas of the Community
also increases risk, as stormwater flooding
is a routine occurrence due to an incomplete
storm sewer system that was never fully built
out to accommodate the present level of
development in the Community. The New York
City Department of Environmental Protection
(NYC DEP} is completing its fourth phase of a
comprehensive upgrade of the sewer and water
infrastructure in Southeast Queens, including a
Bluebelt project in Springfield Gardens, which
is further discussed in the Natural and Cultural

Resources section below. The project will install
approximately 2.8 miles of new sewer lines,
nearly 3 miles of water mains, and new streets
and sidewalks. Additional sewer lines are
required and the entire system is not yet fully
designed or funded.

Prior to 1996, the privately owned Jamaica
Water Supply Company (JWS) operated a group
of wells that provided water to the communities
of southeastern Queens. These wells were
purchased by NYC DEP in 1996, and a former
JWS pump has been decommissioned and sits
vacant, encompassing a full block between
145th Road and 145th Avenue at 228th Street
in Rosedale.*?

Another key infrastructure network impacted
by Superstorm Sandy is the Community’s
electrical power system. A Con Edison power
line crosses the northeastern portion of the
Community parallel to the LIRR. Power outages
were widespread, as indicated by field surveys
in which 100% of respondents noted power
outages as an impact from the Storm.

The Community’s auto-dependence was
made especially clear during the aftermath of
Superstorm Sandy. Flooding of gas stations
caused power outages and damage to fuel
pumping equipment, leading to citywide fuel
shortages. According to AAA, as few as 35%
- 40% of stations in the City were operating in
the days immediately following the storm.*° Fuel
shortages had an significant impact in areas
where residents and employees rely on their
cars to commute and shop for daily necessities.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Springfield Boulevard Storm Sewer Upgrades

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

67
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Figure 2.15:

Infrastructure Assets

Idlewild Watershed Communities
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

  

 

 

 

  
  

 

0,
ae’? v6 NE e Oa,
\ wa Nt
S
a BAISLEY 3 RAILROAD 3
% POND PARK. =
? 2s “ate °
 % py, & 2
A ns oe “eeu
ROCKAWAY atv, ke . 3
’ "
2 } a 2H | by
& % wt %, eee : "8,
Gs » BD y Se es °
13074 ave a « % %, %, ee &
po %, % a, f
% aT rare NASSAU
ee BELT P COUNT¥
Rt SCONDUT AVE . 7
SPRINGFIELD GARDENS’.
h rs . £ :
* a
/\. > Se :
od 2 g\- {
Ye
- A
4 \ se 3) ¢ lag PARK z eS *
1 gah SPRINGFIELD ¥ 4 & %~,MIROSEDALE.$%
, cd 2 PARK : 6 ‘i eS, *
Ne a Mag Ves ane Bf as % WARSOUTH VALLEY
3 als A 5 ) ~af ¢ a a
x e me ~@ee * an OP PP STREAM
~S lm p47 AVE 1
e 8 Se, lap rd
Noe 6 "3 ao (Ol arte ya
@, & f 8 i a
\, ‘,, Baye % on = \
» SS 3 4, rn 4
N IDLEWILD “ % « A 4 J
'~ PARK oe 19mg ‘osprey
. S, HOOK CREEK oh
z c Ce
cy WILDLIFE SANCTUARY 8c att
" ® g
&
Be a
zy * ?
Cp wy NORTH WOODMERE
Mey ~ PARK
3S i
JFK aye %e i |
AIRPORT N
° + .
< ©) )
, Or
0%. : :
aN
¢ Ve
\
vw F%
* N
bead A
HEAD OF BAY

 

Legend

woe eee im PRIMARY PLANNING AREA

cen ot ms om ~SECONDARY PLANNING AREA

ASSETS

MTA FACILITY

oe LIRR | LONG BEACH AND FAR
ROCKAWAY LINES

a LIRR STATION | LOCUST MANOR
LIRR STATION | LAURELTON
LIRR STATION | ROSEDALE

8 JFK MTA BUS DEPOT

ROADWAYS
@ Farmers BLVD

@ Guy R BREWER BLVD
© sPRINGFIELD BLVD
© BELT PARKWAY

@ SOUTH CONDUIT AVE

8 147TH AVE

HOOK CREEK BLVD

FRANCIS LEWIS BLVD
BROOKVILLE BLVD
@® ROCKAWAY BLVD

UTILITIES
® Pump STATION
@ Power LINES

OTHER IDENTIFIED ASSETS
—e— BUS ROUTES

++ LIRR ROUTES

H TRANSPORTATION
(TAXI, LIMO, PRIVATE BUS}
A. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, SOLID

WASTE & RECYCLING

> POWER LINES

 

 

0.5

 

68

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Idlewild Watershed Communities

Figure 2.16: Risk to Infrastructure Assets

NASSAW
COUNTY

—*

IDLEWILD
PARK

HOOK CREEK
SANCTUARY

HEAD OF BAY ‘ \ IMF es

 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

RISK SCORE KEY

Eo wD
0-7 8-31 32-70

ASSETS

MTA FACILITY

@ LIRR | LONG BEACH AND FAR

ROCKAWAY LINES

@ LIRR STATION | LOCUST MANOR

@ LIRR STATION | LAURELTON

@ LIRR STATION | ROSEDALE

® JFK MTA BUS DEPOT

ROADWAYS

FARMERS BLVD
@

GUY R BREWER BLVD

SPRINGFIELD BLVD

BELT PARKWAY

SOUTH CONDUIT AVE
‘D)

147TH AVE
@2 HOOK CREEK BLVD
3) FRANCIS LEWIS BLVD
(4 BROOKVILLE BLVD
(5) ROCKAWAY BLVD

UTILITIES
PUMP STATION
4 POWER LINES

OTHER IDENTIFIED ASSETS
Oo TRANSPORTATION
(TAXI, LIMO, PRIVATE BUS)

A HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, SOLID
WASTE & RECYCLING

—*— BUS ROUTES
+--+ LIRR ROUTES

> POWER LINES

wo me me PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
oon ot oes ms ms SECONDARY PLANNING AREA

DOS RISK LEVELS
MODERATE HIGH [§NEXTREME

———
0 0.25 0.5 1 mi

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 69
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Natural and Cultural Resources

Superstorm Sandy impacted parks, tidal
wetlands, natural stormwater systems,
community facilities, and cultural institutions.
Tidal wetlands in the Idlewild Park Preserve,
both at high risk, form a network of natural
tidal buffers from coastal surge as well as a
natural filtration system for stormwater flowing
south through the Jamaica Bay Watershed into
Hook Creek and Jamaica Bay. These parks
and the wetlands within are considered assets
for both their flood protection and ecosystem
services (e.g., clean air and water), which were
enhanced in 2001 when the Idlewild Park
Preserve was expanded by 100 acres to create
the largest expanse of high-quality salt marsh
along the shores of Jamaica Bay. Tidal creeks
running through the park provide the greatest
volume of fresh water to the Bay. Idlewild Park
Preserve has been designated as a Forever Wild
Preserve, meaning it is a natural area within
New York City that supports diverse wildlife and
plant populations, including numerous rare,
threatened, and endangered species.** The
Idlewild Park Preserve, together with grassland
habitat at JFK Airport, is one of two sites in the
City that provide nesting habitat for northern
harrier (marsh hawk} and short-eared owl.
Ecological restoration initiatives by NYC DEP
include sewer construction mitigation, tidal and
freshwater wetlands restoration, and restoration
of upland habitat.

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
and NYS Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYS DEC) are coordinating on
the Jamaica Bay Restoration Project, while the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S.
EPA) Habitat Estuary Program has identified the

70 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Idlewild Park Preserve, Rosedale

Idlewild Park Preserve as a restoration priority.
NYC Department of Parks and Recreation
(NYC DPR), in coordination with the Eastern
Queens Alliance, has plans to construct the
Idlewild Park Preserve Environmental Science
Learning Center, with associated stormwater
management improvements in the park.

The Community prides itself on the quality of its
parkland and various recreational opportunities.
Among the 15 parks identified as assets, 12
are at moderate risk for future storm events.
This includes large parks such as Springfield
Park in Springfield Gardens, Brookville Park
in Brookville, and Railroad Park in Laurelton.
Playgrounds at moderate risk include Sunrise
Playground; South Rochdale Playground;
Mentone Playground; and the playground at

 

PS 52, the John C. Thompson School. Figure
2.18 illustrates risk to Natural and Cultural
Resource assets identified as part of the asset
inventory process.

Springfield Park was originally known as Spring
Fields for its system of natural ponds and
creeks. Today, NYC DEP and NYC Economic
Development Corporation (NYC EDC} are
implementing a Bluebelt project at Springfield
Park. The Bluebelt program preserves and
optimizes natural drainage systems including
streams, ponds, and lakes by directing
stormwater into natural filtration systems such
as green infrastructure. This project will remove
accumulated sediments from Springfield
Park Pond and plant wetland shelves along
its perimeter, with the goal of improving both
Springfield Park Pond, Springfield Gardens

water quality and aquatic habitat in the pond.
The newly planted wetlands will store and
filter stormwater which will then pass through
Springfield Park Pond, streams, and wetlands
into Jamaica Bay.*>

Both Brookville and Springfield Parks have
ponds fed by tidally influenced streams from
Hook Creek. Brookville Park Pond (also known
as Conselyeas Pond) in Brookville Park and
Springfield Park Pond overflowed beyond their
surrounding wetlands and parklands into
adjacent neighborhoods during Superstorm
Sandy, inundating residential properties
and businesses in Brookville and Rosedale.
Likewise, flooding from Jamaica Bay and
Thurston Basin inundated low-lying areas within
the Community and runways at JFK Airport.

 

Brockville Park Pond at 147th Avenue, Brookville

Coordination is ongoing among the USACE,
NYS DEC, and NYC DEP regarding both water
quality and flood protection in Jamaica Bay.
The Bay’s fragile ecosystem has been degraded
through human encroachment, increased
urbanization, and Combined Sewer Overflow
(CSO) discharges. The USACE is investigating
ecosystem restoration measures such as
regrading shorelines; revegetating grasslands;
creating and/or restoring additional estuarine,
wetland and upland habitats; and improving
circulation and flushing.*

The NYC DEP has adopted the Jamaica Bay
Watershed Protection Plan, which recommends
best management practices for improving the
water quality of the Bay. A comprehensive flood
protection study is also underway for Jamaica

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

   

Bay, led by the USACE in partnership with the
NYS DEC. The Atlantic Coast of New York,
East Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway Inlet and
Jamaica Bay Coastal Storm Risk Management
Feasibility Study is assessing the feasibility of
coastal storm risk management alternatives to
be implemented within Jamaica Bay.*”

In terms of cultural assets, Rochdale Village
and Rosedale public libraries are at moderate
risk, while the Laurelton Public Library is not in
a risk area. These library services, while not at
substantial risk, are locally significant facilities
that are not within walking distance for many
who live in the Community.

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 71
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Figure 2.17: Natural and Cultural Resource Assets

Idlewild Watershed Communities
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

.
~ M6,
"24 py SS ay Up

    

 

aX
LOCUST MANOR %)
STATION MON

  
 

ROCKAWAY atve

Maasr ep

13054 ave

144 Ave

 

  
 

BELT Ph

 

ScONDUT AVE

SPRINGFIELD GARDENS

ent

 
 
 

     
 

JFK
AIRPORT

HEAD OF

 

 
 

      
  
    
  

“Sp,
oy

NASSAU
COUNTY

STREAM

ROSEDALE gp

Legend

we mm mm PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
w= ee = SECONDARY PLANNING AREA
ASSETS
PARKS AND RECREATION
@ ROCHDALE PARK
@ RAILROAD PARK
MONTBELLIER PARK
SPRINGFIELD PARK
IDLEWILD ENVIRONMENTAL LEARNING CENTER
© BROOKVILLE PARK
DD |DLEWILD PARK
G) IDLEWILD PARK RECREATIONAL FIELD
E) HOOK CREEK PARK
( IDLEWILD KAYAK LAUNCH
WATERBODIES AND WETLANDS
@ SPRINGFIELD PARK POND
BROOKVILLE POND
THURSTON BASIN
IDLEWILD LAGOON
HOOK CREEK
JAMAICA BAY
LIBRARIES
ROCHDALE VILLAGE LIBRARY
QUEENS BOROUGH PUBLIC LIBRARY -
ROCHDALE VILLAGE COMMUNITY LIBRARY
LAURELTON LIBRARY
ROSEDALE LIBRARY

OTHER IDENTIFIED ASSETS
PLACE OF WORSHIP

GREEN STREETS
PLAYGROUND

CITY PARKS & OPEN SPACE

NATURE PRESERVE (WETLAND)

 

 

 

 

 

72 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs
Figure 2.18:

Risk to Natural and Cultural Resource Assets

 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Idlewild Watershed Communities
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

RISK SCORE KEY
0-7 8-31 -
ASSETS
PARKS AND RECREATION
ROCHDALE PARK
RAILROAD PARK
MONTBELLIER PARK

HOOK CREEK PARK
NASSAU IDLEWILD KAYAK LAUNCH

COUNTY
WATERBODIES AND WETLANDS

4 IDLEWILD LAGOON
(5) HOOK CREEK
(8 JAMAICA BAY

LIBRARIES
ROCHDALE VILLAGE LIBRARY

ag QUEENS BOROUGH PUBLIC LIBRARY -
ROCHDALE VILLAGE COMMUNITY LIBRARY
LAURELTON LIBRARY
ROSEDALE LIBRARY

HOOK CREEK OTHER IDENTIFIED ASSETS
WILDLIFE SANCTUARY C1 PLACE OF WORSHIP
10 (1 __ GREEN STREETS
14

wo es mm PRIMARY PLANNING AREA
con ot os ms om ~SECONDARY PLANNING AREA

DOS RISK LEVELS
MODERATE HIGH [§NNNEXTREME

————
0 0.25 0.5 1 mi

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 73
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Assets that Serve Socially Vulnerable
Populations

Assets that serve Socially Vulnerable Populations
include facilities that provide services for people
with disabilities, those with language barriers
due to limited English proficiency, low-income
populations, the elderly, young children, and
homeless populations. Superstorm Sandy
impacted socially vulnerable populations
within the Community’s flooded residential
neighborhoods, as well as assets that serve these
populations, such as schools and healthcare
facilities.

The Idlewild Watershed Communities have
limited socially vulnerable populations, with

Figure 2.19: Socially Vulnerable Populations

Households with Income Less than $50,000

 

74 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

low percentages of elderly, low-income, young
children, or populations with disabilities. The
highest concentration of elderly residents resides
north of the Belt Parkway in Laurelton between
223rd Street and Belt Parkway, along Baisley
Boulevard in Rochdale Village, and south of
Belt Parkway in Springfield Gardens between
Springfield Lane and Brookville Park. Elderly
populations identified within the moderate
risk area include those in Rochdale Village,
the northern part of Springfield Gardens, and
southern Laurelton, while disabled populations
include those in the western and central parts
of the Communities such as at Rochdale Village
and Locust Manor Senior Residence. Springfield
Gardens is also home to the Queens Detention

Facility, a privately operated 200-bed prison
which primarily houses pre-sentenced detainees
on behalf of the U.S. Marshall Service.

The Community does not have a_ high
concentration of low-income households;
however more than half of households in
Rochdale Village earn less than $50,000.%8
Lower-income households are dispersed
throughout the Community, with more than
one-fourth of the households in Springfield
Gardens, Brookville, and southern Laurelton
earning less than $50,000 annually, which is
moderately lower than the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) Area
Median Income (AMI) of $67,000 for a family
of four in New York City. The areas with the

Population that Commutes by Public Transportation

[) 18.4% -
[ 20.1% -
HR 30.1% -
WN 40.1% -
HM 50.1% -

 
greatest share of low-income households are
Rochdale Village and in Rosedale between the
Belt Parkway and Hook Creek Boulevard, where
more than 30% of households earn less than
$50,000 annually.

In the area between Farmers Boulevard and
Springfield Boulevard, 8% to 11% of the
population has some physical disability, while
in the area between the Belt Parkway and 86th
Street, 7% to 8% of the population has some
physical disability.

This auto-dependent community has a high
car ownership rate, with more than 85% of
the households having access to one or more
vehicles. However, dependency on public transit
is still very high. In the central part of Brookville

Households with No Access to a Vehicle

 

between 145th and 147th Avenues, 37% to
40% of the population depends on public
transit. More than one-third of the population
depends on public transit for commuting to
work between the Belt Parkway and Rockaway
Boulevard and the area beyond Francis Lewis
Boulevard adjacent to the LIRR station.

English-speaking populations in the Community
are relatively high, with less than 9.6% of non-
English speaking population in any one area
of the Community. Rosedale between Sunrise
Highway and 147th Avenue has the highest
non-English speaking population, between
8.4% and 9.6% (Figure 2.19}.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Population 65 Years and Older

 

|] 21% - 3%
[13.1% -7%
[I 7.1% - 12%
GO 12.1% - 20%
BH 20.1% - 31%

 

 

[15.3% - 8%
[1] 8.1% - 10%
[7] 10.1% - 13%
13.1% - 15%
GE 15.1% - 18.5%

 

 

 

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 75
Idlewild Watershed Communities

B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities

The objective of the Assessment of Needs and
Opportunities is to evaluate the potential for
increased resilience in the short-, medium-,
and long-term in the Idlewild Watershed
Communities (Community). The Assessment
of Needs and Opportunities has been refined
through detailed analysis of the assets and risks
within the Community, analysis of demographic
and economic data, and input from the NYRCR
Planning Committee (Committee), and at Public
Engagement Events.

Though Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane
Irene were both extreme events, the sources
and causes of flooding observed during these
storms are regularly reflected on a smaller scale
during high tides, rain storms, and nor’easters.
These extreme events have effectively exposed
the greater system-wide inadequacy of the
Community’s flood mitigation and protection
system, as well as the need for more robust
community planning.

For each of the six Recovery Support Functions
(RSFs) described in Section |.C., the following
Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
identifies areas in which the Community could
improve its resilience to major storms and
other disasters. This analysis supplements
input that the Committee provided at Planning
Committee Meetings and received at Public
Engagement Events and has helped to guide
the Committee in identifying Reconstruction
Strategies and Projects that will increase the
Community’s resilience.

76 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Community Planning and Capacity
Building

 

The Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
for Community Planning and Capacity Building
examines existing public education initiatives,
recommendations from previous _ plans
created for the Community, and policies and
programs related to resilience and emergency
preparedness undertaken by community groups
and New York City agencies. In order to assess
needs for Community Planning and Capacity
Building, the Community was assessed for its
ability to:

« Mobilize storm recovery activities;
= Adequately educate residents; and

= Implement long-term plans to mitigate
storm damage.

In recent years, the New York City Department
of City Planning (NYC DCP} downzoned three
neighborhoods within the Community in
response to residents’ concerns about multi-
family buildings altering the Community’s
suburban character. These areas include:
the section of Springfield Gardens between
Baisley Boulevard, North Conduit Avenue, and
Guy R. Brewer Boulevard (2005); the majority
of Brookville between Springfield Park and
Brookville Parks, from South Conduit Avenue to
Idlewild Park; and several sections of Rosedale
south of Merrick Boulevard (2010). However,
residents remain concerned about enforcement
of zoning regulations with regard to out of
scale buildings.” Residents have also expressed

concerns about enforcement regarding
basement conversions and paving of front yards
with hardscape. Basement conversions in flood
zones put tenants at risk of flood damage, while
yard paving increases the impact of stormwater
runoff on adjacent properties.

Community Planning and Capacity
Building Needs

Needs in the Community regarding Community
Planning and Capacity Building largely pertain
to educational campaigns, empowerment of
homeowners and tenants to protect themselves
from extreme weather, and increased resources
and training for existing Community Based
Organizations (CBOs) in the area.

Disaster Preparedness Education and
Resources for the Elderly

The elderly population in the Community needs
educational resources and additional social
services that allow them to age in place while
also making sure that they have the support they
need to evacuate and recover in the event of a
disaster. In particular, this population needs a
network of social services that has the capacity
to maintain a voluntary registry of their location
and needs, can provide transportation in the
event of an evacuation for those who cannot
drive, and can provide education and assistance
for elderly homeowners who need to upgrade
their homes to withstand future flooding.
Expanded Localized Educational Campaigns
on Emergency Preparedness and
Floodproofing

Although tools exist to provide information to
residents in the Community on emergency
preparedness and floodproofing, localized
educational campaigns that reach more
residents are needed. Citywide materials provide
effective emergency preparedness concepts, but
need to be tailored to the Community in order
to be more locally applicable. There are many
ways that residents can ensure that their homes
and families are better prepared for extreme
weather and other disasters—some which incur
minimal costs and others which would require
minor structural improvements—but existing
technical and educational literature has limited
impact in the Community.

Tenant Advocacy

Tenants living in rental properties, including
newer multi-family buildings need an advocate
to provide resources and education about
their rights in assuring that their homes are
constructed with adequate  floodproofing
methods. Ensuring that rental properties are
resilient to flooding will also help to make sure
that these properties are well-maintained and
supportive of the Community’s character.

Homeowner Advocacy

Homeowners in the Community need an
advocate to educate them on how to negotiate
with insurance companies to receive adequate
payment for storm damages. After Hurricane
Irene and Superstorm Sandy, many residents
have reported receiving inadequate payments
or being dropped from their flood insurance

policy.*° In particular, low-income residents

may lack sufficient resources and support to
repair storm damage or floodproof their homes
without additional assistance.

Resource and Recovery Centers

There is a need within the Community for local
facilities where CBOs could provide emergency-
response education and training during normal
conditions while also serving as sites for
distribution of resources and other assistance
after disasters. A model for Resource and
Recovery Centers was developed through the
first round of NYRCR Plans, which is currently
being implemented in other communities. The
services that these facilities could potentially
provide would be distinct from the services
provided at Evacuation Centers operated by the
NYC Office of Emergency Management (OEM).
Rather, the need within the Idlewild Watershed
Communities is for a new facility located within
the Community that could provide educational
materials, training, charging stations, and basic
needs when residents return to the area after
an evacuation.

Community Planning and Capacity
Building Opportunities

The Idlewild Watershed Communities are well
positioned to respond to the needs outlined
above, increasing the Community’s capacity
to protect residents from extreme weather. The
Community’s ability to increase the resilience
of community response networks is based
on two key opportunities. First, many of the
educational resources that the Community
needs in order to increase resilience already
exist. Rather than creating new materials and

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

NYC OEM Educational Materials

Source: NYC OEM

programs, the Community can build upon
these existing materials and use local outreach
and distribution channels to make sure the
resources are reaching populations in need.
Second, and more importantly, the Community
has in place an extensive and active network
of civic associations and religious institutions
that can serve as liaisons between City agencies
and local residents to improve upon and
localize disaster recovery educational materials
and resources.

There are strong and active networks of
CBOs—including local civic associations, local
churches, and other community facilities—that
could support a greater degree of coordination
in order to improve services during extreme
weather events. The model for this type of
initiative is the coordinated response that health
and social services organizations facilitated in
the immediate aftermath of Superstorm Sandy.
With little planning or advance coordination,
organizations within the Community all
expanded their reach to provide critical recovery

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 77
Idlewild Watershed Communities

services. These existing networks of social services
organizations can be a building block for greater
coordination in advance of future disasters.
Residents and businesses in the Community will
be more resilient by strengthening connections
among neighborhood organizations, religious
organizations, and City agencies.

Coordinate Community-Based Organizations

with NYC OEM Resources

One of the greatest resources in the Idlewild
Watershed Communities is the active network
of CBOs, including civic associations,
religions institutions, and other social services
organizations. These groups are well-
established and maintain strong connections
to residents within the Community. The services
that these groups already provide range from
community planning efforts and advocacy to
environmental education and assistance for
the elderly. Although CBOs do not currently
provide significant emergency recovery support
services, the networks they have established
present an opportunity to bring additional
services to the Community. In addition to
these organizations that are not primarily
focused on disaster assistance, there is also a
Community Emergency Response Team (CERT)
based in Southeast Queens that is supported by
NYC OEM.

The relationship between NYC OEM and
the local CERT provides a model for how the
Community can expand the resilience efforts
of CBOs with support from the City. NYC
OEM has initiated a pilot program to support
existing CBO networks known as Community
Organizations Active in Disaster (COAD}.
COADs are networks of local organizations,

78 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

much like the network of civic associations that
exists in the Idlewild Watershed Communities,
but with an additional emphasis on providing
training and recovery support services to help
communities recover from disasters.

The opportunity to establish a COAD that
serves the Idlewild Watershed Communities
would build upon the existing network of civic
associations. Through this network, the COAD
would serve as a critical liaison, providing
local residents and businesses with educational
materials, training events, and recovery support
services. The COAD could also serve as an
advocate in addressing additional needs within
the Community, coordinating with — senior-
services organizations to provide assistance
to the elderly, distributing locally tailored NYC
OEM educational materials, advocating for
tenants and homeowners, and helping to supply
and staff Resource and Recovery Centers in the
aftermath of a disaster.

Resource and Recovery Centers

Resource and Recovery Centers can provide
critical services to residents in the aftermath
of major storms. These centers would serve a
different function from designated evacuation
centers; rather than housing displaced
residents, they would provide educational
materials, training, charging stations, and basic
needs when residents return to the area after
an evacuation. The centers would be located
in existing facilities, such as libraries, churches,
community centers, or other buildings that are
in operation year-round.

Economic Development

 

Expedient post-storm recovery is advantageous
for local economies. Resilience measures to help
avoid or mitigate future storm damages will
help speed future recoveries. The health of the
local economy is vital from several standpoints.
Businesses provide goods and services that
residents need, and local businesses minimize
distances that people need to travel to obtain
these goods and services. Additionally, when
businesses are closed, employees lose wages,
and businesses suffer loss of revenue. For
many small businesses, even a short period
of revenue loss is enough to affect its ability to
remain open.

Economic Development Needs

The ongoing health and viability of existing
businesses in the Community is important for
employment, revenue, and provision of goods
and services to the local population. Businesses
and economic corridors that face severe or
recurring flooding need to be targeted with
floodproofing and resiliency measures to
minimize future damage and reduce the time
needed for recovery.

Access to Critical Goods and Services

While few Community businesses suffered major
damage from flooding during Superstorm
Sandy, daily operations for many businesses
were interrupted due to the storm's effects,
including power outages and sewer backups.
Also, a lack of transportation made it difficult for
employees to reach their jobs and for shoppers
and deliveries to reach businesses. It is vital
that Community businesses are accessible to
employees, shoppers, and deliveries after storm
events. It is also important for these businesses
to recover power, water, and heating quickly.
In particular, economic corridors at risk of
future flooding are shown in Figure 2.20 and
include Guy R. Brewer Boulevard, Farmers
Boulevard, Sunrise Highway/South Conduit,
the area surrounding the Rosedale LIRR Station,
243rd Street, Brookville Boulevard, and
Rockaway Boulevard.

Public input from Community residents suggests
that there are retail gaps in the Idlewild
Watershed Communities, and residents tend to
go elsewhere for daily needs (for example, to
Green Acres Mall, Five Towns Shopping Center,
and other locations in nearby Nassau County).
The types of goods and services located in the
Community do not match residents’ needs.
To ensure that residents are able to access
goods and services, the Community needs to
identify its retail gaps. The day-to-day issue
of having to leave the Community to make
purchases is exacerbated after storm events
due to transportation difficulties. As such,
the Community needs access to retail and
commercial centers, whether it involves reliable
transportation or the location of appropriate
businesses closer to residents, or both.
Transportation is also needed for people to reach
their places of work. Because top employment
destinations for Community residents include
Downtown Brooklyn and Lower Manhattan, it is
important that Community residents can reach
these destinations after storm events.

Coordination with the Business Community
There are numerous businesses in the
Community (596 economic assets have

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 2.20: Retail Leakage to Adjacent Communities

BAISLEY RAILROAD 4

   

     
 
    
  
 
  

   

Day,
© GUY R. BREWER

BLVD. RETAIL @iocust manor ~

STATION
"hee

SUNRISE HIGHWA ;
AVE RETA @.
es

  
  

Ss
as

243RD.$7 RETAIL

   

&
BROOKVILLE

&
SPRINGAELD PAIK =

Jas
Avy
PARK s

       
  

a

 
  
     

2%.) * souTH
VALLEY

BRQOKVILE
BLYD RETAIL
K ave

Se
&

 

147 AVE
& DQ PrReam
a7 so
Wee |g
» Som 8 Q :
Y bh % lag ave
2
a 1 y
‘ cave ‘ew
G
© 19g
v
HOOK CREEK J a FOOD
HLDLIFE SANCTUARY ain a em

      
  

    

*

 
 
    
 

a

NORTH WOODMERE
PARK

 

LEGEND
PLANNING AREA RETAIL

O NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL

-
I
!
!
'
}
s
RETAIL LEAKAGE E TOWNS

ye PPING

BIG BOX RETAIL
— TER
a od

EXTENT OF FLOODING FROM 4
a
SUPERSTORM SANDY ee:

FREQUENTLY FLOODED AREAS

 

 

HEAD OF BAY

 

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 79
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

243rd Street Retail Corridor, Rosedale

been identified), potentially complicating
recovery and coordination. In order to make
business outreach and recovery processes
more manageable, there is a need for greater
coordination and the information sharing
business owners and employees. Informal
communication networks between business
owners and employees are also needed,
especially when other communication networks
are not functioning due to storm damage. The
coordination of business owners who are able
to help each other supports faster and more
efficient recovery and resilience.

Support for Small Businesses

The majority of businesses in the Community are
small, with four employees or less. The three zip
codes covering the Community (11413, 11434,
and 11422} contain 1,717 businesses. Of
these, 1,007 (58.6%) have four employees or
less, and 1,333 (77.6%) have nine employees

80 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

or less.4’ Small business support is needed, as
these businesses generally have fewer resources
to deal with interruptions. Institutional support
for small businesses is an economic need in
the Community.

Economic Development Opportunities

Existing Resources for Businesses

To the extent that local businesses suffered
damage, the NYC Economic Development
Corporation (NYC EDC) and the NYC
Department of Small Business Services (NYC
SBS} have a program to help businesses recover
and become more resilient to future storms.
The agencies are providing financial assistance
through the Hurricane Sandy Business Loan
and Grant Program, which provides grants and
loans to small businesses that suffered direct
damage from the storm.” Additionally, NYC SBS
is offering training sessions for those interested

Springfield Gardens Industrial District

in applying for a grant or loan, and will hold
office hours for those needing assistance.

Opportunities for Local Entrepreneurs

There is opportunity for local entrepreneurs
to fill commercial gaps identified in the retail
gap analysis. These entrepreneurs can take
advantage of the chance to work with local
economic development organizations, such
as the Queens Economic Development
Corporation (QEDC} and the Queens Chamber
of Commerce. QEDC has a partnership with
Accion International, a nonprofit organization
that works with microfinance institutions to
provide financial services, that provides loans to
small businesses and start-ups. They also offer
advice on credit, finances, and loan eligibility.

The Community can also identify vacant or
underutilized parcels that could be used for infill
or redevelopment based on the needs identified
ant of: a

Eta hE het

PS 231, Queens

in the retail gap analysis. An inventory of such
parcels could help guide the local business
community in identifying future opportunities.
Parcels located outside of flood zones should be
identified as places to locate essential services,
such as grocery stores (should such businesses

be needed).

To facilitate better collaboration and
coordination, the Community can create a
database of businesses in the area so people are
aware of the local businesses, and so businesses
are aware of each other, and can be reached
during times of emergency and recovery.

Queens Library, Rosedale Branch

Health and Social Services

 

For this Assessment of Needs and Opportunities,
Health and Social Services assets and assets
that support socially vulnerable populations
were reviewed to determine the extent that their
services were impacted by Superstorm Sandy,
and what these assets need to provide improved
services in the event of future storms.

Health and Social Services Needs

Centralized Communications Strategy for the
Elderly

The Community needs resources to provide
comprehensive support for the — elderly
population, including education during normal
conditions, notification and _ transportation
during pre-storm conditions, and search crews
after a disaster in case of phone and power
outages. This comprehensive strategy to provide

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

support for the elderly before and after disasters
would include an inventory/database of
homebound seniors, coordinated educational
campaigns, emergency transportation planning
for evacuations, and coordination with local
first responders or CERT to carry out post-
disaster searches.

Backup Power for Critical Facilities

Facilities within the Idlewild Watershed
Communities experienced power outages
from one week to four weeks in the aftermath
of Superstorm Sandy. It is especially important
that Health and Social Services assets are able
to maintain continued operations during and
after disasters, especially first responders and
other critical facilities that provide recovery
services, such as schools, healthcare facilities,
and other social services organizations. These
assets require reliable backup power supplies
fo maintain provision of recovery services

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 81
Idlewild Watershed Communities

during widespread power outages. Backup
power supplies will also help to ensure that first
responders maintain the ability to communicate
with each other and community groups while
coordinating recovery efforts during any type
of disaster.

Flood Protections for Assets that are at Risk of
Flooding

Although none of the Health and Social Services
assets in the Idlewild Watershed Communities
received High or Extreme Risk Scores, many
received Moderate Risk Scores, and three
of these are located in or near the High Risk
Zone on the Risk Assessment Maps. These three
assets—Engine 314 of the New York City Fire
Department (FDNY}, PS. 181 in Brookville, and
PS. 196 in Rosedale—all may be subject to
future flooding due to tidal surge in the event
of an extreme storm like Superstorm Sandy.
To mitigate this risk, these assets require flood
protections to limit potential damage, while
Health and Social Services assets that are not at
risk of future flooding should be viewed for their
potential to provide resources to those who rely
on assets that could flood during future storms.

Health and Social Services
Opportunities

Expanding Existing Resources for the Elderly

There are three senior centers just outside of the
Community that provide services to its residents,
Laurelton/Rosedale Senior Center, Robert
Couche Senior Center, and Rockaway Boulevard
Senior Center. These facilities, identified below,
are outside of the Risk Zones and therefore
could provide services for those affected by

82 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

future flooding. In addition, the Rochdale Village
Senior Center provides supportive services for
seniors who are residents of Rochdale Village
and the surrounding areas, including residents
of the Idlewild Watershed Communities. There
is an opportunity to expand services at this
location to provide education and resources on
disaster safety.

Jamaica Service Program for Older Adults
(JSPOA) has established a program to
promote Naturally Occurring Retirement
Communities (NORCs) and provide resources
for seniors who are aging in place. NORCs
are multi-generational communities that were
not originally built for seniors but that have
developed over time into areas that house a
significant number of older adults.42 The Senior
Homeowner’s Guide produced by JSPOA
provides some helpful information on working
with contractors to conduct home improvements.
This publication presents an opportunity to
provide educational resources to seniors on
renovating their homes to increase resilience.

All of these existing resources for the elderly
could be expanded to include more information,
outreach, and support for older adults in the
event of a disaster. The Rochdale Village NORC
and newly established NORCs within the
Primary Planning Area could work with JSPOA
and local senior centers to develop a voluntary
registry of seniors who are aging in place and
conduct home visits before and after disasters as
a service to those living in NORCs. This registry
would need to be updated and maintained on
a regular basis by a social service organization
located within the Community.

Backup Power for Critical Facilities

The need to provide backup power for critical
facilities can be supported by several well-
established social service organizations that are
active inthe Community. Existing facilities such as
the Rosedale Library, VFW and American Legion
locations, and public schools already provide
the Community with social-services resources.
Organizations such as these, which do not have
a direct mission to provide recovery services—
but that nonetheless serve a critical role during
disasters—could provide even more reliable
assistance if their facilities were augmented with
backup power supplies to ensure continued
operations during power outages. Generators
that provide backup power for Health and
Social Services assets would improve recovery
work in the aftermath of extreme weather such
as Superstorm Sandy or Hurricane Irene, and
the benefits would also extend to other recovery
services, providing charging stations during
blackouts, cooling stations during the summer,
and warming stations during the winter.
Housing

 

A number of housing-related needs and
opportunities were identified through public
input as well as interpretation of data gathered
and detailed above.

Housing Needs

Floodproofing Retrofits

Older housing units in the Community need
floodproofing retrofits, and homeowner
education is critical. More than 84% of
Community homes were built prior to 1983,
when flood-resistance standards were added
to the New York City building code, which
was originally implemented in 1968. In New
York City, 84% of buildings within Superstorm
Sandy’s inundation area were built before
1983, but 98% of the buildings destroyed and
94% of the buildings suffering severe structural
damage were built before 1983,4* indicating
that residences pre-dating flood-resistance
standards are more vulnerable to damage.

 

Home with Paved Yard on 148th Drive, Rosedale

Mold Remediation

Community residents voiced concerns about
mold in homes as a result of flooding. A study
commissioned after Sandy found that “flooded
homes not dried out within 24 to 48 hours were
at serious risk of developing mold infestations,
threatening the health and safety of thousands
of New Yorkers. More than two years after
Superstorm Sandy hit, the acute need for mold
remediation across New York City has not
abated, and mold’s disproportionate impact on
low-income and immigrant communities has
resulted in displacement, sickness, and continued
crisis in Sandy-affected neighborhoods.”“ The
Community needs to develop measures to
remediate homes to address mold and identify
safe removal strategies.

Floodproofing of Renter-Occupied Housing

Maintenance of affordable housing in the
Community is another necessity. Based on
data provided by the 2008-2012 American
Community Survey and mapped by New York
University’s Furman Center in 2011, 34% to

Single-family Homes on 225th Street, Brookville

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

40% of renter-occupied households in the
Community spent more than 30% of their
monthly income on rent (including heat
and electricity) and are thus considered “rent
burdened,” according to guidelines established
by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (U.S. HUD}. Measures need to be
taken to ensure that housing that is currently
affordable remains so. Resiliency retrofits will
be costly, and there is danger that landlords will
pass on the costs of retrofits to renters through
higher rents. Rent-burdened households need
to be shielded from such cost increases that
may occur due to resiliency investments.

Flood Insurance Assistance

Flood insurance is another concern for
Community members. Residents have reported
being dropped from their flood insurance, even
if they had no flood claims. A number of news
outlets have reported insurance companies
dropping customers after Sandy. Skyrocketing
insurance costs have also been a concern due
to recent legislative changes. In 2012, the

 

Homes Adjacent to Springfield Gardens Industrial Area

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 83
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Federal government passed the Biggert-Waters
Flood Insurance Reform Act, which aimed to
ensure that flood insurance rates reflect flood
risk, raising long-subsidized premiums over the
course of four years. Congress voted in March
2014 to delay this price increase for three
years, due to the high costs it would impose on
homeowners. Insurance costs have risen post-
storm, with one estimate suggesting that the
average cost of flood insurance in New York
City after Superstorm Sandy had risen about
20% for properties in high-risk areas.*7 And,
after insurance premiums increase, properties
generally see a matching decline in value,
and substantial premium increases reduce
disposable income, wealth, or both.** To the
extent that property owners have to pay more for
insurance, already rent-burdened households
may struggle with higher rents and homeowners
may struggle with higher insurance costs. There

Figure 2.21:
0.30%
0.25%
0.20%
0.15%

0.10%

Foreclosure Rate

0.05%

0.00%

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

New York City Queens

is a need for these households to be able to
keep their insurance coverage at an affordable
level.

Because the majority of housing units in the
Community are owner-occupied, there is a
need to mitigate financial risks to homeowners
related to storm damage and insurance. Advice
and help is also needed so that Community
residents are able to find credible information
on housing programs, flooding risk, and
insurance issues so that they can assess their
options and make appropriate decisions.

Loss of Street Trees

Another concern is that trees destroyed on
residential streets during Superstorm Sandy
have not been replaced.*? Loss of street trees
has a negative impact on both stormwater
management and on property values. Multiple

Notices of Foreclosure (Rate, 1-4 Family Buildings), May 2014

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Year

Idlewild Watershed Communities

Source: Public Data Corporation, New York City Department of Finance, Furman Center

84 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

studies have shown that the presence of street
trees can add to property values and sales prices
for single family homes.*° One report finds that
“homes with trees are generally preferred to
comparable homes without trees, with the trend
across studies being a price increase of about
7%."5'52 Street trees need to be replaced in
front of residences throughout the Community
to mitigate stormwater flooding and protect
property values.

Storm Damage Compounding Foreclosures
Foreclosures are an issue in the Community
that may be worsened by post-storm drops
in housing value. According to data from the
Furman Center, the rate of foreclosures within
the Community is approximately ten times that
of Queens and New York City (Figure 2.21).5*
Although the foreclosure crisis began during the
recession of 2007-2009, storm damage and
increasing flood insurance rates pose an added
burden on families who are already struggling
with housing costs. Credit counseling is needed
for those households going through or at risk of
going through foreclosure.

Housing Opportunities

A number of housing assistance programs exist
to help homeowners with post-disaster repairs on
top of FEMA funding,*4 and the Neighborhood
Recovery Fund,55 which provides grants or
loans to homeowners who were affected by
Sandy. Loans for repairs are available through
agencies such as the U.S. Small Business
Administration (SBA), which provides financial
assistance to homeowners and renters in
declared disaster areas.*° Also, the Individuals
and Households Program (IHP}, administered
by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security
(DHS), provides funding and help for housing
needs related to disasters.5”

Building Retrofits

Community residents have expressed interest in
floodproofing or elevating single-family houses
in specific parts of the Community in areas
where flood risks are particularly high. Existing
programs that provide homeowner assistance
for home elevation, storm damage repairs, or
floodproofing assistance include New York City
Build It Back, and the Local Initiatives Support
Corporation (LISC}) Home Repair Program.
While these programs provide some assistance
to homeowners who experienced property
damage from Superstorm Sandy or Hurricane
Irene, there may be additional opportunities
to provide gap funding to those who are not
served by these programs.

There are also opportunities through the
mold remediation program, Neighborhood
Revitalization NYC, operated by LISC.
However, according to the report Sandy’s
Mold Legacy released in 2013, only 2,000
homes were helped by this program city-wide,
with awareness of the program minimall.*?
There is an opportunity to increase awareness
of Neighborhood Revitalization NYC so that
homeowners who are facing still problems with
mold can receive assistance.

Flood Insurance Assistance

A number of local organizations are providing
advice and aid to households regarding their
options and new regulations. Assistance is also
being offered to those who have questions or
problems with their flood insurance. These

problems have been recognized, and the New
York State Department of Financial Services has
investigated and announced new regulations
regarding insurance company practices after
Superstorm Sandy. Additionally, Community
residents can obtain legal help relating to flood
insurance through the City Bar Legal Hotline, or
review Touro Law Clinics’ Flood Victims FAQ.*?

Street Tree Plantings

Community residents can reach out to the New
York City Department of Parks and Recreation
(NYC DPR} for free street trees. Tree planting
can help with stormwater management and
maintaining residential property values as well
as enhancing community character.

Francis Lewis Boulevard at South Conduit Avenue

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Infrastructure

 

Superstorm Sandy caused significant damage
and strain to many of the Community’s
infrastructure assets and systems from inundation
and flooding. The Community faces severe risk
not just from direct storm surge but also from
backflow inundation, a high groundwater table,
and overland stormwater runoff. Stormwater
and sewage backflow flooded homes and
businesses during Superstorm Sandy, causing
building damage and potential human exposure
to toxic materials. Many neighborhoods remain
highly vulnerable to this type of inundation in
future storm events.

Infrastructure Needs

Needs for infrastructure
the restoration, repair,

systems involve
and management

 

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 85
Idlewild Watershed Communities

of essential services, such as_ stormwater
systems, transportation networks, and coastal
defenses. While some infrastructure issues can
be addressed within the NYRCR Plan for the
Community, other projects will require additional
study, significant regional coordination, and
greater capital investment. The Committee
identified several critical infrastructure issues
within the Community including:

«Heavy rains and frequent flooding have
caused damage to local streets, including
ponding and sinkholes;

« Because no subways serve the Community,
buses provide a critical transit link for
residents and businesses in the area.
Reliable bus routes provide an important
connection for local residents, especially
those who do not own cars or in the event
that cars are damaged by severe flooding;

= Frequent power outages occur due to
downed wires, as most power lines are
above ground, and lack of a diversified
power network;

= Several large capital projects are underway
or planned by NYC DEP and the New York
City Department of Transportation (NYC
DOT). More information is needed on the
impact new or upgraded storm sewers
will have on frequent stormwater flooding
and what gaps exist that potential NYRCR
projects could fill; and

« The Rosedale Pumping Station is
completely below grade, with the exception
of some ventilation equipment housed in
an onsite brick structure. Failure of the
Rosedale Pumping Station would affect
an area of approximately 990 acres with

86 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Vacant Lot on Bayview Avenue, Meadowmere

a population of 17,683. According to

the NYC Wastewater Resiliency Plan, “the
critical flood elevation would inundate the
area surrounding the facility with over 4
feet of water. This would damage electrical
controls and the non-submersible pump
motors. The Rosedale Pumping Station
receives flow from another pumping
station. Therefore loss of function at
Rosedale increases the vulnerability of an
additional pumping station.” The pumping
station requires hardening measures

to protect against future storm events,
including elevating the electrical equipment
and pump motors, and constructing a
new building, at an estimated cost of
$9,943,000.

These needs addresscriticalissuesthe Community
faces and opportunities to enhance and improve
the infrastructure would directly address those
issues by strengthening coastal defenses,
improving stormwater and sewer capacity,
increasing the reliability of telecommunication

 

networks, and building a more reliable power
grid and transportation network — system.
Infrastructure needs have a broad impact on
the Community and the surrounding parts of
Queens and Nassau Counties.

Power Supply Network

After Superstorm Sandy, the Community
experienced widespread power outages,
ranging from one to four weeks. As a result,
the Community faced a lack of heat, interrupted
communications capabilities, hardship for local
small businesses, and inadequate capacity to
operate critical facilities. According to input
from the Committee and feedback at Public
Engagement Events, the main source of power
outages during the storms was from downed
trees that fell on power lines. The Community
lacks a diversified network of power sources
and relies mainly on overhead power lines for
their source of power. With the exception of the
Rochdale Village Power Plant, the Community
does not use natural gas or microgrids to supply
alternate power during storm events.

Telecommunications Network

The Community has a _ network of civic
associations that reach out to their respective
constituents before and after storm events for
coordination, organization, and to identify areas
of need and assistance. These associations use
grassroots techniques to stay connected within
each of their respective neighborhoods. During
Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene, the
associations did not have a reliable emergency
communications network, complicating efforts
to coordinate. They lack the equipment needed
to connect with each other and to other
emergency coordination efforts. Due to power
outages and lack of available Wi-Fi access in
public areas, gathering information via the
Internet was either unreliable or not possible.
Currently, there is one public Wi-Fi hotspot at
the Queens Public Library in Rosedale, covering
an area that does not adequately serve the
entire Community and its residents.

Stormwater and Sewer Network

The configuration of the Community’s drainage
system provides additional clarity regarding
potential sources of recurring flooding issues.
The western portion of the Community is within
the Grassy Bay-Jamaica Bay watershed, while
the eastern portion is within the Hook Creek/
Head of Bay watershed. The total drainage
area for the Jamaica Bay watershed is 50,708
acres, with a combined sewer contributory area
of 6,600 acres, approximately 5,478 acres of
which are impervious.°!

According to the 2011 NYC DEP Waterbody/
Watershed Facility Plan for the Jamaica Bay and
CSO Tributaries, the majority of the Community’s
collection system is served by separate sewers,
with a very small portion in the northeast area
served by combined sewers (along Merrick
Boulevard near the Belt Parkway and Francis
Lewis Boulevard) and direct drainage in the
southeast area (along Hungry Harbor Road).
The entire Community is served by Jamaica
Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP). Adjacent
areas of Brooklyn and Queens are served by
the Spring Creek Auxiliary Water Pollution
Control Plant (AWPCP} and the 26th Ward
Water Pollution Control Plant (WPCP). The
Spring Creek AWPCP also receives stormwater
overflow from the Jamaica WWTP

As of 2011, approximately 70% of Jamaica
WWTP was served by separate sewers, 21%
by combined sewers, and 9% by direct runoff
into Jamaica Bay. Portions of the sanitary sewer
system flow into the combined system, and
other portions of the sanitary system act as
combined sewers because stormwater systems
have not been constructed. The Jamaica
WWTP service area has two pumping stations
located in Howard Beach and Rosedale. The
Rosedale Pumping Station serves a separate
sewer area and is located on 147th Avenue at
Brookville Boulevard.*?

Stormwater and sewer systems throughout
the Community were compromised during
Superstorm Sandy, causing flooding in low-
lying areas and sewer backups into basements.
These systems also experience frequent flooding
and sewer backups during rainstorms and high
tides. An effort by NYC DEP is underway to

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

expand the stormwater, water supply, and sewer
networks by installing new drainage pipes and
mains in coordination with natural solutions
such as the Bluebelt project in Springfield Park.
These projects will address frequent flooding
throughout the Community and improve water
quality in Springfield Park Pond. The project
includes stormwater pipe installation and street
reconstruction. A number of significant Bluebelt
components include:

«Three large constructed wetlands, each
situated at storm sewer outfalls.

«Installation of 2,000 square feet of porous
concrete in the Springfield Boulevard
median, undergirded with structural soil to
encourage the growth of new trees planted
in the median.

Construction on the new Springfield Gardens
Bluebelt began in the fall of 2012 and is ongoing.
Despite the continuing work on stormwater
and sewer upgrades, stormwater systems
throughout the Community require additional
hydrologic and hydraulic studies to determine
the specific nature and extent of the sources of
sewer backups and stormwater flooding within
the low-lying areas. Additional study would
determine where the low-lying flooding is still
occurring, how the water is entering these areas
(overland flow, groundwater, etc.), where and
what networks need to be expanded to increase
system capacity, and how the Community can
use the existing wetlands and ponds within the
parks for stormwater retention. Maintenance
of not just the roadway catch basins but also
residential trap/sump pump systems need to be
adequately maintained for proper function. The

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 87
Idlewild Watershed Communities

high groundwater table within the Community
also affects stormwater runoff and capture.

Coastal Defenses

Superstorm Sandy coincided with a high tide,
exacerbating flooding in southern Queens.
Flood levels averaged three to six feet
throughout the Community. In some areas,
where floodwaters reached a height of 10 feet,
homes and businesses were inundated with
more than five feet of floodwater. Backwater
inundation, or flooding from creeks and inlets,
also flooded the Community from Hook Creek
and overtopping of Idlewild Marsh and Thurston
Basin. Even though the wetlands in Idlewild Park
Preserve provide some natural protections to
elevated tides, the Community lacks hardened
protection, berms, and tide gates for events
over the 10-year storm. Construction has also
occurred within the adjacent wetland areas and
has decreased natural defenses that were served
by the marshes. In addition, understanding how
the tide gates within JFK operate and affect the
Community would help residents and businesses
properly plan for future storm events.

Transportation Infrastructure

Rockaway Boulevard and Belt Parkway are the
only major roadways within the Community that
provide an east-west link to Nassau County and
Brooklyn, while 147th Avenue is the only major
east-west connection within the Community.
These roads are often congested and lack
sufficient connections to the neighborhoods.
The Belt Parkway links the Community to
Brooklyn, Manhattan, and Long Island. Since
Superstorm Sandy, many of the roadways have
fallen into disrepair due to lack of maintenance,

88 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

frequent flooding, and a high groundwater
table that causes sinkholes. Local flooding of
roadways like Brookville Boulevard decreases
the routes that are used for both evacuations
and daily travel. The bridge on 147th Avenue
just south of Brookville Park is prone to flooding
during frequent rain events as well as heavy
rains. Because 147th Avenue is one of the only
east-west routes traversing the Community, the
vulnerability of this bridge has an outsized effect
on circulation and access in the Community.

The Idlewild Watershed Communities lack
diverse public transit facilities and therefore
many residents and workers rely largely on
private vehicles for transport. During storm
events, there is no designated high ground for
residents to store their cars or transportation to
get them to and from safe locations to protect
vehicles from storm damage. Increased bus
service would provide better connectivity and
access to the subways and the LIRR stations at
Rosedale, Laurelton, and Locust Manor. These
LIRR stations did not flood during Superstorm
Sandy, however, the parking lot adjacent to the
Rosedale station experiences recurring flooding.
Parking lots at the Laurelton and Locust Manor
stations could be used as vehicle storage during
future storm surge events.

Infrastructure Opportunities

Power Supply Network

Superstorm Sandy highlighted the fact that
the power supply network in the Community
requires upgrades to become more resilient
in the face of future extreme weather. More
frequent tree pruning along power lines would
reduce the outages experienced from fallen

trees. In the event of an electrical power failure,
backup power supplies from natural gas sources
or renewable energy sources and microgrid
facilities would be able to provide power to any
critical assets identified by the Community.

Telecommunications Network

The telecommunications network in the
Community requires upgrades to become more
resilient in the face of future extreme weather.
Since the Community has a very well-organized
network of civic associations and community
groups, a centralized location with emergency
communication capabilities would allow for
these resources to be readily accessible to
Community residents. This would allow them
to have better communications with each
other, as well as with New York City, State, and
Federal emergency management officials. One
potential opportunity would be to expand upon
the New York City franchise agreement with
Time Warner Cable to maintain Wi-Fi services
in parks and public spaces. Increasing public
Wi-Fi access and providing solar charging
stations would allow for telecommunication
services within the Community in the event of a
power outage.

Stormwater and Sewer Networks

NYC DEP has ongoing and planned drainage
studies and capital projects to improve the
stormwater and sewer systems throughout
the Community. These efforts are in response
to an extensive history of stormwater flooding
in the Community, but could also help to
mitigate the impacts of extreme weather such
as Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene by
helping to prevent flooding in low-lying areas
 

Springfield Gardens Bluebelt Construction

and sewer backups in basements. The Idlewild
Watershed Communities NYRCR Plan presents
an opportunity to supplement the $175 million
in ongoing upgrades of stormwater and sewer
infrastructure underway by the NYC DEP
including the Springfield Gardens Bluebelt
project. The current fourth phase of NYC DEP’s
build-out of stormwater and sewer infrastructure
in Southeast Queens will install 84 new catch
basins, 2.8 miles of new sewer lines, and three
miles of water mains with associated street
and sidewalk improvements. Expanding upon
these capital projects would provide further
protection against stormwater flooding and
sewer backups. Installing check valves on pipes
that flow into ponds and tidal water would
reduce and slow the tidal water entering the
system, allowing for more storage within the
system. Increasing the frequency of routine
maintenance of catch basins would ensure
proper function and capacity. Implementing
green infrastructure projects upstream in both
watersheds would allow for more capture of

 

water before it enters the system. Incorporating
a residential trap clean-out program to ensure
that these systems are operating efficiently could
also serve to alleviate stress on the stormwater
and sewer systems.

Coastal Defenses

Opportunities also exist to improve coastal
protection measures that would help to reduce
erosion and protect the Community from
extreme tidal flooding. The Community has
an extensive waterfront, including wetlands
and areas with and without bulkheads. The
Community could benefit from a_ strategy
that incentivizes replacement and restoration
of these erosion protection measures that
would include raising existing bulkheads to
ensure protection from a certain storm event,
and increasing wetland acreage to improve
ecosystem functions and enhance tidal flood
protection. Increasing natural protection within
the Community’s existing natural coastal

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

defenses in the Idlewild Park Preserve would
increase their flood protection and resiliency.

Transportation Infrastructure

Opportunities also exist to improve the
transportation network that would help to
ease traffic congestion within the Community,
provide for better-served evacuation routes,
and in conjunction with roadway improvements
could protect the Community from extreme
tidal flooding. To maintain the roadways,
construction of proper drainage and curb
heights would alleviate overland flow onto
properties. Increasing the functionality of the
east-west transportation corridor would provide
better and easier access for residents to stores
and evacuation routes as well as increasing
public transportation options by improving
access to the LIRR or increased bus service.

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 89
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Natural and Cultural Resources

 

Natural and Cultural Resources are important
to the Community, as economic drivers,
recreational amenities, and for environmental
and public health. Much of the Community was
built on filled wetlands, which has significantly
degraded these natural assets. Though the
local topography and environment have been
substantially altered, many natural assets still
exist. These remaining resources often serve a
protective function in the event of heavy rains
and storm surge.

Natural and Cultural Resource Needs

The Community lacks contiguous natural tidal
barriers within the existing systems of wetlands,
parks, and natural spaces. The lack of tidal
barriers creates a need to address unimproved
shoreline conditions at the entrance of Head
of Bay and in the neighborhoods adjacent to
Hook Creek and the Idlewild Park Preserve.
In particular, waterfront areas within the
Community need improved bulkheads and
increased development of natural shorelines.

These needs address critical issues this
Community faces, and opportunities to enhance
and improve the natural and cultural resource
assets would directly address those issues by
strengthening the watershed’s capacity to hold
water, creating more parks and open spaces and
enhancing existing ones, improving the overall
environmental quality in the Community, and
increasing access to cultural resources. Natural
and Cultural Resource needs have a broad
impact on the Community and the surrounding
areas in Queens and Nassau County.

90 Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Watersheds and Waterbodies

Through increased development over the
last century, the Hook Creek and Idlewild
watersheds are now considered urbanized and
largely impervious. Some of Hook Creek has
been channelized with bulkheading and rip
rap. Sedimentation has increased within the
creek due to urbanization and lack of flushing
to move the sediment. Increased development
along the Idlewild Park Preserve reduces the
natural barrier system, flood protection, and
ecosystem services the wetland provides.

Overall water quality in Hook Creek, Head of
Bay, and the wetlands of Idlewild Park Preserve
are negatively impacted by stormwater runoff
and illegal dumping. Waterbodies in the
Community require greater protections for water
quality, natural processes, and flood mitigation.
The needs identified by the Community are to
return Hook Creek and the tidal wetlands in
Idlewild Park Preserve into functioning water
bodies that provide habitat and potential
recreational opportunities.

Parks and Open Space

The Community prides itself on its open space
system, with a network of natural features and
active recreation areas. Idlewild Park Preserve is
a major natural resource in the area, serving as
tidal wetlands for ecosystem services and flood
mitigation. Springfield Park and Brookville Park
are the two main parks in the area with active
recreational resources. To continue to act as an
asset within the Community, the existing parks
and open spaces need regular maintenance to
enhance their function and to better provide co-
benefits such as stormwater management and
flood mitigation. Expansion of the Community’s

open spaces would add to the park system
as well as capturing stormwater The Idlewild
Park Preserve is already used for educational
programming but, these programs could be
expanded to provide additional education
on the benefits that the wetlands provide for
the Community. Education and creation of
parks, open spaces, and green spaces were
identified as opportunities to enhance and
maintain existing parks and open space within
the Community.

Environmental Quality

With the Community’s close proximity to JFK
Airport and the concentration of industrial
uses supporting the airport, the Community is
subject to impacts such as air pollution, noise,
and other effects on public health. Existing
monitoring locations for pollutants in Maspeth
and Flushing are at a considerable distance
from JFK Airport® and do not provide accurate
data for the Community. Airport expansion is
a concern within the Community in terms of
the effects it will have on the environment and
quality of life, such as the tree removal.

Natural and Cultural Resource
Opportunities

Watersheds and Water Bodies

Existing parks and the Bluebelt system currently
under construction provide a robust framework
for improving the health of water bodies in
the Idlewild Watershed Communities. The
Community’s ability to withstand severe
storms can be increased by restoring natural
resources, such as parks, wetlands, and
marshes to increase their capacity in absorbing
flooding and rainwater. Restoring degraded
marshes and stream banks in the waterways
surrounding the Community will help mitigate
the impacts of tidal and stormwater flooding.
Wetlands are vital to the health of waterways
and surrounding communities. They feed
downstream waters, trap floodwaters, recharge
groundwater supplies, remove pollution, and
provide fish and wildlife habitat. Wetlands are
also economic drivers because of their key role
in fishing and recreation.

Although wetlands would not act as a buffer to
extreme storm surge, they can filter stormwater,
decrease the release of pollutants into
waterways, and help reduce wave action from
small storms. Bluebelt projects preserve natural
drainage corridors, including streams, ponds,
and other wetland areas. Preservation of these
wetland systems allows them to perform their
functions of conveying, storing, and filtering
stormwater. In addition, Bluebelts provide
important community open spaces and diverse
wildlife habitats. The Bluebelt program saves
tens of millions of dollars in infrastructure costs
when compared with providing conventional
storm sewers for the same land area.
This program demonstrates how wetland
preservation can be economically prudent and
environmentally responsible. Coastal protection
measures can also be implemented in addition
to or in conjunction with wetland restoration.

Parks and Open Space

The potential to build upon existing resources,
such as existing parks and the Springfield Park
Bluebelt present an opportunity to create a
contiguous park system within the Community
that will help mitigate the effects of stormwater,

Springfield Gardens Bluebelt near 145th Road

provide flood mitigation, and generally promote
a greener streetscape. Green infrastructure such
as right-of-way bioswales and tree pits would add
to the overall initiative of a greener streetscape
and provide for stormwater mitigation upstream
of and within the Community. Participating in
the Million Trees NYC initiative by NYC DPR
would also provide for a greener streetscape.
Better maintenance of existing parks would
allow for more stormwater storage during
heavy rain events. Improvements to the Idlewild
Park Preserve Environmental Science Learning
Center, which are currently underway, provide a
basis for broader education about the benefits
that wetlands provide for the Community.

Environmental Quality

Environmental quality measures, such as noise
mitigation, street cleaning, and addressing
existing mold issues can be improved.
Remediating mold issues in previously flooded

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

homes and businesses would provide for better
health and quality of life. Using construction
applications such as triple pane windows may
reduce the noise heard by residents from
airplanes at JFK Airport. Reducing truck traffic
on local roads would decrease the noise from
these vehicles, provide for safer streets, and
reduce overall air pollution from vehicle exhaust.
Providing an ecological buffer between the
industrial areas and residential neighborhoods
would also reduce the air and noise impacts
in these adjacent communities. Greater
enforcement of illegal dumping throughout the
Community would help prevent garbage from
entering Idlewild Park Preserve and other parks
and clean up local neighborhoods.

Section Il: Assessment of Risk and Needs 91
  
   
  

40's

yi
‘a
Yd
s RR, Ce
@ 16cusT Manor

a
owe

5 CONDUIT Ath —

 

 
 
  

1454
(Me

= en ONT ,
¥
H pat. Pe s
a

“A
y
7

 

       
 
 
 

      

      

 

x 2

¥

sy ¥

45 4, &
147 ay, é SOUTH VALLEY
Coenen BROOKE ay STDEAM
“SGARDENS t = @ zeae
\, * i, ROSEDALE \
\, 0* \
sy 1 & e 5
ot:
\, i aS 4
#9 \ wy om
Ce \y . eg
“Ay 6 \ —
aN 2 7 LEGEND
“~~ a 7 ok PROPOSED GREEN STREET
. 2 f =r
JFK XY. ° \ og
( ] ORITIZED GREEN STREET
AIRPORT \, S
° ° N
Green streets siting criteria *
¢ In areas where the water table is 9’ or
more from grade
e

10’ CONTOURS

ELEVATION ABOVE SEA LEVEL
(SOURCE: USGS)

WATER FLOW

>
In areas above the force main

<
* \,
LV = es
a

r-
\.

 

WATER TABLE MORE THAN 9
FROM GROUND LEVEL

=> FORCE MAIN

 

 
Idlewild Watershed Communities

SECTION III. RECONSTRUCTION STRATEGIES

Based on input from the Planning Committee,
feedback from Public Engagement Events, and
initial research, the following Reconstruction
Strategies represent a framework that guided
development and evaluation of the Proposed
and Featured Projects described in Section IV.

The key strategies that guided the NYRCR Plan
for the Idlewild Watershed Communities are:

«Strategy A: Alleviate Localized Flooding
Conditions;

= Strategy B: Strengthen the Emergency
Response Capacity of the Community;

«Strategy C: Support Environmental
Stewardship of the Community’s Natural
and Manmade Resources; and

« Strategy D: Provide Safe and Reliable
Access to Critical Goods and Services.

The role that these strategies played in the
development of this NYRCR Plan, the benefits
that they will provide to the Community, and
the projects that the Committee has identified
to achieve these strategies are described in
more detail in Section IV. The list of Proposed
and Featured Projects described in Section IV
represents acompilationto increase the resilience
of the Idlewild Watershed Communities. Based
on the framework provided by these four
strategies, projects evolved that addressed
the needs of and risk to Community assets.
Proposed Projects and Featured Projects have
been assessed for their ability to mitigate future
risk, were vetted by the Planning Committee
and the public, and were categorized by their

capacity to address needs within one or more
of the Reconstruction Strategies.

Proposed Projects are projects proposed for
funding through the Community’s allotment of
Community Development Block Grant-Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR)} funding. Featured Projects
are projects and actions that the Committee has
identified as important for the Community’s
resilience and has analyzed in depth, but has
not proposed for funding through the NYRCR
Program. Proposed and Featured projects are
discussed in detail in Section IV.

94 Section Ill: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
Strategy A: Alleviate Localized Flooding Conditions

Develop a comprehensive approach to address
localized flooding in the Community that
accomplishes the following goals:

» Leverages ongoing and planned
stormwater infrastructure projects
conducted by the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection
(NYC DEP}, New York City Department of
Design and Construction (NYC DDC}, and
the New York City Economic Development
Corporation (NYC EDC), including the
Springfield Park Bluebelt;

«Takes into account projected benefits of
ongoing and planned projects to maximize
flood protection without duplicating those
efforts; and

« — Identifies additional projects that will
increase stormwater retention capacity
of parks and wetlands, address coastal
flooding, and expand the green
infrastructure network throughout the
Community.

Although NYC DEP DDC, and EDC all have
projects underway to relieve stormwater
flooding in the Idlewild Watershed Communities
and other parts of Southeast Queens, the need
remains to build upon these ongoing efforts
to increase the stormwater retention capacity
within the Community’s parks and wetlands.
The objective of Strategy A is not to duplicate
these efforts, but to leverage the Springfield Park
Bluebelt and other stormwater infrastructure
projects to: 1) provide comprehensive protection
against stormwater flooding through identifying

gaps that the ongoing projects do not address;
2) work with City agencies to build upon the
impact of existing projects; and 3) identify
strategies to increase the stormwater capacity
of natural resources and green infrastructure.

Strategy A represents an effort by the Committee
to coordinate closely with NYC DEP on the
implementation of Phase IV of the agency’s
stormwater infrastructure upgrades in Southeast
Queens. Phase IV includes the Springfield Park
Bluebelt as well as installation and upgrades
to the stormwater sewer network. However,
the Committee recognizes the need to identify
complimentary projects in targeted locations
that will not benefit from these improvements.

The Committee also views Strategy A as an
opportunity to increase the stormwater retention
capacity of the Community’s valuable network
of parks and wetlands. Construction of the
Bluebelt is an example of this type of project that
is already underway, however the Committee
also looked to identify similar types of projects
in Brookville Park and strategies to increase the
functionality of the Idlewild Park Preserve as a
means to detain stormwater.

Finally, Strategy A includes opportunities
to expand the green infrastructure network
throughout the Community and in adjacent
upland areas. The existing network of green
streets in Laurelton is an example of this type
of project in action. The Committee recognized
that large scale stormwater infrastructure—
both green and grey—cannot solve the entire
problem of stormwater flooding. Small-

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

scale interventions such as green streets and
bioswales, conceived as part of a larger, more
comprehensive network that includes existing
city capital projects will help to reduce the
impact of stormwater runoff throughout the
Community. While the Committee identified
green infrastructure projects within the Idlewild
Watershed Communities, they also recognize
that stormwater flooding does not only result
from localized conditions. Solutions to this
problem in the Community also depend upon
and expansion of the green infrastructure
network in upland communities as well.

Section Ill: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies 95
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 3.1: Strategy A: Alleviate Localized Flooding Conditions
Project Estimated Project Regional
Project Name Short Description Project
# Cost Category
(Y/N)
Provide funding for locally-specific Green Infrastructure Master Plan as a
component of NYC DEP’s larger southeast Queens green infrastructure
Green Infrastructure study. In particular, the plan should emphasize interagency coordination,
Al Community Master Plan evaluate the potential for stormwater capture on both public and private $750,000 Proposed Y
(with pilot projects) properties, and identify critical gaps in stormwater management that
are not addressed by ongoing and planned infrastructure projects in
the area.
Brookville Park Pond Dredge Brookville Park Pond to increase stormwater storage capacity.
Ala : Conduct riparian restoration in a 4’ wide planting area around the $1,600,000 Proposed N
Restoration .
perimeter of the pond.
Construct right-of-way (ROW) bioswales at key community gateways
to increase stormwater retention and treatment, while improving the
streetscape, fostering a sense of place, and supporting local business
Alb Community Gateway growth. Project would include construction of bioswales, rain gardens, $2,900,000 Proposed N
Green Streets planting of new street trees, and stormwater tree pits on Francis Lewis
Boulevard between 248th Street and Brookville Boulevard, 225th Street
between South Conduit Boulevard and 145th Road, and the crossroads
of Farmers Boulevard and Guy Brewer Boulevard.
Construct a green infrastructure pilot project at a public building, such
as school or library. This pilot project would include a green roof, rain
Green Infrastructure Pilot garden, and porous pavement, serving as a demonstration of various
Alc Project (School Green Roof green infrastructure best management practices. Educational signage $1,250,000 Proposed N
and Raingarden) and associated educational curricula would illustrate the benefits of
green infrastructure.This project could potentially receive partial funding
through NYC DEP’s NYC Green Infrastructure grant program.
Fwin Pond Park Bluebelt As a complement to construction of outfalls by NYC DEP conduct
Ald riparian restoration to beautify the park and construct bike path to $850,000 Featured N
Enhancement : .
connect Twin Ponds Park to Brookville Park.
. Support the proposed NYC DEP Oyster Restoration project in Thurston
A2 DEP Oyster Restoration in Basin, Oysier vectoration could improve water quality help reduce $250,000 Featured N

 

 

Thurston Basin

wetland fringe erosion, and stabilize the banks of Thurston Basin.

 

96 Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 3.1: Strategy A: Alleviate Localized Flooding Conditions

 

 

 

: : : Regional
Project : as Estimat P t .
e Project Name Short Description s mated Coteus Project
Study the impacts of coastal defenses to protect the Community from
tidal flooding ata regional scale. Recommended projects could include
tructi | the Idlewild P.
A3 Coastal Management Plan constructing a berm along the dlewild Park Preserve border to block $465,000 Featured Y
storm surge, constructing tide gates at Hook Creek, and installation of
green infrastructure upland to reduce flow of stormwater into areas with
low elevation.
Advocate for NYC DPR to construct the funded park project at the
Ale Advocate for Construction — southern end of Thurston Basin. Project is to include wetland restoration Add'l Res
of Thurston Basin Park along Thurston Basin and construction of comfort stations near the Rec

kayak launch.

 

City Purchase of Privately

 

Owned Parcels on Use City funds to acquire 64 vacant privately owned parcels within and Add’l Res
Alf Edges of Idlewild Park directly adjacent to Idlewild Park Preserve. Restore wetlands within the Rec
Preserve for Restoration/ acquired properties, as needed.
Preservation as Wetlands
Ad Idlewild Park Preserve Reconstruct cunert in Siow Pork Preserve to instal a erger opening. Add'l Res
Culvert Expansion mproved tidal flow would help to restore areas by supporting natura Rec

vegetation and wetland functions.

 

 

 

 

Section Ill: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies 97
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Strategy B: Strengthen the Emergency Response Capacity of the Community.

Expand the ability of existing Community Based
Organizations (CBOs) to assist in disaster
preparation, response, and recovery by:

«Providing resources to local groups to
increase education and training to prepare
residents for future disasters;

«=~ Ensuring that critical community facilities
have the resources they need to help
vulnerable populations recover from
major storms;

«Increasing the capacity of CBOs to
expand their services to include disaster
preparedness and response; and

= Increasing coordination between local
groups and the New York City Office of
Emergency Management (NYC OEM) to
increase the reach of existing educational
materials, training programs, and
recovery assistance.

The objective of Strategy B is to provide
resources for existing, established organizations
within the Community to provide expanded and
improved services in the event of future severe
weather and other disasters. In some cases,
these projects are directed towards improving
existing organizations that were established to
provide disaster recovery services, such as the
local Community Emergency Response Team
(CERT). However, other projects in Strategy B
are meant to help organizations with a mission
outside the scope of disaster preparedness
and recovery expand their services to better
address the needs of the Community pre- and
post-disaster.

NYC OEM Educational Materials

Source: NYC OEM

Strategy B builds upon the established
network of CBOs, civic associations, the CERT
program, and Naturally Occurring Retirement
Communities (NORCs} to provide resources
to a broad network of residents within the
Community. The objective of projects within this
strategy is to expand the critical role that these
organizations play before and after disasters
by expanding educational outreach, providing
training to local residents and businesses, and
identifying locations within the Community for
improved post-disaster recovery.

By utilizing the physical and social infrastructure
of existing organizations, Strategy B capitalizes
on some of the Community’s greatest resources,
including existing Health and Social Services

98 Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

 

Backup Generator at School Source: www.cquest.us

assets and CBOs with established outreach
strategies and membership.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 3.2: Strategy B: Strengthen the Emergency Response Capacity of the Community

 

 

 

 

 

: : : Regional
Project Project Name Short Description Estimated Project Project
# Cost Category
(Y/N)
Phase |
Establish Idlewild Watershed COAD.
Southeast Queens Develop Southeast Queens Disaster Preparedness and Recovery Plan.
Bla Disaster Preparedness and Identify assets and vulnerabilities of local not-for-profit organizations. $230,000 Proposed Y
Recovery Plan Identify potential locations for Resource and Recovery Centers.
Establish communication between CBOs and NYC OEM.
Training and education for CERT, COAD and residents.
Impl +
Recommendations of the Phase Il
Blb . Implement selected Recommendations of the Disaster Response and $500,000 Proposed Y
Southeast Queens Disaster
Preparedness Plan.
Recovery Plan

 

 

Section Ill: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies 99
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Strategy C: Support Environmental Stewardship of the Community’s Natural and Manmade

Resources.

Lay out a plan that provides the Community
with the resources it needs to promote, support,
and enforce stewardship of the environment to
foster sustainability and assure that natural and
manmade resources can provide protections
from flooding, using the following principles:

«Maintain and improve the ecosystems of
the Community parks and wetlands;

= Support increased enforcement of illegal
dumping and other threats to the health of
parks, open space, and wetlands; and

= Expand educational campaigns about
environmental stewardship.

With Strategy C, the Committee acknowledges
that the Community is served by an enviable
network of Natural Resource assets. However,
the assets that make up this network require
management, maintenance, and _ restoration
in order to adequately provide stormwater
protection, pollution mitigation, and recreation.

The objective of Strategy C is to identify ways
that the Community can improve the function of
its natural resources. The focus of this strategy
is to provide for better maintenance and to
improve the ecosystem of the Community’s
parks and wetlands. This strategy requires that
the Committee identify specific capital projects
to mitigate and restore natural resources,
detail ongoing methods to fund maintenance
in the future, and develop advocacy positions
to support increased enforcement of illegal
dumping and other threats to the health of

Springfield Park Pond

parks, open space, and wetlands. In addition,
the Committee viewed expanded educational
campaigns about environmental stewardship
as an important way to ensure that residents
and businesses can play an active role in
maintaining the health of the Community’s
natural resources in the future.

100 = Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

 

 

Idlewild Park Kayak Launch at Huxley Street
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 3.3: Strategy C: Support Environmental Stewardship of the Community’s Natural and Manmade Resources

 

 

Regional
Project . . sas Estimat Project i
I Project Name Brief Description stimated rojec Project
# Cost Category
(Y/N)
Develop and implement workforce training and volunteer development
Phase 1: Green programs to provide skilled training in green infrastructure installation
Cl Infrastructure Workforce and maintenance to Community residents while also encouraging $200,000 Proposed N
Training Program environmental stewardship of the Community’s natural and manmade

stormwater management facilities.

 

. Establish a fund to provide ongoing maintenance of the Community’s

Phase 2: Idlewild :

sy: parks, wetlands, Bluebelts, and bioswales to ensure that they can
Watershed Communities . . nes
Cl . adequately function as resources for stormwater flooding mitigation. $350,000 Featured N

Open Space Restoration . oe . .
Fund Identify additional funding sources and secure City resources to conduct
improvements and maintenance.

 

Provide education and technical assistance to the Community’s home
. and business owners on how to minimize flood damage, prevent sewer
Home and Business we gs .
Owner Education and backflows, and the flood mitigation benefits of permeable surfaces.
C2 . . Establish a storefront resource center in the Community to provide $250,000 Featured Y
Technical Assistance d ‘onal ‘al

Program educational materials.

Provide technical assistance in the form of counseling and on-site

building audits performed by case managers.

 

Advocate for Idlewild Park

 

 

C3 Preserve Trail Network and Advocate for improved connectivity of the overlook constructed by NYC Add'l Res
. DEP and NYC DPR to the network of trails in Idlewild Park Preserve. Rec
Overlook Restoration
Advocate for Municipal Advocate for all City agencies to view resilience to extreme weather and ,
a. . . ane . Add’‘l Res
C4 Agency Coordination to the impacts of climate change as top priorities when planning future R
Prioritize Resilience program development and capital project planning. ee
Advocate for the creation of the Proposed Greater JFK Industrial
C5 Support for Creation of Improvement District. Advocate that the JFK IBID evaluate strategies to Add’‘l Res
Greater JFK IBID address recurring stormwater flooding within District boundaries and Rec

contribute to increased enforcement of illegal dumping.

 

 

 

 

Section Ill: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies 101
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Strategy D: Provide Safe and Reliable Access to Critical Goods and Services.

Provide for reliable transportation, communication,
and backup power networks to ensure that the
Community is not isolated from critical goods and
services after disasters by:

«= Supporting retail/commercial districts so
that businesses can quickly recover from
disasters and residents have access to
essential goods after storms;

«Strengthening the area’s transportation
infrastructure, power grid, and
communications networks to improve their
ability to operate during and recover more
quickly after a disaster; and

= Reinforcing key connections to critical
support services and regional shopping
districts outside of the Community.

The Committee developed Strategy D to
recognize the importance of maintaining access
within a Community that is relatively isolated
from mass transit, has few arterial roadways
and significant traffic congestion, and depends
in large part on outside areas for retail and
commercial services. The need for access
includes methods to ensure mobility within and
outside of the Community as well as the health
of retail corridors within the Community.

The objective of Strategy D is to improve the
Community’s access to critical goods and
services after extreme weather by bolstering
the area’s transportation infrastructure, power
grid, local retail corridors, and strengthening
key connections to critical support services and
regional shopping districts.

BAISLEY
POND PARK:

JFK
AIRPORT

 

 

LEGEND
EAST/WEST ROUTES

eS ~— ROUTES IN AND OUT
oe

* is FREQUENTLY FLOODED ROADS

FREQUENTLY FLOODED AREAS

EXTENT OF FLOODING FROM
SUPERSTORM SANDY

 

 

102 = Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

 
  
     

FREQUENTLY FLOODS

147™ AVE BRIDGE

2

 

734 ay

an
@iocust manor ~ °
STATION MONTBELEIER

  
      

   

    
   
 
   
    

241 ST

IDLEWILD
PARK

HEAD OF BAY

te
&, 1319,
Ly. #

NER. E
IC, §j veo

 

@. HOOK CREEK
SuoUFE SANCTUARY

*

/

.
4
"Oe,
7 "4,
128 RDI e

OE ANASSAU
Ve I county

by,
Meg

soa GREEN ACRES

%
a ea 4 apereevinie ey oe % % Xx
tee a 45.4 PARK, “ag ~ % Ya.
pa j : “ey \\. SOUTH
% 7) Viginc
41 REAM

g
253 SF

     

=. eu
aS

  
   

ROUTE TO SOUTH
VALLEY STREAM FLOODS

FIVE TOWNS:
Bp OPPING
aS
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table 3.4: Strategy D: Provide Safe and Reliable Access to Critical Goods and Services

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Project Project Name Brief Description Estimated Project Regional
# Cost Category Project
(Y/N)
Install Backup Power Install generators and/or solar power at critical facilities to provide
“: a more reliable power source during and after major storm events.
DI Supply Systems at Critical Critical facilities could include Schools, Senior Centers, Medical facilities, $500,000 Proposed N
Resource and Recovery Centers, or Rosedale Pumping Station.
Study to Elevate Brookville Study the feasibility of elevating the entire length of Brookville Blvd
Boulevard (Snake Road) (Snake Road) through the Idlewild Park Preserve on a trestle to prevent
D2 between 149th Boulevard flooding of the roadway and encourage the passage of intertidal waters $450,000 Featured Y
and Rockaway Boulevard — through the surrounding wetlands.
Advocate for NYC DOT to elevate the 147th Avenue Bridge between ,
D3 Elevate 147th Avenue 232nd St and 235th St. Elevation of the bridge would reduce the Addl Res
Bridge at Brookville Park . . . Rec
occurrences of flooding, allowing safer access to the bridge.
Pepper Bockoway Advocate for the Rockaway Turnpike/Nassau Expressway Resilient
D4 Ex ewe Resilient Corridor Study from the NYRCR Five Towns Plan, with an expanded Add’‘l Res
Condes sh dy (NYRCR scope that addresses potential impacts and benefits for the Idlewild Rec
vey Watershed Communities.
Plan for the Five Towns)
Support for Existing or Advocate for NYC SBS to establish an information clearinghouse to Add'l Res
D5 : . provide information on flood insurance requirements and resiliency
New Retail/Commercial Rec

 

measures.

 

 

Section Ill: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies 103
J tn )
] i ]
Y N Y

 

EXISTING SIDEWALK BENCH BIOSWALE/RAIN GARDEN CURB EXISTING ROAD LIRR- ROSEDALE STATION ~CROSSWALK IMPROVEMENTS PARALLEL PARKING — LIGHT POST/SIGNAGE CONNECT TO EXISTING DRAIN
Idlewild Watershed Communities

SECTION IV. PROJECT PROFILES

Governor Cuomo has allotted up to $6
million to fund eligible recovery and
resiliency projects proposed by the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR} Idlewild
Watershed Communities Planning Committee
(Committee). The funding is provided through
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) Community Development
Block Grant — Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
program. While developing projects and actions
for inclusion in the NYRCR Plan, the Committee
took into account a number of factors including
cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the
effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to
populations and critical assets, feasibility, and
Community support. The projects and actions
set forth in the NYRCR Plan are divided into
three categories. The order in which the projects
and actions are listed in the NYRCR Plan does
not indicate the Community’s prioritization of
these projects and actions.

«Proposed Projects are projects proposed
for funding through the Community’s
allotment of CDBG-DR funding.

«Featured Projects are projects and actions
that the Planning Committee has identified
as important resiliency recommendations
and has analyzed in depth, but has not
proposed for funding through the NYRCR
Program.

« Additional Resiliency Recommendations
are projects and actions that the
Committee would like to advocate for, but

106 = Section IV: Project Profiles

are not categorized as Proposed Projects or
Featured Projects.

NYRCR Project Profiles

This section provides an overview of each
potential NYRCR project including the elements
listed below:

«Project Title: Title of the project and
accompanying project rendering, site plan
or other graphics that illustrates the project
or site (if applicable);

«Project Description: A brief summary of
the project including tasks, components, or
phases;

«Cost Estimate: Estimated cost of
implementing the project, not including
operating and maintenance costs;

«Benefits and Co-Benefits: A qualitative
description of the direct benefits and co-
benefits of the project, whether those
benefits are local or regional in scale, and
the population benefitting from the project.
Benefits and co-benefits may include
risk-reduction, sustainability, economic
development, environmental quality, public
health, social benefits, providing access to
essential services during disaster events,
and others;

«Cost-Benefit Analysis: A qualitative
comparison of the costs associated with
the project, including both capital and life-
cycle costs, and the benefits of the project,
including job creation and avoided costs;

«Risk Reduction: The anticipated reduction
of risk associated with the project;

«Timeframe for Implementation: The
general timeframe for completing
implementation: Immediate (can
be completed in two years or less),
intermediate (two to five years}, or long-
range (more than five years);

= Regulatory Requirements: Consideration
of the local, state and federal government
regulatory requirements related to the
project, if applicable; and

« — Jurisdiction: The entity with jurisdiction
over the project.

Adding up the Costs

The Committee worked with a team of cost
estimators, engineers, architects, landscape
architects, and planners to develop estimated
costs for each Proposed and Featured project.
All costs are preliminary and based on available
data as well as an understanding of the issues
learned through site visits, Committee member
knowledge and feedback, and input from the
Community. Local government entities and
nonprofit organizations also provided input
regarding project scope and estimated costs.

Maximizing the Benefits

All Proposed and Featured projects underwent
a qualitative analysis of the anticipated costs
and benefits. The purpose of the cost-benefit
analysis is to assist the Committee in defining
the scope of these projects and to identify
actions for implementation. The Committee
utilized this cost benefit analysis to develop
a proposed implementation schedule that
identifies a comprehensive set of projects that
are best able to achieve the greatest benefits at
the lowest cost.

The following types of benefits were reviewed
for the cost-benefit analysis:

* Environmental Benefits;

« Economic Benefits;

«Health and Social Benefits; and
«Risk Reduction Benefits.

For feasibility studies, action plans, or advocacy
projects, the discussion of benefits is related
to the potential benefits that would result from
future implementation of the selected alternative
or recommendations developed through the
course of study or advocacy. In addition, some
projects are scalable; the benefits of these
projects are considered in their current state,
and potential benefits that would result from
development into regional or larger-scale
projects are noted where appropriate.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 4.1: NYRCR Planing Process—The Road to Projects

OTe) ane LALA AN Ard (enn}
Communities in which our natural and manmade systems are maintained, improved,
extended, and maximized so that they are fully functional in terms of flood prevention,
control, and alleviation

Critical Issue Need

My street floods
during Superstorm
Sandy and during

typical rain events due
to the lack of sewers

Strategy
Utilize green infrastructure to manage storm water on flood prone streets

Opportunity

Use existing natural
resources to manage
RKO etm elke

Better drainage

Project
Reconstruct bioswales on Main Street to help manage storm water

 

Section IV: Project Profiles 107
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Strategy A: Alleviate Localized Flooding Conditions

Al: Green Infrastructure Community Master Plan (with pilot projects) [Proposed Project]

 

Project Description

This project would create a master plan, in
coordination with the forthcoming New York City
Department of Environmental Protection (NYC
DEP) drainage improvement plan for Southeast
Queens, which would outline the strategic
implementation of green infrastructure projects
on public and private property throughout
the Community. The objective of conducting
the Green Infrastructure Community Master
Plan is to develop a comprehensive strategy
for identifying and siting green infrastructure
projects that would complement ongoing and
planned expansion of the storm sewer system
in the Community. NYC DEP is currently
scoping and procuring services to develop a
broad drainage improvement study for the
greater Southeast Queens area, extending
beyond the Idlewild Watershed Communities.
CDBG-DR funds would be leveraged to fund
the Green Infrastructure Community Master
Plan as a specific task within the scope of the
greater Southeast Queens plan, tailored to the
Community (Figure 4.2}.

This project evolved from the recognition that
the Community needed a plan to manage
stormwater and prioritize investment in green
infrastructure with the Community. While
there are extensive storm sewer improvements
underway throughout Southeast Queens,
it will be many years before those capital
improvements are completed. In the meantime,

108 Section IV: Project Profiles

the Green Infrastructure Community Master
Plan would identify green infrastructure
improvements that could be implemented more
quickly, provide short term benefits in mitigating
stormwater flooding, and also augment the
long term impact of ongoing storm sewer
improvements.

The recommendations of the Green
Infrastructure Community Master Plan would
be created in support of the NYC DEP NYC
Green Infrastructure Program. The NYC Green
Infrastructure Program is a multiagency effort
led by NYC DEP to design, construct, and
maintain green infrastructure on public property
throughout New York City. The program presents
a comprehensive approach to improving water
quality that integrates green infrastructure—such
as restoration of water bodies and Bluebelts,
and the development of Right-of-way (ROW}
bioswales, green streets, and green roofs—with
grey infrastructure—such as upgrades to sewer
system capacity and improvements to pump
stations—for a cost-effective and sustainable
approach to stormwater management.

The Green Infrastructure Community Master
Plan would recommend green infrastructure
best management practices (BMPs) that may
include (but are not limited to}: cisterns and rain
barrels, porous pavement, ROW _ bioswales,
rain gardens, green roofs, and constructed
wetlands. Green infrastructure projects could
also include the protection and restoration of

wetlands. The goal of the recommended BMPs
would be to:

« Retain stormwater during rain events to
reduce the strain on the sewer system and
reduce stormwater flooding;

«Capture contaminants and debris that
would otherwise clog the storm sewer
system;

« Decrease the cost and need for
maintaining and upgrading stormwater
infrastructure by implementing a green
solution to water management;

«Improve water quality and assist the City
with meeting permit requirements for its
municipal separate storm sewer system

(MS4);

= Reduce the urban heat island effect,
reducing the amount of energy needed to
cool buildings;

= Improve air quality in the Community; and

= Promote ecosystem growth at proposed
project locations.

The scope of work for the Green Infrastructure
Community Master Plan would begin with
baseline studies that include a desktop review
of existing GIS data (i.e., geology, property
ownership, etc.) and drainage _ studies,
completion of topographic and geotechnical
surveys, and the development of impervious
cover and sewershed mapping. Each of the
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 4.2: Green Infrastructure Community Master Plan

 
  

    

STINN. GREEN ROOFS ME

 

pastes hsesinge

ey GREEN STREETS: 4

saeesereeen tats

 

 

 

  
 

» TWIN POND PARK
BLUEBELT RESTORATION —

THURSTON BASIN La —_— > 80g ‘RS sroonvite park

‘0 MUNITIES

Section IV: Project Profiles 109

 
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Springfield Park Pond

BMPs listed above has specific conditions and
siting requirements (e.g., porous pavement
should not be sited in the parts of the
Community with a high groundwater table}. The
baseline studies would be utilized to conduct a
green infrastructure siting analysis which would
recommend ideal locations for implementing
green infrastructure BMPs. Identified locations
will be subject to further study as necessary (i.e.,
geotechnical borings, percolation testing, etc.}.

One emphasis of the Green Infrastructure
Community Master Plan would be to evaluate a
proposal put forth to construct radial collection
systems underground in appropriate locations
throughout the Community. Radial collection
systems would mimic the role that streams
play in transmitting ground water and would

110 = Section IV: Project Profiles

help to restore groundwater flow to Brookville
Park Pond, Springfield Pond, and Baisley Pond.
The system under study could include slotted
collector pipes, permeable reactive barriers,
and regulating valves.

An implementation schedule would be
developed that identifies potential funding
sources, partners and milestones. As part of
this implementation schedule, the plan would
identify ways to encourage or incentivize
private property owners to implement green
infrastructure. Private property owners would be
encouraged to apply for partial funding through
the NYC Green Infrastructure Plan’s Green
Infrastructure Grant Program, which has already
committed $11.5 million to 29 private property
owners to build green infrastructure projects.*4

Brookville Park Pond

The Committee has identified several pilot
projects to be studied in conjunction with the
master plan to demonstrate green infrastructure
implementation and effectiveness in the Idlewild
Watershed Communities. Profiles for each
project follow (Ala-A1f).

Estimated Cost: $750,000

This estimate includes costs for the tasks outlined
above, including a desktop review of existing
data, recommendations of green infrastructure
BMPs, and an implementation schedule.

Hydrogeological analysis, stream modeling,
and soil analysis could be included in the
Green Infrastructure Community Master Plan to
evaluate the feasibility of this proposal.
 

Idlewild Park Preserve at Huxley Street

An estimated cost to
recommendations of the plan would be
developed, including operations and
maintenance costs and life cycle costs.

implement — the

Benefits and Co-Benefits

The Green Infrastructure Community Master Plan
would yield indirect economic benefits because
the BMPs recommended in the Master Plan would
have economic, environmental or ecological,
and health and social benefits. The Master Plan
would lay the foundation for implementing a
series of pilot projects, whose benefits would
be tied back to the Master Plan. For example,
wetlands serve as a natural tidal barrier for the
Community, and green infrastructure practices
implemented Community-wide would make

significant contributions in improving air and
noise quality, beautifying the Community, and
increasing property values.

Environmental Benefits:

The Master Plan would provide a framework
for Community-wide implementation of green
infrastructure BMPs, such as_ constructed
wetlands, rain gardens, bioswales, and green
roofs. These BMPs would significantly improve
the air and water quality in the Community.
Vegetated BMPs could filter out air pollutants,
including carbon dioxide (CO,}, ozone,
particulate matter with a diameter of 10
micrometers or less (PM-10), nitrogen dioxide
(NO,}, sulfur dioxide, and carbon monoxide
(CO}. Increased vegetation would cool air
temperatures, decreasing the urban heat island

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

effect and reducing the demand for energy
used to cool the Community. Consequently,
air pollution from power plants could decrease
as well.

Water quality benefits would result from
vegetated BMPs that filter phosphorus from
stormwater, preventing it from entering nearby
water bodies. Phosphorus is known to reduce
oxygen levels in water bodies, harming the
water body’s ecosystem. In addition, wetland
restoration would mitigate tidal flooding, while
green infrastructure would mitigate stormwater
flooding. Reduced flooding would decrease
non-point source pollution from stormwater
runoff and point source pollution from combined
sewer overflow events, improving water quality
in Thurston Basin.

Improving air and water quality within the
Community would benefit Community members
and the diverse ecosystem in Jamaica Bay
and the Idlewild Park Preserve. Jamaica Bay
has 91 fish species, 325 species of birds, and
many reptile, amphibian, and small mammal
species, including the following endangered
or threatened species that would benefit from
improved water quality: the piping plover, red
knot, roseate tern, and sandplain gerardia.®

Economic Benefits:

Development of the Green Infrastructure
Community Master Plan would generate five
fulltime equivalent jobs. The implementation
of the BMPs recommended in the Master Plan
would generate additional jobs due to the
planning and design, construction, operation,
and maintenance of the recommended BMPs.

Section IV: Project Profiles = 111
Idlewild Watershed Communities

In 2013, there were 775 reported street
floods® and 2,197 confirmed sewer backups
in the Community,’”? each requiring a repair,
replacement, or cleaning of the sewer line.
Typical costs for replacing sewer lines range
from $8,000 to $12,000 and repairing
sewer lines range from $4,000 to $6,000%,
while sewage above ground would add to
the total cost of responding to these hazards.
Implementation of the recommended BMPs
would mitigate street flooding, sewer backups,
and tidal flooding, reducing the cost of damages
caused by these risks. There are 2,545 homes
and 17 commercial lots within the FEMA
Preliminary 2013 100-year flood zone, totaling
a collective estimated market value of $1.4
billion,*? which represents the property value at
risk of damage from tidal flooding. Mitigating
stormwater flooding, sewer backups, and tidal
flooding would reduce the cost of repairing and
replacing assets and would reduce the chance
that businesses close due to these events.

A typical business in Queens generates
an average of $6,300 in sales per day.’°
Implementation of Green Infrastructure
Community Master Plan recommendations
would reduce the vulnerability of businesses
within the Community to closures from
flood events, avoiding lost sales revenue for
businesses and lost days of income generation
for local employees, including — socially
vulnerable populations.

Green infrastructure projects recommended
through the Master Plan would absorb
stormwater, increasing the capacity of the sewer
system and reducing the need to expand existing
grey infrastructure to handle larger amounts

112. Section IV: Project Profiles

of stormwater, while leveraging the ongoing
NYC DEP grey infrastructure improvements
for additional benefit. Since 2002, NYC DEP
has spent $438 million to construct 84 miles
of new storm sewers in Southeast Queens,
with a projected cost of $6 billion to build
out the remaining system to capacity.”’ Green
infrastructure is being employed by NYC DEP
in priority areas outside the Community due
to its cost-effectiveness. The City’s plan to use
green infrastructure to reduce combined sewer
overflow events could save $1.5 billion over
20 years by including both grey and green
investments rather than relying on traditional
infrastructure alone. 7?

If placed in the combined sewer shed, green
infrastructure could reduce the severity and
occurrence of CSOs discharged into Thurston
Basin. CSOs cause damage to the ecosystem
and the wetlands in the area surrounding the
basin. Mitigating CSOs at this location would
reduce future restoration costs and improve
water quality. Wetland restoration at this
location would cost approximately $300,000
to $400,000 per acre (can increase due
to contamination issues), based on similar
urban restoration projects constructed within
the region.

Green infrastructure has been shown to increase
property values for the surrounding area. In a
study conducted by ECONorthwest in 2007,
findings showed that property values were 5%
higher in areas near green infrastructure versus
areas that did not have green infrastructure.73

Health and Social Benefits:

The BMPs recommended by the Master Plan
would increase the livability and quality of life
in the Community. Improving air and water
quality would decrease the occurrence of
associated health risks. For example, poor air
quality is linked to cases of asthma, which green
infrastructure may reduce.” In addition, green
infrastructure would create more opportunities
for outdoor recreational activities.

The benefits listed above would significantly
benefit socially vulnerable populations.
The Community has 14,242 low-income
households, 2,023 individuals with limited
english proficiency, 6,338 households with at
least one disabled individual, 10,727 elderly
(over the age of 65}, and 21,246 children.’5
These populations would benefit from reduced
floods and sewer backups, in addition to the
decreased risk of loss of income. Finally, this
project would help to raise awareness about
environmental stewardship by involving the
Community in the process of identifying green
infrastructure priority projects.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The Green Infrastructure Community Master
Plan is necessary to provide a framework to
implement BMPs throughout the Community.
The low cost (approximately $750,000} of the
study would enable strategic implementation
of BMPs that would provide significant benefits,
including mitigation of stormwater flooding,
tidal flooding, and sewer backups, saving costs
on repairing and replacing damaged assets.
Businesses within flood-prone areas would
experience decreased vulnerability of closure
due to sewer backups, stormwater, and
tidal flooding, benefitting business owners,
employees, and overall economic activity in
the Community, while also helping to increase
property values near implemented green
infrastructure by up to 5%.

Green infrastructure would reduce the need
for sewer system upgrades to increase capacity
because it would reduce peak flow volumes
entering the system. Sewer system upgrades
require capital projects that could total up to $6
billion in Southeast Queens.”¢

The recommended BMPs would also have
unquantifiable benefits to air and water quality
throughout the Community. Vegetated BMPs
and wetlands would filter out pollutants in the
air and water, and absorb water during rain
events, preventing flood waters from soaking
up pollutants from streets. The BMPs would
reduce peak flows to the sewer system, reducing
CSO events and mitigating the damage that
sewage overflows have on the water quality and
ecological health of Thurston Basin.

Risk Reduction

The Green Infrastructure Community Master
Plan itself will not reduce risk within the
Community, but the implementation of the
plan’s recommendations © Community-wide
would significantly reduce risk from flooding
stemming from tidal floods and drainage issues,
which can be exacerbated by extreme high tide
events and tidal surge that blocks stormwater
from exiting outtfalls.

Recommended BMPs have the potential to
decrease the occurrence and severity of storm
sewer and sewer backups throughout the
Community by increasing the capacity within
the combined storm sewer network. This
reduces risk by limiting disruption of service
of businesses and flooding of homes that are
in locations prone to storm sewer and sewer
backups. Green infrastructure BMPs would be
particularly effective at reducing stormwater
flooding risks for properties located within the
FEMA FIRM 100-year flood zone, which would
benefit 2,545 homes and 17 commercial lots

with a collective estimated market value of
$1.4 billion.

In addition, roads would become safer and
more reliable due to the decrease of combined
sewer backups that flood streets decreasing
the cost of repairing these roads after flood
events. In New York City, the average cost of
restoring damaged streets ranges from $1,500
to $2,000.77 The Community would experience
a reduced risk of accidents due to unsafe streets
and the cost of repairing damaged streets.

The protection and restoration of wetlands
would increase the function of the wetlands as
a flood barrier. Wetlands act as a sponge and
buffer during tidal events, so increasing this
function directly reduces the risk of those that are
in the low-lying areas surrounding the wetlands
by reducing the number of homes, streets, and
businesses that flood. In addition, preventing
the flooding of key infrastructure facilities, such
as Rosedale Pumping Station, would benefit all
areas within the Community.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for implementation of the
Green Infrastructure Community Master Plan
is immediate and can be completed within
two (2) years or less. Implementation of the
recommended projects from the Plan is long
range. Ongoing coordination between New
York State and New York City regarding the
partnership to fund implementation, as well as
stakeholder involvement to guide the design of
the plan and projects would need to be defined.

Regulatory Requirements

Depending on the location and specifications
of implementation of project(s} recommended
within the Green Infrastructure Community
Master Plan, the project(s) would be subject
to a regulatory review from a number of city
agencies, including NYC DEP the New York
City Department of Transportation (NYC DOT},
and the New York City Department of Parks
and Recreation (NYC DPR). Due to the scale
of the project and receipt of federal funding,
various agencies would also likely be involved
in the review and permitting of the project;
such state agencies are likely to include at a
minimum the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC) and
the NYS Department of State (NYS DOS}.

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have jurisdiction over
the project.

Section IV: Project Profiles 113
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Ala: Brookville Park Pond Restoration [Proposed Project]

 

Project Description

As a pilot project for the Green Infrastructure
Community Master Plan, the objective of
Brookville Park Pond Restoration is to increase
filtration of stormwater by using natural wetlands
systems to effectively slow peak stormwater
flows, increase the capacity of Brookville Park
Pond, and improve water quality.

During Superstorm Sandy, tidal surge flowed
from Jamaica Bay through the Idlewild Park
Preserve wetlands into Brookville Park Pond
(also known as Conselyeas Pond). The pond is
surrounded by a biking/hiking trail, baseball
and football fields, tennis courts, and a
playground for young children. Superstorm
Sandy caused water to overflow Brookville
Park Pond, flooding the surrounding area and
the ball fields southwest of the park, as well as
the pathways around the Pond. The riparian
buffer is also degraded surrounding the pond
and currently offers little function for sediment
removal, habitat, or stormwater retention.

Sediment removal would increase the stormwater
storage capacity of the pond, while restoring the
riparian plantings around the pond would filter
sediment and debris from future stormwater
flows into the pond. The restored riparian zone
would also absorb water and catch sediment
before it enters the pond, effectively increasing
the retention capacity of the pond. The stream
restoration would improve the drainage from
the pond to the nearby wetlands, mitigating
future flooding in the area.

114 — Section IV: Project Profiles

The scope of this project includes dredging
Brookville Park Pond (totaling seven acres of
siltation removal), restoring riparian plantings
with native vegetation within a four-foot wide
planting area surrounding the perimeter of the
Pond (totaling 15,400 square feet of riparian
plantings), and dredging the stream corridor
and restoration of the stream bank connecting
the northern and southern parts of the pond
(totaling 1,100 linear feet of stream restoration)
(Figure 4.3). Brookville Park Pond Restoration
could be coordinated with other improvements
of Brookville Park conducted by New York City
Department of Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR)
to improve the condition of the Park by expanding
opportunities for active and passive recreation.

Figure 4.3:

ae fs
J RIPARIAN RESTORATION, 4
cai

 

Cost: $1,600,000

The project cost estimate includes the tasks

described in the project description as well as:

= Existing condition analysis, which includes:
— Sediment characterization;

— Wetland delineation/functional
assessment;

— Stormwater pipe and outfall flow
monitoring;

— Topographic and Bathymetric Surveys;
— Bio-bench mark survey; and

-— Ecological surveys.

Phases of Restoration at Brookville Park Pond

 
«Preparation of construction plans.

«Preparation of regulatory approvals and
permits.

The maintenance of the pond to prevent future
silt buildup and riparian zone deterioration
would cost $1,760,000 over the span of 25
years, which includes siltation removal every
seven years and maintenance of the riparian
zone. The funding for this maintenance is not
included in this project, but provides the scope
for additional costs.

Benefits and Co-Benefits

Brookville Park Pond Restoration would
demonstrate and document the _ local-
effectiveness and reliability of green infrastructure
for the Idlewild Watershed Communities.
This pilot project will increase awareness and
educate residents and other neighborhood
stakeholders about pond restoration. Brookville
Park Pond has a large water capacity, which can
be increased by pond restoration, and can be
utilized as a stormwater detention location.

Environmental Benefits:

Removing the sediment in Brookville Park
Pond would directly improve the water quality
and increase water capacity of the pond.
Excess sediments are known to impair water
quality and harm the ecosystem within and
around the pond.’® Increased water capacity
would help to mitigate stormwater flooding in
the areas surrounding the pond. Stormwater
absorbs pollutants from asphalt and concrete,
harming the water quality of the pond when the
stormwater flood subsides. Thus, increasing the
water capacity would maintain the improved

water quality that results from siltation removal.
Restoring the riparian zone around the pond
would result in healthy native vegetation that
would filter out sediments and pollutants from
stormwater that flows into the pond, further
maintaining the improved water quality. Native
vegetation would also improve the habitat for
fish and avian species.

The restored vegetation would also improve
air quality by annually removing up to 7.48
Ibs of ozone, 6.68 lbs of particulate matter
with a diameter of 10 micrometers or less (PM-
10), 6.05 lbs of nitrogen dioxide (NO,), 3.56
lbs of sulfur dioxide, and 1.83 lbs of carbon
monoxide (CO).”?

Economic Benefits

Brookville Park Pond Restoration will generate
a total of 17 fulltime equivalent jobs. The
maintenance of the pond would generate an
additional 19 fulltime equivalent jobs over the
span of 25 years.

Siltation removal of Brookville Park Pond would
mitigate stormwater flooding during heavy
rain events, decreasing damage caused to the
riparian zone and recreational assets around
the pond and reducing the cost of restoring and
repairing these assets. Riparian zone restoration
would cost $185,000 (includes construction
costs only), while repairing the pathway around
the pond would cost $400,000 and replacing a
baseball field would cost at least $332,000.°°
A restored Brookville Park Pond would enhance
the recreational experience at Brookville Park,
potentially leading to an increase in the property
values in the surrounding residential area.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

   

Ereded Pond Bank at Brookville Park Pond

Health and Social Benefits

Improving the water and air quality in the
Brookville Park area would benefit the health of
Community members. Improved air quality has
coincided with decreased in cases of asthma in
nearby areas.

Brookville Park Pond Restoration would enhance
the recreational experience at the park,
encouraging more Community members to
visit the park and could provide an educational
benefit to the surrounding neighborhood. As the
park is more utilized, the health of Community
members would improve due to the increase
in recreational activities. The World Health
Organization recommends 150 minutes of
physical activity per week,’’ only achieved by
41.1% of the Community.®?

Section IV: Project Profiles 115
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Existing Condition at Brookville Park Pond

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Although the project has a high cost, Brookville
Park Pond Restoration § offers _ significant
benefits. The water and air quality in the area
surrounding the pond would improve, leading
to health benefits for the Community. With
restoration, the pond would have an increased
water capacity, mitigating stormwater flooding.
Mitigating stormwater flooding would reduce
the need and cost to repair and restore the
recreational assets surrounding the pond as
well as future restoration of the riparian zone.

With this project, the Brookville Park area would
be improved, providing the Community with
a vibrant recreational area. The park would
become a greater asset to the Community,
increasing physical activity in the area. The

116 Section IV: Project Profiles

improvement may also increase property values
in the surrounding area.

Overall, the benefits of the project outweigh
the cost. The restoration of the Brookville Park
Pond would allow Brookville Park to be a valued
recreational asset and a natural stormwater
detention facility for the Community.

Risk Reduction

This pilot project would improve the drainage
of the area around Brookville Park Pond.
Improvements in drainage would decrease the
severity and occurrence of stormwater flooding
in this area, mitigating damage to the adjacent
environmental and recreational assets. This
project would also increase the drainage of
stormwater for parcels surrounding Brookville

Park, since the stormwater in this area flows into
the pond.

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for implementation of the project
is intermediate and can be completed within two
to five years. Ongoing coordination regarding
the partnership to fund implementation, as well
as stakeholder involvement to guide the design
of the plan and project, will need to be defined
and procured.

Regulatory Requirements

Brookville Park Pond Restoration would be
subject to regulatory review from the New York
City Department of Environmental Protection
(NYC DEP}, the New York City Department of
Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR}, and the New
York City Department of City Planning (NYC
DCP}. Due to the scale of the project and the
project location, various agencies would also
likely be involved in the review and permitting of
the project; such agencies are likely to include
at a minimum the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC},
NY Coastal Zone Management and NYS
Department of State.

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have jurisdiction over
the project.
Alb: Community Gateway Green Streets [Proposed Project]

Project Description

As a pilot project for the Green Infrastructure
Community Master Plan, this expansion of the
Green Streets program—a component of the
NYC Green Infrastructure Plan—aims to capture
stormwater in order to reduce peak flows that
contribute to flooding. Community Gateway
Green Streets would construct right-of-way
(ROW) bioswales at Community gateways to
increase resiliency through stormwater retention
and treatment, while improving the streetscape,
fostering a sense of place, and supporting local
business growth (Figure 4.4).

The project would include construction of
bioswales and rain gardens and planting of
new street trees and stormwater tree pits along
three key gateways to the Community:

«Francis Lewis Boulevard between South
Conduit Boulevard and 248th Street,
Rosedale (Figure 4.5 and Figure 4.7);

» 225th Street between South Conduit
Boulevard and 145th Road, Brookville
(Figure 4.6}; and

* Rockaway Boulevard between the Belt
Parkway and 144th Street.

In addition to these three locations, the
Committe also advocates for future construction
of green infrustructure at the crossroads of Guy
R. Brewer and Farmers Boulevards (Figure 4.8).
The crossroads is located at the intersection of
two key Community gateways. NYC DEP has
long-term plans to install new sewer mains along
Farmers Boulevard, and therefore this location is
not ideal of green infrastructure implementation

currently. However, the Committee believes that
future sewer main construction at this gateway
should be accompanied by complementary
green infrastructure that could help to mitigate
stormwater flooding and ease the burden on
grey infrastructure within the Community.

These green streets would help mitigate the
stormwater flooding that is common to these
areas by intercepting and reducing runoff by

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

encouraging infiltration. Reducing stormwater
runoff before it reaches the east-west force
main that runs along 147th Avenue would
reduce the strain on the sewer system, leading
to less water flowing into Thurston Basin.
Because groundwater is more than nine feet
below street level in these areas and geclogy
is conducive to infiltration, green infrastructure
would be feasible.

Figure 4.4: Community Gateway Green Streets

N

7 @weusrnavcn

/ a

I ‘ ea

7% % es

| % % #

: Ms %, x
J 2

~
‘se Rockaway \— ow),
>*PBivo . o AVe

1 AE ‘ouy e BREWER

oa
14? Ayer
Sa SPRINGFIELD
SN GARDENS
‘®,

JFK
AIRPORT

Green streets siting criteria

¢ In areas where the water table is 9’ or
more from grade

* In areas above the force main

   
    

~“/ \, \ Me FARMERS BLVD_...
\ od a

225,

 

Se
ers, F /
= ¥ i
= Bey F §}
& se ee:
gs g
Se & |
eke ~ as e j NASSAU
ROSEDALE
eka STATION & } COUNTY
a == SUNRISE HWY"
= Koc
FRANCIS|
wa 225" st 2 SS EWIS BLVD
Ib ff JR
S Alp <= Pp
i) ROSEDALE
BROOKVILLE & VILLAGE %, \soutx VALLEY
Sy \_ STREAM
= a © ra7mavP |
& i, ROSEDALE !
“ \
& 1
© J
os —
3 ee
% =
“Ys
ON eo ” LEGEND
“N, 5 r eile PROPOSED GREEN STREET
3] 7
\ | (} PRORITIZED GREEN STREET
\ } wane 10° CONTOURS
ou > ELEVATION ABOVE SEA LEVEL
> 2 (SOURCE: USGS}
c. \ WATER FLOW
ye * WATER TABLE MORE THAN 9”
¢ oO FROM GROUND LEVEL
vw £*
dnacl FORCE MAIN

 

 

 

Section IV: Project Profiles 117
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Figure 4.5: Conceptual Rendering of Rosedale Station Community Gateway Green Street, Francis Lewis Boulevard

 

 

 

r - r r
y if ) y
/ 1 / /
Ke | ) )

EXISTING SIDEWALK BENCH BIQSWALE/RAIN GARDEN CURB EXISTING ROAD LIRR- ROSEDALE STATION CROSSWALK IMPROVEMENTS PARALLEL PARKING — LIGHT POST/SIGNAGE CONNECT TO EXISTING DRAIN

118 = Section IV: Project Profiles
Figure 4.6: Scope of Gat
Fa FH Te aT Pee BE

       

9) Ss 5*x20' BIOSWALES.

© cure EXTENSIONS
| === OPTIONAL PERVIOUS PAVEMENT

The new green infrastructure would be part of
more comprehensive streetscape improvements
including lighting, paving, and street furniture.
Strategic investment to improve the quality of the
public realm at these key Community gateways
would be aimed at improving the streetscape
at entrances to the Community and attracting
private investment to increase retail offerings
that better serve the local market. Expanding
and improving the range of retail amenities
in local neighborhood nodes would help
increase the ability of local residents to obtain
food and other daily needs in the aftermath of
major storm events. It would also decrease the
need for local residents to travel outside the
Community, which has proven to be difficult
due to frequent flooding along the area’s major
east-west streets.

eway Green Street at 225th Street

An additional co-benefit of siting the proposed
green streets at highly visible key gateways to
the Community is to help raise awareness of
the value of stormwater management. All three
locations also have either train or bus facilities:

«Francis Lewis Boulevard is the primary
pedestrian route for residents to access the
Rosedale LIRR station;

«225th Street is a primary pedestrian route
for residents to access the Laurelton LIRR
station and the Q85 bus route along
Conduit Boulevard; and

«Rockaway Boulevard is served by the
Q6 bus route, and is a key axis through
the Springfield Gardens Industrial area,
which is a major employment center in the

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

225th Street

 

Community that includes a commercial
district, industrial businesses, and hotels.®

The crossroads of Farmers and Guy R. Brewer
Boulevards—which the Committee advocates
as a future site of gateway green streets upon
completion of planned sewer main installation—
also has three bus stops and 13 commercial
and mixed use parcels (total).

The proximity of these Community Gateways
to local rail stations and along existing bus
corridors could promote transit oriented land
uses and increase opportunities for transit
connections within the Community. As such,
addressing localized flooding in these areas
will also increase the Community’s resilience by
improving access to transit.

Section IV: Project Profiles 119
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Figure 4.7: Scope of Gateway Green Street at Rosedale Station Francis Lewis Blvd. Near Rosedale Station

ee / yy ; me omayit

pe
5x20" BIOSWALES
CURB EXTENSIONS

RAIN GARDEN
OPTIONAL PERVIOUS PAVEMENT.

Farmers Boulevard Source: Google Earth

120 = Section IV: Project Profiles

 
The location and construction of green streets
will conform to the design guidelines provided
by the NYC Department of Transportation (DOT}
Street Design Manual® and NYC Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP} Standards
for Green Infrastructure®5 which provide
specifications for the siting and implementation
of green infrastructure. These guidelines
provide general considerations and design
principles typical of a green stormwater solution
and identify City-led strategies for managing
stormwater in targeted areas that have the
greatest need. The underlying stormwater
system will also be considered to maximize the
effectiveness of these green streets.

The Committee has the option of choosing any
combination of the possible locations for green
infrastructure upgrades. The benefit of choosing
only one site is the reduced cost of the overall
project. On the other hand, developing green
infrastructure at all three sites yields greater cost
efficiency by combing project administration fees
and contract support. It should also be noted
that this project would be eligible for funding
through the Green Infrastructure Grant Program
{a grant within the NYC Green Infrastructure
Program), which has already funded $11.5
million to 29 private property owners for the
implementation of green infrastructure.

Cost: $900,000-$2,900,000

This project would have different costs based
on the combination of streets that are chosen
to have green infrastructure implemented. The
costs for each project are listed below:

«Francis Lewis Boulevard: Approximately
$1.15 million;

* 225th Street: Approximately $900,000;

* — Rockaway Boulevard: Approximately
$940,000 million; and

« All 3 sites as one project: Approximately
$2.9 million.

Francis Lewis Boulevard would have 14 ROW
bioswales and a 1,000 sq. ft. rain garden;
225th Street would have 12 ROW bioswales;
and Rockaway Boulevard would have 12 ROW
bioswales and a planted median. Additional
costs include an existing condition analysis and
the preparation of construction documents.

External costs associated with this project
would include traffic, noise, and air impacts.
Construction of the project would either fully
or partially block off traffic at these sites.
Construction would also cause noise impacts
to nearby properties due to the construction
equipment. Although each green street project
would remove CO,, the CO, gain from the
construction and maintenance of the projects
result in a net increase of CO,. Air quality
impacts may result from the release of dust
particles during construction and _ pollutants
generated by construction equipment.

Benefits and Co-Benefits

The green streets would capture stormwater
runoff, reducing the amount of stormwater
entering the sewer system. The amount of
stormwater that each green street would remove
each year is approximately:

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

«Francis Lewis Boulevard: 0.19 million
gallons (MG)/year;

= 225th Street: 0.24 MG/year; and
«= Rockaway Boulevard: 0.18 MG/year.®

Environmental Benefits:
Green infrastructure would capture stormwater,
filtering out pollutants such as phosphorus and
nitrogen. The amounts of phosphorus and
nitrogen removed annually by each green street
project are listed below:

«Francis Lewis Boulevard: 13% of the total
phosphorus and total nitrogen load would
be removed with a reduction of 8% total
phosphorus and 13% of total nitrogen in
effluent concentration;®”

» 225th Street: 10% of the total phosphorus
and total nitrogen load would be removed
with a reduction of 6% of total phosphorus
and 10% of total nitrogen in effluent
concentration; and

= Rockaway Boulevard: 9% of the total
phosphorous and total nitrogen would
be removed with a reduction of 5% total
phosphorous and 9% of total nitrogen in
effluent concentration.®8

Water quality in nearby water bodies, such as
Thurston Basin, would be improved through the
mitigation of stormwater flooding.

Implementation of green _ infrastructure
projects can increase retention, infiltration
and evapotranspiration of stormwater runoff
during heaving rain events. This can improve
water quality to nearby receiving waters as well
as decrease energy, chemicals, and costs of
treatment.

Section IV: Project Profiles 121
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Green streets would also improve air quality by
filtering out pollutants. The amounts of pollutants
annually removed by green infrastructure are
listed below. It should be noted that although
each green street project removes CO,,, the CO,
gain from the construction and maintenance of
the projects result in a net increase of CO,:

«Francis Lewis Boulevard: 2.41 lbs of
ozone, 1.75 lbs of particulate matter with
a diameter of 10 micrometers or less (PM-
10), 1.72 lbs of nitrogen dioxide (NO,},
0.97 lbs of sulfur dioxide (SO,)}, and 0.38
Ibs of carbon monoxide (CO};

* 225th Street: 2.1 lbs of ozone, 1.5 lbs of
PM-10, 1.5 lbs of NO,, 0.8 Ibs of SO,,
and 0.3 lbs of CO; and

«Rockaway Boulevard: 2.07 lbs of ozone,
1.5 Ibs of PM-10, 1.48 Ibs of NO,, 0.83
lbs of SO,, and 0.33 Ibs of CO.

Green streets would also reduce the urban heat
island effect, which is a phenomenon in which
temperature in urban areas tend to be higher
due to the abundance of impervious surfaces
such as pavement. Increasing the amount of
vegetated areas can help alleviate the elevated
temperatures found in urban areas. In addition,
increased vegetative cover can improve shading
and insulation, reducing energy demand
associated with heating and cooling.

Economic Benefits

The construction of green streets would
generate fulltime equivalent jobs. The amount
of fulltime equivalent jobs generated for various
combinations of green streets are provided
below:

122 Section IV: Project Profiles

«Construction of the Francis Lewis Boulevard
green street alone would generate 13
fulltime equivalent jobs;

«Construction of the 225th Street green
street would generate 11 fulltime
equivalent jobs;

= Construction of the Rockaway Boulevard
green street would generate 10 fulltime
equivalent jobs; and

= Construction of all green streets would
generate 35 fulltime equivalent jobs.

The operations and maintenance of the projects,
whose costs are not included in this project,
would generate additional fulltime equivalent
jobs over the span of 25 years.

The project would reduce the amount of
stormwater entering the sewer system, reducing
the frequency and severity of flooding and sewer
backups and minimizing the cost of repairing
these damages caused from these floods. The
reduction of stormwater runoff within the sewer
system would lessen the occurrence and severity
of floods on Francis Lewis Boulevard, 225th
Street and Rockaway Boulevard. This would
decrease traffic congestion and reduce road
repair costs resulting from flood damages. In
addition, home repair costs and the loss of assets
would decrease for the 110 residential units
within the tributary areas in which stormwater
runoff is decreased. The 22 commercial and
mixed use lots, two transportation and utility
parcels, one public parcel, and five vacant
parcels in the area would experience a reduced
interruption of service due to floods. Flood risk
would be reduced to the properties listed above,
whose residential, commercial, and mixed use

parcels have an estimated market value of
$38 million.*°

Green streets would also reduce the strain
on the sewer system, reducing the cost of
expanding grey infrastructure in order to
improve stormwater management. In addition,
the cost of maintaining the sewer system would
be reduced. Properties surrounding the green
street sites would also face a reduced risk of
flood damage.

Mitigation of the urban heat island effect could
result in reduced localized air temperatures
which could result in energy savings for
nearby properties.

Additionally, green streets have coincided with
property value increases due to the aesthetic,
environmental, and economic benefits that they
provide. Green streets have been modeled to
increase the value of nearby properties by up to
5%.” The potential property value increases for
each green infrastructure project is listed below:

«The Francis Lewis Boulevard green street

would result in property value increases of
up to $774,663.

= The 225th Street green street would
result in property value increases of up to
$463,934.

«The Rockaway Boulevard green street
would result in property value increases of
up to $3,053,535.

In addition, the green streets would enhance the
aesthetics of the streets, encouraging potential
commercial shoppers to visit the areas. Thus,
the green streets would potentially increase
commercial spending at these locations.
Health and Social Benefits

Green streets would help to beautify key
gateways to the Community, providing additional
recreational assets for the Community. Green
streets could also increase pedestrian and
bicycle safety along the transportation corridors.
With these benefits, the Community Gateways
would be an attractive hotspot for Community
members to go for commercial shopping.

By mitigating stormwater flooding, green streets
would reduce the risk of flood damage to at-
risk properties. Socially vulnerable populations
near the green streets would benefit, especially
those who are lower income and more heavily
impacted by the cost of flood damage or may
have trouble relocating.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Green streets would improve the water
quality and air quality of the Community,
while also mitigating stormwater flooding.
These projects would save money on costlier
grey infrastructure upgrades, which are an
alternative to green streets as a solution for
stormwater management. The project would
reduce the amount of stormwater from entering
the sewer system, reducing the frequency and
severity of flooding and sewer backups, and
minimizing the cost of repairing these damages
to the residential and commercial properties in
the tributary area in which the green streets are
located in. The projects would also result in less
traffic congestion and reduce road repair costs
as a result of the floods. The urban heat island
effect would be reduced for areas near the
green streets, resulting in energy savings that
would have otherwise been spent on cooling

buildings. Lastly, these benefits would result in
an increase in property values for areas near
the green streets.

It should be noted that this project is scalable
and can be implemented in phases for increased
feasibility. Upon success of this project, the
construction of additional green streets would
be encouraged, increasing the scale of the
benefits listed above.

Risk Reduction

Green — streets—which include  bioswales,
planted medians, and stormwater street trees—
would decrease the occurrence and severity of
stormwater flooding throughout the Community.
Green streets achieve this by reducing the
amount of stormwater and debris that enters the
sewer system. Thus, the properties surrounding
the green streets would face a reduced risk of
flood damage.

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for implementation of the project
is intermediate and can be completed within
two to five years.

Regulatory Requirements

Depending on the location and specifications
of Community Gateway Green Streets, the
project(s) would be subject to a regulatory
review from the New York City Department of
Environmental Protection (NYC DEP}, the New
York City Department of Transportation (NYC
DOT}, and the New York City Department of
Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR}. Due to the
scale of the project, various agencies would also

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

likely be involved in the review and permitting
of the project; including but not limited to
New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYS DEC}, NYS Department of
State (NYS DOS}.

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have jurisdiction over
Community Gateway Green Streets.

Section IV: Project Profiles 123
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Alc: Green Infrastructure Pilot Project (School Green Roof and Raingarden) [Proposed Project]

 

Project Description

As a pilot project for the Green Infrastructure
Community Master Plan, the Green Infrastructure
Pilot Project seeks to capture stormwater at
a public facility, such as a school, in order to
reduce peak flows that contribute to flooding.
This project would include construction of a
green infrastructure pilot project at a public
or non-profit facility within the Community,
consisting of a green roof, rain garden, and
porous pavement, serving as a demonstration of
various green infrastructure Best Management
Practices (BMPs). This project could provide park
space to the Community in conjunction with the
City’s Schoolyards to Playgrounds program.

Figure 4.9: Proposed Gre

ian oad aE ae

| —__PERVIOUS PAVEMENT/|
~ | __RAINGARDEN |
ies: eee! alk oa

a ——_

   

 

124 Section IV: Project Profiles

en Infrastructure at PS 231

pr te,

Public facilities would be evaluated throughout
the Community as potential locations for this
green infrastructure pilot project. Suitable
locations for green infrastructure depend on
site geology (soils permeability, depth to water
table, and depth to bedrock), site geometry
(size of the potential site, open areas of
potential green infrastructure implementation),
topography, and sewer infrastructure (including
direction of flow). Locations north of 147th
Avenue within the combined sewer shed would
be ideal candidates for green infrastructure
projects because the geologic conditions in this
area, including greater than nine feet in depth
to the water table and well infiltrating soils, are
conducive to stormwater infiltration through

green infrastructure BMPs (Figure 4.9 and
Figure 4.10).

The conceptual design for a sample green
infrastructure project was developed for PS
156 Laurelton. The green roof would cover
nearly the entire rooftop of the school, aside
from utilities systems located on the rooftop,
spanning approximately 10,000 square feet
(rough estimate pending selection of a specific
location}. It would utilize a modular green roof
technology with an engineered growing medium
intended to be self-sustaining, designed to be
easily maintained. Porous asphalt would be
installed in general areas of the school parking
lot not presently used for recreation, spanning
approximately 10,000 square feet. Both the

PS231

 
green roof and porous pavement would capture
rain water where it falls, mimicking natural
pervious surfaces. The green roof would slowly
release filtered stormwater into the drainage
system, while the porous pavement would allow
water to filter through various layers of gravel
and sand into the soil. Right-of-way (ROW)
bioswales would be installed to capture runoff
from 229th Street and 230th Street.

The pilot project would illustrate the benefits
of green infrastructure to students and the
Community through public outreach—which
includes educational signage and associated
development of educational materials and
curricula, in addition to transparency of the
project results.

The results of the project can be quantified
through the stormwater volume absorbed by

 

{ _ |PERVIOUS PAVEMENT/| | /
| RAINGARDEN

ere |
TAT AVES

m=)

* &

 

 

 

   
   

  

yr yw Teg RD
Pa A el

the green infrastructure, reduction in energy
costs due to the cooling effects of the green roof,
and avoided costs due to the reduced need to
upgrade traditional stormwater infrastructure.
Green infrastructure within the combined sewer
shed would mitigate Combined Sewer Overflow
(CSO) events at the outfalls in Thurston Basin.
CSOs are discharges of stormwater and
sewage that typically occur during heavy rain
events when the sewer system is overtaxed
and cannot pump the combined sewage to
the Jamaica Bay Wastewater Treatment Plant
(WWTP). Green infrastructure would capture
stormwater where it falls, detaining it on-site,
and allowing it to evaporate or release slowly
into the ground or sewer system. Thus, green
infrastructure would relieve pressure off the
sewer system, allowing a larger volume of
combined sewage to be pumped to the WWTP

Figure 4.10: Proposed Green Infrastructure at PS 195

 

| | [GREEN ROOF | ae) |

 

 

 

ae,

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

and reducing the occurrences and severity of
CSOs at Thurston Basin.

This project could possibly be funded by a grant
through the NYC Department of Environmental
Protection’s (DEP} NYC Green Infrastructure
Plan. Within the Green Infrastructure Plan,
the DEP Trust for Public Land (TPL), School
Construction Authority (SCA), the Department of
Parks and Recreation (DPR}, and the Department
of Education (DOE) have collaborated to
provide funding for the construction of green
infrastructure at public school playgrounds.
The collaboration has already identified
10 recipients—2 recipients already have
constructed the green infrastructure—for a total
of up to $5 million in funding. This project could
be eligible for the next round of funding, which
would greatly decrease the cost of this project to
the Community.

PS 195

 

Section IV: Project Profiles 125
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Cost: $1,250,000

The cost estimate includes an existing condition
analysis, issue of regulatory approvals and
permits, preparation of construction documents,
construction of the green infrastructure system,
and outreach. The operation and maintenance
of the green infrastructure system—not included
in the funding of this project— would cost an
additional $1.32 million over the span of
25 years. As this project is based off of the
construction of the sample project, which may
differ from the implemented green infrastructure
project, the degree of uncertainty with this cost
is high.

External costs that would be anticipated with
this project includes the potential disruption to
traffic around the green infrastructure site, the
disruption to the school operations, and public
health impacts resulting from the construction,
such as increased air and noise pollution.

Benefits and Co-Benefits

Environmental Benefits

The green infrastructure would improve water
quality within nearby water bodies, such as
Thurston Basin. Green infrastructure would
increase the water capacity of the sewer system
mitigating CSOs at these water bodies. In
addition, water pollutants, such as phosphorus,
are filtered out from the stormwater captured
by the green infrastructure. The project would
remove about 0.12 MG of surface water runoff
annually.?" The only portions of the site that
would be considered pollutant-generating”
are the adjacent roadways which would be
served by the ROW bioswales. Of the pollution-

126 = Section IV: Project Profiles

generating surfaces, the project would remove
about 14% of the total phosphorus and 15% of
the total nitrogen load. In addition, the project
would reduce the total phosphorus and nitrogen
concentration from the pollution-generating
surfaces by about 14% and 23%, respectively.”

Improved water quality at Thurston Basin would
benefit the health of the ecosystem in the area.
91 fish species, 325 species of birds, and many
reptile, amphibian, and small mammal species
live in the area, including two endangered bird
species, the common tern and least tern.”

Green Infrastructure would improve air quality
in the surrounding area as well. For the sample
project shown above, construction of a green
roof and rain garden would annually remove
7.25 lbs of ozone, 3.25 lbs of particulate matter
with a diameter of 10 micrometers or less (PM-
10), 1.99 lbs of nitrogen dioxide (NO,), 6.03
Ibs of sulfur dioxide (SO,}, and 2.29 lbs of
carbon monoxide (CO).”5

2

This project would also support the reduction
of the urban heat island effect, which is a
phenomenon in which temperature in urban
areas are higher due to the abundance of
impervious services such pavement. The urban
heat island effect increases energy demand, air
conditioning costs, air pollution, and greenhouse
gas emissions. Reduced energy demand would
also lead to air pollution benefits at the local
power plant.

Economic Benefits

As stated above, green infrastructure would
reduce the urban heat island effect, potentially
reducing energy demand. For the sample

project, green infrastructure may reduce energy
costs by up to $4,010 per year, based on a
model defined within the NYC DEP Green
Infrastructure Plan.

The reduced stormwater runoff would help
to mitigate stormwater flooding and sewer
backups, reducing the cost of damages caused
from these events to properties near the project
site. Green infrastructure would also decrease
the occurrence and severity of CSOs at Thurston
Basin, helping to reduce the cost of restoration
of the area. Ultimately, green infrastructure
would reduce the need to upgrade and expand
the current sewer infrastructure system.

The project would also increase property values
for nearby properties. In a study conducted by
ECONorthwest, property values near green
infrastructure increased by 5% due to the
reduction of risk from damages resulting from
stormwater flooding and sewer backups.” For
the sample project shown above, this would
result in a $245,910 increase in market value.

Additionally, this project would generate 14
fulltime equivalent jobs. The operations and
maintenance of the green infrastructure, whose
cost is not included in this project’s funding,
would generate an additional 14 fulltime
equivalent jobs over the span of 25 years.

Health and Social Benefits

The water bodies near the Community are used
for a variety of recreational activities, such as
kayaking. Green infrastructure would improve
the water quality at nearby water bodies,
decreasing the negative health impacts for
those that come in contact with the water. In
addition, improved air quality would support
the decrease of associated health impacts, such
as asthma.”

The project would also educate Community
members and, in the case of the sample project,
students of the benefits of green infrastructure.
The Community would learn the effectiveness of
the implemented green infrastructure, primarily
measured by the amount of stormwater
capture, within the Idlewild Watershed
Communities. Upon success of the project,
property owners and stakeholders would be
encouraged to implement additional green
infrastructure projects. Students would have
the opportunity to learn about the benefits of
green infrastructure via the green roof pilot
projects and associated educational curricula.
Educational programs could be enhanced by
engaging and partnering with the New York
City Department of Education (NYC DOE),
including development of a curriculum focused
on green infras

This green infrastructure pilot project would
encourage other facilities to also implement
green infrastructure. With =©Community-
wide green infrastructure projects, the entire
Community would benefit, including socially
vulnerable populations. The Community
has 15,720 low-income households, 2,023
individuals with limited english proficiency,
6,338 households with at least one disabled
individual, 10,727 elderly (over the age of 65),
and 21,246 children.'°

Edible Schoolyard at PS 216

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The project would serve as a model for future
green infrastructure projects. The results of the
green infrastructure would be transparent to
the public, and upon success of the project,
additional facilities would be encouraged
to implement green infrastructure projects.
Considering this and the benefits listed above,
the project is well worth the cost.

Stormwater flooding and sewer backups would
be mitigated for properties near the project
site. In addition, this project and others like it
could reduce the need to upgrade the sewer
system with costly grey infrastructure. Green
infrastructure would improve the water and air
quality within the Community, benefitting the

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Source: www.inhabitat.com

health of nearby ecosystems and Community
members. Green infrastructure would cool
the project site, saving on energy costs to cool
the building.

Risk Reduction

As stated in the risk reduction for the Green
Infrastructure Community Master Plan (project
Al}, green infrastructure—in the case of the
sample project, green roofs, bioswales/rain
gardens, and porous pavement—reduces risk
by decreasing the occurrence and severity of
stormwater flooding and sewer backups. These
events would be mitigated through the additional
water capacity that green infrastructure
provides, which benefits areas both upstream

Section IV: Project Profiles 127
Idlewild Watershed Communities

  

Green Roof at Sidwell Friendship School Washington DC

and downstream from the project site. Thus, the
entire Community would experience a reduced
risk of stormwater flooding and sewer backups.

In addition, this pilot project would serve as a test
case for potential green infrastructure projects in
the future. With the success of this pilot project,
green infrastructure could be installed in other
public facilities, which would add to the overall
risk reduction effect of green infrastructure.

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for implementation of the project
is intermediate and can be completed within
two to five years.

128 Section IV: Project Profiles

Regulatory Requirements

Implementation of the Green Infrastructure Pilot
Project would require coordination and input
from state agencies in developing the project.
Depending on the location and specifications
of the project, the project would be subject
to regulatory review from the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection (NYC
DEP), the New York City Department of Design
and Construction (NYC DDC), the New York City
Department of Education (NYC DOE), the New
York City School Construction Authority (SCA},
and the New York City Department of Parks and
Recreation (DPR). State agencies would also
likely be involved in the review and permitting
of the project; such state agencies are likely

 

Source: www.asla.org

to include at a minimum the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation
(NYS DEC} and NYS Department of State (NYS
DOS).

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have jurisdiction.
Ald: Twin Pond Park Bluebelt Enhancement [Featured Project]

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Project Description

As a pilot project for the Green Infrastructure
Community Master Plan, the Twin Pond Park
Bluebelt Restoration would increase stormwater
filtration by using natural wetlands systems
around the perimeter of the Ponds to effectively
slow peak stormwater flows and improve
water quality.

The New York City Department of Environmental
Protection (NYC DEP} Bluebelt program provides
an ecologically sound and _ cost-effective
drainage system that captures stormwater and
directs it to one of several facilities known as Best
Management Practices (BMPs). BMPs include
constructed wetlands, stormwater detention
ponds, and stream restoration projects that
serve the role of mitigating the negative effects
of discharging stormwater into the environment.

In 2013, DEP began dredging Springfield Lake
as part of Phase IV of its $175 million upgrade
of sewer and water infrastructure in Southeast
Queens to alleviate flooding. Springfield Lake
is part of a new network of nearly 10 acres of
Bluebelt wetlands in the Community that will
receive and filter stormwater before it is released
into Jamaica Bay. DEP is currently planning a
similar Bluebelt project at Twin Ponds, which will
include the installation of stormwater outfalls.

Twin Pond Park Bluebelt Restoration would
supplement NYC DEP’s current project by
clearing any debris and dead trees from the
ponds, restoring wetlands within the riparian
zone, and installing a porous pavement
walkway surrounding the ponds for passive

 

recreation (Figure 4.11). Wetlands restoration
would enhance existing four foot wide riparian
plantings which include native grasses and
emergent wetland species. The Bluebelt project
would lead stormwater away from the area
around Twin Ponds Park—including Merrick,
Brookville, and Hook Creek Boulevards—and
into the restored wetlands located near the
ponds. These wetlands would filter stormwater
before it flows into the Ponds, which would
slow the pace of runoff and improve water
quality. This restoration project would enhance
ecosystem health and restore habitat near Twin
Ponds, while increasing the storage capacity of
the ponds.

Figure 4.11:

    

Me
wae

tet

Twin Pond Park Bluebelt Restoration

The passive pedestrian walkway surrounding
the ponds would both capture stormwater and
allow it to infiltrate where it falls, while improving
the public use, enjoyment and quality of life in
the Park. Park benches would be installed on
the walkway to increase usage of the park.
Trash receptacles would also be installed to
encourage the maintenance of the cleanliness
of the walkway.

Cost: $850,000

The cost estimate includes the above restoration
and construction tasks in addition to:

= Existing condition analysis;

«Sediment characterization;

re

Section IV: Project Profiles 129
Idlewild Watershed Communities

«Wetland Delineation;

» Stormwater pipe and outfall flow
monitoring;

«Topographic and bathymetric surveys;
*  Bio-benchmark survey;

«Preparation of construction
documents; and

« Issue of regulatory approvals and permits.

The maintenance of the restored structures—
including the riparian plantings, porous
pavement, park bench, and trash receptacles—
would cost an additional $780,000 over 25
years. The maintenance cost is not included in
this cost estimate.

Benefits and Co-Benefits

Environmental Benefits

Riparian plantings would provide Twin Ponds
with a layer of vegetation that would act as a
protection perimeter, filtering pollutants and
sediments from stormwater that would have
otherwise entered the ponds. Improved water
quality would encourage aquatic life in the
ponds to thrive. Soil quality would benefit as a
result of the improvements of the water quality.
Thus, the vegetation that relies on the soil would
also thrive.

Restored riparian plantings would also improve
the air quality in the surrounding area. The
plantings would annually remove 2.05 Ibs
of ozone, 1.83 lbs of particulate matter with
a diameter of 10 micrometers or less (PM-
10), 1.65 lbs of nitrogen dioxide (NO,}, 0.97
lbs of sulfur dioxide, and 0.50 Ibs of carbon
monoxide (CO).*”

130 Section IV: Project Profiles

Furthermore, the walkway and park benches
would generate public interest in the Twin
Ponds Park area. Public interest would promote
the maintenance of Twin Ponds Park and its
ecosystem, providing a long-term solution for
the welfare of the park.

Economic Benefits

Twin Pond Park Bluebelt Restoration would
generate a total of nine fulltime equivalent jobs.
The operation and maintenance of the project
components would generate an additional
eight fulltime equivalent jobs over the span of
25 years.

Riparian restoration around Twin Ponds would
mitigate stormwater flooding, reducing costs for
additional maintenance of Twin Ponds and the
repair of the surrounding traffic infrastructure.
Riparian restoration of Twin Ponds Park costs
$50,000. The riparian zone would prevent
sediments from entering the pond, increasing
the water capacity of the pond. Increased water
capacity would mitigate stormwater flooding of
the pond. Mitigating stormwater flooding would
reduce the cost of future riparian restorations
and repair of the surrounding roads that would
have otherwise been damaged by the floods.

The riparian restoration would also maintain the
water quality of Twin Ponds, reducing the need
and cost for water treatment methods such as
siltation removal. The upkeep of the Twin Ponds
water quality would be necessary to maintain its
water capacity and the ecosystem of the ponds.

The project would improve stormwater
management near Merrick, Brookville, and
Hook Creek Boulevards. This could decrease

traffic congestion during localized flood events
and reduce road repair costs as a_ result
of flooding.

Health and Social Benefits

Restoring the riparian plantings would improve
the air quality of the Twin Ponds Park area.
Improved air quality would reduce the health
risks associated with poor air quality, such
as asthma.

Improved water quality would increase the
water capacity of the Twin Ponds Park, which
would mitigate stormwater flooding at the pond.
Improved water quality would also increase
stormwater drainage at the pond, benefitting
the planned Bluebelt project at the ponds.

The constructed walkway and park benches
would provide the Community with an additional
recreational area. Increasing the recreational
areas within the Community would promote the
health and well-being of Community members.
The World Health Organization recommends
150 minutes of physical activity per week,’
only achieved by 41.1% of the Community.'°
The new recreational area at Twin Ponds Park
would encourage more Community members
to participate in physical activities. In addition,
there is currently a bike path that connects
Merrick Boulevard, which is just north of the
Twin Ponds Park, and Brookville Park. With the
addition of Twin Ponds Park as a recreational
area, the usage of the bike path would increase.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

In addition to contributing to the mitigation of
stormwater flooding, the project would provide
additional economic, environmental, and
health and social benefits. The restored riparian
planting would improve the water quality and
air quality in the surrounding area by filtering
out pollutants and sediments from stormwater
entering the pond and pollutants from the air.
Improved air quality would decrease the risk
of associated health risks, such as asthma.
Improved water quality would promote
the growth and health of the surrounding
ecosystem. Improved water quality would
mitigate stormwater flooding at the pond and
the surrounding Community by increasing the
water capacity of the pond. The mitigation of
stormwater flooding would reduce damages to
Twin Ponds Park and nearby road infrastructure.
The project would also provide a recreational
area for the Community, promoting physical
activities that would improve the health of
Community members.

Risk Reduction

The restoration of the Twin Ponds Park would
enhance the planned Bluebelt project, improving
stormwater drainage within the Community. The
restoration itself also would improve stormwater
drainage at the pond, mitigating flooding of the
park during heavy rain events. Thus, the Twin
Ponds Park, surrounding road infrastructure,
residential units, and businesses would face a
reduced risk of stormwater flooding.

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for implementation of the project
is intermediate and can be completed within two
to five years. Ongoing coordination regarding
the partnership to fund implementation, as well

as stakeholder involvement to guide the design
of the plan and project, will need to be defined.

Regulatory Requirements

Twin Pond Park Bluebelt Restoration would be
subject to a regulatory review from NYC DEP
the New York City Department of Parks and
Recreation (NYC DPR}, and the New York City
Department of City Planning (NYC DCP). Due to
the scale of the project and the project location,
various agencies would also likely be involved
in the review and permitting of the project; such
agencies are likely to include at a minimum the
New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYS DEC), NY Coastal Zone
Management and NYS Department of State.

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have jurisdiction over
the project.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section IV: Project Profiles

131
Idlewild Watershed Communities

A2: NYC DEP Oyster Restoration in Thurston Basin [Featured Project]

 

Project Description

During Superstorm Sandy, tidal flows surged
through Jamaica Bay into Thurston Basin and
the wetlands of the Idlewild Park Preserve.
Successful oyster restoration in the Thurston
Basin may be able to slow tidal surge flows into
the Basin and adjacent wetlands and improve
the water quality within the basin.

Oyster restoration has been proposed by the
New York City Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) for Thurston Basin, but has
not yet been completed. The head of Thurston
Basin is three feet deep which is suitable for
restoration of oyster reefs. Shallow parts of the
Basin along Idlewild Park Preserve have the
potential to offer opportunities for other aquatic
habitat restoration. Oyster restoration in
Thurston Basin can lead to a series of protective
oyster reefs that can dissipate wave energy and
slow tidal flows. Oyster restoration would also
improve the habitat and health of both Thurston
Basin, known as a top location for bird watching
in New York State, as well as adjacent Idlewild
Park Preserve.

This project would provide support for DEP’s
project to establish oyster reefs in Thurston Basin
by providing funds to initiate the project (Figure
4.12}. Oyster restoration in Thurston Basin is an
effective and resilient project complimentary to
the ongoing Hudson-Raritan Estuary projects
such as the Jamaica Bay Oyster Bed Pilot project
and the New York Harbor Schools Billion Oysters
Project in addition to other projects initiated by
NY/NJ Baykeeper.

132 Section IV: Project Profiles

 

Figure 4.12: NYC DEP Oyster Restoration

in Thurston Basin
Oysters have the following benefits:

« Oysters are an indicator species and can
be used to gather information on overall
health of the estuary;

«Oyster reefs can provide habitat for many
other marine organisms;

= Oyster reefs can improve water quality
and protect shorelines by reducing wetland
fringe erosion and stabilizing banks; and

«Oysters are filter-feeders that can
improve water quality through filtration of
sediments and other contaminants, such
as nitrogen, fine sediments and toxins from
water column.

Through the above benefits, oysters will improve
the overall health of the wetlands surrounding
Thurston Basin. This improved health would
enhance the function of the wetlands as a tidal
barrier.

Cost: $250,000

The project would provide funding to DEP’s
project to establish oyster reefs in Thurston
Basin. The project cost would include the
following tasks:

= Engineering and design of the oyster reef;

= Preparation of construction documents;

«Oyster seeding, substrate seeding, and
oyster monitoring; and

« Issue of regulatory approvals and permits.

External costs of this project would include
potential impacts to the existing ecosystem
within Thurston Basin.

Oyster Restoration

Benefits and Co-Benefits

NYC DEP Oyster Restoration in Thurston
Basin will have environmental, economic, and
social and health benefits for the Community,
primarily the Idlewild Park Preserve area. This
project would have the following local benefits
as well as long term regional benefits.

Environmental Benefits

Oyster reefs protect from erosion, enhance
water quality, and provide substrate for the
recruitment of new larval oysters. The project
would improve the health of the ecosystem in
Thurston Basin by filtering nitrogen, nutrients,
bacteria, and sediments from coastal waters. A
typical oyster filters between 20 to 50 gallons
of water per day.'°? The improved water quality
resulting from the oyster restoration would
benefit species that live in Thurston Basin’s low
and high marsh, forested/shrub, and brackish
water habitats.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Source: www.marinediscoverycenter.org

Oyster reefs provide hard substrate for
settlement of sessile organisms, such as
barnacles and oysters, and increase foraging
areas for fish. In addition, marsh systems may
develop on the sediment that accumulates
behind reef, providing intertidal marsh habitat.
Endangered or threatened species in these
habitats that would benefit from improved
water quality include the piping plover, red
knot, roseate tern, and sandplain gerardia.'
Thurston Basin is also designated as providing
essential fish habitat for nineteen federally
mandated species, including winter flounder,
windowpane flounder, bluefish, and black
seabass. Oysters would serve as an indicator
of the health of the ecosystem within the basin,
alerting the Community to poor ecosystem
health in the future.

Section IV: Project Profiles 133
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Economic Benefits

The funding from this project provided to DEP’s
proposed oyster restoration project would
generate three fulltime equivalent jobs.

Economic benefits would result from the
increased risk reduction resulting from the oyster
restoration, which would increase the function
of the wetlands as a natural tidal barrier.
Thurston Basin is one of the main entry points of
water into the Community. Improving the health
of the wetlands in this area would increase
the water capacity of the wetlands, slowing
tidal floods entering the Community. As an
example, restoration of oysters in the northern
Gulf of Mexico reduced wave height by 51-90%
and reduced wave energy by 76-99% at the
shore.'°5 A similar dynamic at Thurston Basin
would reduce the cost of flood damages to the
Idlewild Park Preserve and nearby properties.
Oyster restoration would also reduce the cost
of additional infrastructure projects that aim to
mitigate tidal flooding from the Thurston Basin.

Health and Social Benefits

Improving water quality within Thurston Basin
would mitigate the health impacts of poor water
quality to those who use nearby water bodies
for recreation, such as the kayak launch in
Hook Creek. Improving water quality would
make this recreational area safer, encouraging
more Community members to participate
in recreational activities, while providing an
educational opportunity on the importance of
shellfish habitats to wetlands and water bodies.

134 Section IV: Project Profiles

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Oyster reef restoration would provide moderate
environmental, economic, and health and
social benefits in comparison to the project’s
low capital costs of $250,000. Further, oyster
reefs are “self-maintaining,” meaning that if
they are alive, they could continue to build new
reef, which may multiply their cost-effectiveness.

The oyster restoration would provide
unquantifiable benefits to water quality and
ultimately ecosystem health in Thurston Basin.
Community members that use nearby water
bodies for recreational activities would also
benefit, facing a reduced risk of adverse health
effects from poor water quality. Improved
functioning of the nearby wetlands as a natural
tidal barrier would mitigate tidal floods,
providing economic benefit through avoided
costs of repairing or replacing damaged assets.

Risk Reduction

As stated in the Benefits and Co-Benefits section
above, NYC DEP Oyster Restoration in Thurston
Basin would benefit the health of the adjacent
wetlands in Idlewild Park Preserve. Healthy
wetlands would have an increased capacity to
retain water, improving their function as a tidal
barrier. Therefore, the restoration of the oysters
in Thurston Basin would reduce the risk of tidal
surges within the area around the Thurston
Basin. Since Thurston Basin is one of the main
entry points of tidal water into the Community,
the wetlands here are critical to the defense of
the Community against tidal surges.

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for implementation of the project
is immediate and can be completed within two
(2) years or less. Ongoing coordination between
New York State and New York City regarding
the partnership to fund implementation, as
well as stakeholder involvement to guide the
design of the system, will need to be defined
and procured.

Regulatory Requirements

Depending on_ the _ specifications of
implementation of project, the project would be
subject to a regulatory review from the New York
City Department of Environmental Protection
(NYC DEP}, the New York City Department of
Transportation (NYC DOT}, and the New York
City Department of City Planning (NYC DCP).
Due to the scale and location of the project,
State and Federal agencies would also likely
be involved in the review and permitting of the
project; such agencies are likely to include at
a minimum the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC}, the
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey
(PANYNJ}, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG),
and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE},
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA}, the New York City
Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP}
within the Department of City Planning (NYC
DCP), and the New York State Coastal Zone
Management (CZM) Program through the New

York State Department of State (NYS DOS).

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have jurisdiction over
the project.
A3: Coastal Management Plan [Featured Project]

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Project Description

The southern part of the Idlewild Watershed
Communities includes Idlewild Park Preserve
and is bordered by Hook Creek and the Head
of Bay. Areas surrounding Idlewild Park Preserve
experience recurring flooding, including
Rosedale south of 147th Avenue, Brookville in
the vicinity of Brookville Park, and Springfield
Gardens southwest of Guy Brewer Boulevard as
well as in the vicinity of Springfield Park south of
145th Avenue. There are a variety of economic
assets here, ranging from small businesses
that employ up to 20 people and select large
businesses that have a workforce of up to 500
people. Three key roads in the area, Hook
Creek Boulevard, Rockaway Boulevard, 147th
Ave, and Brookville Boulevard, provide access
points to and from surrounding communities.
In addition, the Rosedale Pumping Station is a
key infrastructure asset that pumps water away
from the Combined Sewer Outfalls located in
Thurston Basin.

The areas described above are in a low lying
area that is vulnerable to tidal flooding. Most
of the tidal inundation during Superstorm
Sandy was water that flowed in from Jamaica
Bay and entered the Community through Hook
Creek and Thurston Basin overtopping the
wetlands. During Superstorm Sandy, many
of the homes, businesses, and roads were
flooded in these neighborhoods. In addition,
Rosedale Pumping Station lost functionality
during the storm, leading to 6.8 million gallons
of untreated sewage overflows discharging
into Thurston Basin.'% A comprehensive and

regional coastal management plan is needed
to prioritize improvements and integrate flood
protection measures that mitigate the flood risk
to the Community with broader objectives such
as economic development, recreation, and
public health.

This project would focus on developing strategies
to protect low lying areas that are prone to tidal
flooding at certain flood levels and studying
the impacts of various coastal defenses for
mitigation of tidal flooding on a regional scale,
serving to protect the Community and parts of
adjacent Nassau County. The goal of the study
would be to identify a coastal management
system that protects the Community from
100-year flood events. This study would be
completed in coordination with the NYRCR
Five Towns Project Rockaway Turnpike/Nassau
Expressway Resilient Corridor Study as well as
other regional coastal protection projects.

Among the potential coastal defense measures
that would be studied are: a berm along the
perimeter of the Idlewild Park Preserve to block
minor storm surges; and tide gates at Hook
Creek to prevent water from flooding the
creek and the surrounding area. The project
would investigate the technical feasibility of
these and other coastal defense measures,
the possible regional coordination that the
implementations may require, and the timeline,
estimated cost, and schedule to implement the
potential projects.

A potential recommendation of this project
would be to construct a berm that begins

south of Springfield Park, continues along the
northern border of Idlewild Park Preserve, and
ends at the kayak and canoe launch near Hook
Creek. Future extensions could implement a
floodgate at Hook Creek and continue the berm
into North Woodmere Park. The layout of the
potential project is shown in Figure 4.13. The
extension would construct a floodgate to allow
the flow of water during regular conditions and
block water from flooding the creeks during
flood events. The berm could also include a bike
path or walking trail on top of it. The bike path
or trail would allow travel between key points
along the berm, including Springfield Park, PS.
181 Brookfield, Brookville Park, and the kayak
and canoe launch at the end of Huxley Street on
Hook Creek.

The berm would serve as a tidal barrier that
would supplement the wetlands in Idlewild Park
Preserve. It would be designed to a height of
14 feet NAVD, which is equal to the base flood
elevation plus three feet, and would protect
the Community from small scale tidal floods
up to 147th Avenue and on the east side of
the Community as well as the south side of
Rosedale. Bioswales and culverts would be built
along the berm to maintain the drainage of
stormwater that would flow downstream into
the Idlewild Park Preserve wetlands. In order to
protect against a 100-year flood, this regional
coastal barrier could extend into neighboring
communities, mainly North Woodmere east of
the Idlewild Watershed Communities.

The potential flood gates along Rockaway
Turnpike, as advocated for in Project Dé Support

Section IV: Project Profiles 135
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Figure 4.13: Conceptual Coastal Management Plan

hI

ST AMEN Se

Pe oath

ce 3

eV Ale NA

if

TIDE GATE
BERM / SEA WALL
WETLAND CREATION

AREAS PROTECTED
{AREAS INUNDATED IN SUPERSTORM
SANDY)

136 Section IV: Project Profiles

 
Rockaway Turnpike/Nassau Expressway Resilient
Corridor Study (NYRCR Plan for the Five Towns},
would provide an additional level of resiliency
by protecting against a 100-year flood. Pairing
these two projects together could offer a tiered
approach to resiliency. If this regional strategy
were implemented, then a berm would protect
against smaller, more frequent, flood events,
while the regional project would protect against
larger, less frequent, flood events.

Cost: $465,000
The development of a coastal management plan
would have a low cost. The development of the
plan would include the following components:
«Baseline studies:

— Existing information review;

— Topographic surveys;

— Geotechnical surveys;

— Wetland delineations;

— Evaluation of threatened and
endangered species; and

— Tidal analysis
= Conceptual feasibly report;
» Alternatives analysis;

= Review of potential regulatory approvals
and permits; and

= Public outreach.

Implementation of the recommended coastal
management solution would have additional
costs, which are not included in this project’s
cost estimate. The construction of such a
solution would have external costs, including

but not limited to, traffic, noise, and air impacts,
as well as impacts to the local ecology.

Benefits and Co-Benefits

The coastal management plan for Idlewild
Park Preserve would have few direct benefits.
However, ifthe project or projects recommended
in the plan are implemented, they would have
several benefits for the Community, as well as
adjacent communities. Because the coastal
management plan is a necessary step in
implementing a coastal management solution,
the benefits of the implemented solution would
be tied back to the plan funded by this project.

The area protected by the potential project
described above is referred to as the mitigated
flood zone. A summary of the mitigated flood
zone is provided in Table 4.1.

 

 

Table 4.1: Summary of Mitigated Flood
Zone
Residential units 4,073

 

Households with disabled 324
individuals

NowEnglch Seakeay sa saceeeeseeeeecenneneeenseees mS
FeSO sssassssssssassassssssssssasssssssssssssessssesses
Children (age under 18) os vcsssssssssseeee VA96
Elderly (age over 65) 509

Source: NYC Department of City Planning's PLUTO data and U.S. Census
Bureau; 2008-2012 ACS Population Summary. Data obtained from ESRI

 

 

Community Analyst

 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Environmental Benefits

Implementation of a coastal management
solution would protect upland parks and
water bodies, including Idlewild Park Preserve,
Brookville Park, Twin Ponds Park, and Springfield
Park, and the water bodies that reside in them.
The ecosystems within these parks would also
benefit, including 91 species of fish, 325
species of birds, and other animals, including
endangered species such as the common tern
and least tern.'°7

These measures would also improve water and
air quality by reducing stormwater runoff and
potential damages from floods. During tidal
floods, floodwaters absorb pollutants from the
street, harming the water quality of the water
body that they return to; the reconstruction of
damaged assets from tidal floods would cause
significant air quality impacts. These water and
air quality impacts would be mitigated through
the coastal management plan.

The bike path on the berm would generate
public interest in the Idlewild Park Preserve,
which would aid in the preservation of the
wetlands within the preserve. The bike path
would also divert automobile traffic since it
connects a large part of the Idlewild Watershed
Communities, further improving the air quality
throughout the Community.

Additional potentially avoided environmental
costs include those from home heating oil
spills in which oil mixes with flood waters and
can contaminate water bodies and adjacent
properties;'°8 flood damaged homes which can
contain hazardous materials; flooded heating
systems which can contain asbestos; and
sheet rock which can contain lead paint.’ By

Section IV: Project Profiles 137
Idlewild Watershed Communities

avoiding common sources of water pollution
following floods, this phase of the project could
improve ecosystem health in the Jamaica Bay,
protecting the Bay’s endangered species, such
as the common tern and least term, and critical
habitat for marine species. The implementation
of shoreline defenses could also reduce coastline
erosion along the 9,000 linear feet of coastal
erosion hazard areas within the Community.

Lastly, the coastal management plan would
reduce the risk of combined sewer overflows
in Thurston Basin. In the potential coastal
management recommended shown above,
Rosedale Pumping Station would be protected
from floods, decreasing the chance that the
pumping station loses functionality and the
subsequent release of untreated sewage into the
basin, as occurred during Superstorm Sandy.''°

Economic Benefits

The development of a coastal management
plan would generate five fulltime equivalent
jobs. Due to the mitigated flood zone, 4,073
residential units and 20 commercial lots residing
in the mitigated flood zone would be protected,
with an approximate total market value of
$73.1 million." In addition, vulnerability of
businesses would decrease, reducing their
risk of temporary closure, and benefitting the
economic activity of the Community through
avoided loss of sales revenues and income
for employees. With $2.3 million in annual
revenues generated on average per business,
in the mitigated flood zone, an estimated
$519.9 million in annual business revenues
are generated, which on average translates to
$1.42 million in sales generated in the mitigated
flood zone per day."

138 Section IV: Project Profiles

Implementation of the plan’s recommendations
would reduce or avoid damages to
infrastructure, utilities, and other commercial
assets. For example, during Superstorm Sandy,
Rosedale Pumping Station lost functionality due
to flood damage, causing 6.8 million gallons
of untreated sewage to discharge into Thurston
Basin."'3 The Station is currently equipped with
three pumps rated at 4,150 gallons per minute
(gpm) (6 MGD) each. Repairing the damage
to the Rosedale Pumping Station would cost an
estimated $5.2 million, which would be avoided
under the mitigated flood event.'"4 In addition,
costs to restore wetlands following such an
event would also be reduced or avoided.

The protection provided by the coastal
management measures and project could
result in an increase in property value due to
improved livability of and amenities within the
area. Increased amenities for residents would
result from the project, including a bike path
or trail, bioswales and additional wetlands and
vegetation. The protection would also generate
interest in commercial investments in the area.
With increased coastal protection, existing
businesses would remain in the area, providing
jobs and income for the local economy.

In the example coastal management
recommendation provided above, the bike path
on the berm would enhance the recreational
value for residents and visitors of the Idlewild
Park Preserve area, and would trigger additional
visitor spending, sales taxes, and economic
activity in the area.

One critical objective of the Coastal
Management Plan is to coordinate design of
coastal flood mitigation measures with FEMA

to ensure that implementation of the coastal
management plan has insurance benefits for
residents and businesses currently located
within the floodplain. Infrastructure measures
that reduce risks to structures located in the
floodplain may reduce insurance premiums
for these high-risk coastal areas, contingent on
design and coordination with FEMA.

Health and Social Benefits

This project would result in health and social
benefits by protecting a large part of the
Community, including socially vulnerable
populations and the facilities that serve them.
In the mitigated flood zone, there are 650 low-
income households, 324 households with one
or more persons with a disability, 119 non-
English speaking residents, 1,496 children,
and 509 residents over the age of 65.1'5 These
socially vulnerable populations may have
trouble repairing flood damages or relocating
to a safer location or to facilities that provide
the services they require. Thus, the coastal
management plan would reduce this risk to
these populations.

In the case of the potential solution shown above,
the proposed vegetated berm with bike path
would enhance the recreational opportunities
at Idlewild Park Preserve by protecting a series
of recreational assets, such as Springfield Park,
Brookville Park, and the Idlewild Kayak Launch.
These recreational opportunities would also
improve the fitness of Community members by
encouraging physical activity.
Cost-Benefit Analysis

The coastal management plan would be a
necessary step in a solution that would mitigate
recurring tidal flooding in the Community.
Implementation of the plan’s recommendations
would protect the Community’s environmental
assets, residences, and businesses within
the mitigated flood zone from future flood
damage; the properties within this zone
have an approximate total market value of
$73.1 million," representing the collective
property value protected by the berm from
mitigated floods.

The cost of lost functionality of critical
infrastructure within the Community should also
be considered. For example, during Superstorm
Sandy, Rosedale Pumping Station was flooded
and lost functionality, releasing untreated
sewage into Thurston Basin. Estimated costs to
repair the Rosedale Pumping Station would be
$5.2 million, which would be avoided under
the mitigated flood event. An implemented
coastal management project would protect the
pumping station, mitigating the costs of repair
and the damage of releasing untreated sewage
into Thurston Basin.

Mitigating tidal floods would also improve water
quality in nearby water bodies and air quality
throughout the Community would improve. The
protection from tidal floods and improvement in
water and air qualities would benefit the native
species that reside in the Community.

Overall, improved livability within — the
Community would increase property values,
encourage commercial investments, and
benefit economic activity. The coastal protection

solution would also include a bike path,
connecting parks in the Community and
providing recreational opportunities.

The coastal protection plan would provide
the framework for developing a _ coastal
management solution, which would have
economic, environmental, and health and
social benefits. Thus, the low cost of the plan
($465,000} would be outweighed by the
benefits of implementing its recommendations.

Risk Reduction

This project would also reduce the risk for the
parcels in flood zones north of the Idlewild
Park Preserve from small scale tidal surges.
This area includes 4,073 residential units and
20 commercial lots for a total market value
of $73.1 million." The project would also
protect Rosedale Pumping Station, which lost
functionality during Superstorm Sandy, from
tidal inundation. Protection of the Rosedale
Pumping Station would reduce the number of
sewer backups throughout the Community.
Therefore, this project would reduce the risk of
both tidal inundation for parcels in areas close
to Idlewild Park Preserve and the risk of sewer
backups throughout the Community.

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for implementation of the
study is immediate and can be completed
within two (2) years or less. Implementation
of the recommended projects from the Plan is
long range. Ongoing coordination between
agencies, as well as stakeholder involvement to

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

guide the design of the system, will need to be
defined and procured.

Regulatory Requirements

Depending on the location and specifications
of implementation of the project recommended
within the coastal management plan, the
project(s) would be subject to a regulatory
review from the New York City Department of
Environmental Protection (NYC DEP), the New
York City Department of Transportation (NYC
DOT), and the New York City Department of
City Planning (NYC DCP}. Due to the scale
of the project and the project’s likely location
on the waterfront, City, State, and Federal
agencies would also likely be involved in the
review and permitting of the project; such
agencies are likely to include at a minimum the
New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYS DEC), the Port Authority of
New York and New Jersey (PANYNJ}, the U.S.
Coast Guard (USCG), the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers (USACE), the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the
New York City Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program (LWRP} within the Department of City
Planning (NYC DCP}, and the New York State
Coastal Zone Management (CZM) Program
through the New York State Department of State
(NYS DOS).

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have jurisdiction over
the project.

Section IV: Project Profiles 139
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Strategy A: Additional Resiliency Recommendations

 

Ale: Advocate for Construction of
Thurston Basin Park

During Superstorm Sandy, tidal flows surged
through Jamaica Bay into Thurston Basin and
the wetlands of the Idlewild Park Preserve. This
project would restore the health of the wetlands
in in Thurston Basin. Restoring wetlands in
Thurston Basin would serve to increase their
ability to absorb tidal flows from Jamaica Bay.
The restoration and creation of wetlands along
the Thurston Basin can increase the acreage
of wetlands on the east side of the creek to
approximately 7 acres,''’ therein increasing
the water retaining capacity of Thurston Basin
(Figure 4.14).

Figure 4.14:

-

   

140 = Section IV: Project Profiles

The objective of this project is to advocate
that New York City Department of Parks and
Recreation begin construction of the already-
funded plan to build a park at the southern
end of Thurston Basin. The Committee also
advocates that the City include comfort stations
as part of the park construction near the planned
kayak launch. The proposed comfort stations
would increase the usage of the future kayak
launch, which will generate public interest in
the area, promoting the protection and further
restoration of the Thurston Basin wetlands.

Advocate for Construction of Thurston Basin Park

   

Alf: City Purchase of Privately
Owned Parcels on Edges of Idlewild
Park Preserve

Phase I: City Purchase of Privately Owned
Parcels

New York City public agencies own most of
the area in the Idlewild Park Preserve. Within
this area of ownership, City agencies are able
to initiate programs to protect and restore
wetlands. However, within privately owned
parcels, they are unable to take action to
preserve wetlands.

This project advocates that City funds be used to
acquire the 64 vacant privately owned parcels

Figure 4.15: City Purchase of Privately
Owned Parcels

 
within and adjacent to Idlewild Park Preserve.
The purchase of these areas would provide
public agencies with the jurisdiction to initiate
steps to restore and protect the wetlands in the
purchased areas (Figure 4.15).

Phase I: Restoration of Wetlands within
Purchased Parcels

This phase of the project would restore the
remaining areas as wetlands. As with all
wetland restoration projects, the results of
the restoration would increase the Idlewild
Park Preserve’s capacity to retain water and
improve health of the ecosystems residing in the
restoration area. The increased water capacity
of the wetlands and improved health of their
ecosystems would increase its function as a tidal
barrier. This is important for the Communities,
since the Idlewild Park Preserve is a natural tidal
barrier against flood surges coming from Hook
Creek and Thurston Basin.

AA: Idlewild Park Preserve Culvert
Expansion

Currently, there is a culvert within Idlewild Park
Preserve that allows water to flow beneath a
service road used by JFK Airport. This culvert
allows the passage of water to and from
the east and west sides of the Idlewild Park
Preserve, impacting the surrounding wetlands
that provide major water retention capacity for
the Community.

The culvert is undersized for the volume of
water passing through it, resulting in flooding of
the service roadway during Superstorm Sandy,
and affecting the hydrology of the adjacent
wetlands. This project would advocate for the

expansion of this culvert by reconstructing the
existing culvert opening to provide a larger
pass through for water and adding additional
culverts for more channels for water flow
(Figure 4.16). Expansion of the existing culvert
would improve tidal flow, improve the health
of presently impacted wetlands in the preserve,
allow for the passage of sediment and water
during surge events (improving sediment water
balance) and provide infrastructure stability for
the roadway.

Improved tidal flow would help to restore areas
that are not adequately inundated twice per day
with tidal water to support natural vegetation.
Improved health of the natural vegetation
would help stabilize the wetland ecosystem
and stabilize the functionality of the wetlands

Figure 4.16:

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

as a tidal barrier. In addition, improving tidal
flow would improve local hydrology to increase
the water capacity of the wetlands during tidal
surges, mitigating flood effects.

Idlewild Park Preserve Culvert Expansion

 

Section IV: Project Profiles 141
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Strategy B: Strengthen the Emergency Response Capacity of the Community

B1: Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan [Proposed Project]

 

Project Description

In order to strengthen long term recovery and
build capacity to respond to future disasters,
the Idlewild Watershed Communities require
a coordinated planning effort among the New
York City Office of Emergency Management
(OEM}, nonprofit organizations, Community
Emergency Response Teams (CERT), and other
relevant City, State, and Federal agencies.
Superstorm Sandy highlighted the need for
a centralized plan that coordinates effective
disaster preparation and recovery strategies
between government agencies and community
based organizations (CBOs).

The Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan
would facilitate community-level coordination
between City agencies and community
organizations in two phases (Figure 4.17).
The first phase would include the development
of a comprehensive disaster recovery plan
for the Community. The second phase would
implement selected recommendations from
the Phase | plan. Project descriptions for both
phases are below.

Phase I: Establish COAD and Develop a
Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan
Phase la: The first step in the planning
process would be to establish a Community
Organizations Active in Disasters (COAD}
that would serve as the advisory committee to
oversee development and implementation of

142 Section IV: Project Profiles

the Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan. In
addition to being responsible for planning and
oversight, the COAD would create a registry of
local CBOs and coordinate activities among
and between community groups for the mutual
benefit of the greater Southeast Queens region.
The COAD would build upon established
networks between existing community groups to
provide training for disaster recovery assistance,
develop relationships with citywide and regional
agencies to ensure communications in times of
crisis, and facilitate communication and shared
resources between COAD members.

Phase 1b: The second step in the planning
process would be to develop the Southeast
Queens Disaster Recovery Plan. The objective
of the Plan would be to build capacity for
the Community to respond effectively to a
range of hazards. The scope of the Southeast
Queens Recovery Plan would include, but is not
limited to:

« Identify assets and vulnerabilities of
local not-for-profit organizations, and
define roles and responsibilities of COAD
member groups in disaster response (e.g.,
the CERT may need additional training
programs for locally specific disaster
threats, fixed resources, equipment
storage, etc.}.

« Identify existing social services facilities
that could operate as Resource and
Recovery Centers in the Community. These

Resource and Recovery Centers would
allow for coordination of emergency and
relief services following a disaster, such
as access to food, water, power, medical
services, information, and special services
for vulnerable populations.

Assess the feasibility of these facilities to
serve as Resource and Recovery Centers
and determine necessary improvements
to aid in disaster recovery (e.g., meeting
space for the CERT and/or COAD, backup
power supply, warming and cooling
centers, charging stations).

Determine protocols for effective
communication between the COAD, CERT,
community based organizations, NYC
OEM, and other City agencies.

Provide recommendations for improving
standard evacuation procedures during
major storm events and determine the
evacuation and disaster response needs for
vulnerable populations, including seniors.

Develop training and education programs
to prepare member organizations

of the COAD to provide disaster

recovery assistance.

Determine the training and education
needs for local residents for disaster
preparedness and recovery.
Phase II: Implement Recommendations of the

Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan

The second phase of this project would provide
assistance to the local COAD to implement the
recommendations of the Southeast Queens
Disaster Recovery Plan in coordination with NYC
OEM. Such recommendations may include the
following measures, subject to the findings of
the Plan:

«Create a registry of privately owned
recovery equipment and a plan for
Community use during disaster recovery
(e.g., generators, radios, space heaters,
wet vacuums).

= Provide fixed assets for COAD members

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

during power outages, and to facilitate "
door to door check-ins of homebound
residents after disasters.

Implement a pilot project for a Locally-
Based Evacuation Strategy—the strategy is
envisioned as a comprehensive approach
to disaster preparedness that would include
development of a plan in coordination
with community based organizations
(CBOs} to address the individualized
evacuation needs of Community residents.
The strategy would involve outreach and
education for residents and businesses to
establish personalized evacuation plans

«Create a task force among local
community groups to coordinate with
NYC OEM in developing locally relevant
Homeowner Education and Storm
Preparedness materials that are targeted
directly towards the needs of the Idlewild
Watershed Communities.

Figure 4.17: Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan

  
 
  

EVACUATION CENTER
BELMONT RACETRACK,

engaged in emergency preparedness and/
or recovery.

Establish one Resource and Recovery
Center through a competitive process.

Install fixed generators at the Resource and
Recovery Center—generators will be able
to provide backup power to the Center(s}
during power outages. A phone charging
station and a Wi-Fi network can be
connected to the generator, which would
enable the reliable use of communication
devices during disaster events.

Develop educational materials and provide
storm recovery assistance to vulnerable

populations, including seniors, in
coordination with NYC OEM.

Create a voluntary registry of elderly
residents for use by the newly created
COAD, NORC, CERT, and other
community groups to provide evacuation
assistance, distribute medical supplies

'VACUATION AN
HILLCREST HIGH
HOOL =4.5 a
oe

% BAISLEY ZX
“4 POND PARK y
EVACUATION CENTER
JOHN ADAMS HIGH Zz
SCHOOL = 4 MILES.

soz: 5 MILES:
me!

 
 
 
 
 
    
  
  

  
    
 
  

pe
SpANGAIELD
wl4? Aye PARK

  
 

\ \soura VALLEY

 

BE wl
8 see y go \ STREAM
Ne pa ’ .
Nye ‘s 1
~, i
~, 5
o 2 ea z =
N IDLEWILD S tc J
JFK ~ PARK ce “ - staat to
AIRPORT Rs, HOOK CREEK” ete
Dy, WILDLIFE iets i
LEGEND ar, SANCTUARY ”
a & <
Zz SCHOOLS “Oe N 3 ! NORTH
Oy, “~~ 4 §  WOOoMeRE
+ HEALTHCARE FACILITIES bo \e j PARK
e EMERGENCY RESPONSE N '
(FOR NYPD & FDNY) \, J
a PLACES OF WORSHIP & OTHER .
SOCIAL SERVICES > -
===) _ DIRECTION OF EVAC. CENTERS 4 \
o
EXTENT OF FLOODING FROM ¢ am “
SUPERSTORM SANDY Vv’ 7 . N
,
FREQUENTLY FLOODING AREAS bend ———a
a 025 as Timi

 

 

 

HEAD OF Bay

Section IV: Project Profiles 143
Idlewild Watershed Communities

(e.g., route, location, shelter, etc.) in
advance of future disasters.

Cost: $230,000 — 750,000

The estimated cost of first phase of this
project—Establish COAD and Develop a
Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan—
is roughly $230,000. This estimate includes
costs for the establishment of a COAD and a
disaster recovery plan. The cost to establish the
COAD includes developing a COAD structure
and recruitment of members, establishment
of roles and responsibilities, and training for

ih

Food Bank Volunteers

144 Section IV: Project Profiles

member organizations. Training would include
approximately three workshops and associated
curricula for members. The cost of a disaster
recovery plan includes the scope of services
outlined in the project description above, with
an emphasis on identifying feasible locations for
Resource and Recovery Centers and developing
effective disaster communications.

The estimated cost of the second phase of this
project—Implement Recommendations of the
Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan— is
approximately $500,000. This includes the

 

Source: www.ready.gov

cost for providing assistance to the COAD to
implement the recommendations from the
first phase, the establishment of one Resource
and Recovery Center through a competitive
solicitation process, and community education.
Components of this community education
campaign include the development and
distribution of Community-specific educational
materials to vulnerable populations and the
development of an emergency response website
and mobile app for the Community.

The estimated cost for this project has a low
degree of uncertainty, and no externalities
are expected as a result of either phase of
the project.

Benefits and Co-Benefits

Economic Benefits

This project would create an estimated eight
fulltime equivalent jobs’? (FTEs} through the
developmental and implementation phase.

The Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan
would create a COAD, which would have
positive economic benefits. The COAD will
increase the capacity of disaster preparedness
and recovery for nonprofit and community
groups, which would significantly increase the
productivity of volunteer labor and moderately
offset the need for disaster recovery personnel
which could result in a more efficient disaster
recovery response. The COAD would have
a greater understanding of the specific
Community needs during a disaster event and
would coordinate the response to those needs in
a more cost effective, timely fashion. Therefore,
this program could reduce the costs of disaster
recovery, potentially providing more services
to individuals and households, including
vulnerable populations. The COAD could
qualify for a variety of funding that would not be
available to government agencies. In addition,
local organizations and regional emergency
agencies could save money and resources by
responding in an organized and coordinated
manner during and after a disaster event. The
COAD would expedite disaster preparation
and recovery efforts, allowing residents to
return home and businesses to reopen faster.
Therefore, this project would decrease the costs
of temporary business closures, avoiding lost
profits, lower sales tax revenues, and lost wages
for employees.

In addition, implementation of the plan may
help to reduce the costs of evacuations in the
Community. These costs, which are incurred by
both private and government entities, can be
significant. Better planning and preparedness
can help reduce these costs and increase the
likelihood that lives are saved which is the
ultimate goal of evacuation plans.

The Recovery and Resource Center created
through the Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery
Plan would provide similar benefits. It would
also reduce disaster preparation and recovery
costs by consolidating multiple social service
and emergency response functions into a single
building, increasing efficiency. The Resource
and Recovery Center would be known through
the Community as the first stop for Community
members, minimizing the confusion that comes
with disaster recovery.

Additionally, the
Strategy would

Locally-Based Evacuation
facilitate the evacuation

process. Overall, implementation of the plan
would decrease disaster preparation and
recovery costs.

Health and Social Benefits

Health and Social benefits would be significant
due to increased coordination and efficiency of
disaster preparation and recovery. Efficient and
faster disaster preparedness and recovery will
benefit socially vulnerable populations living
in the Community, who may need assistance
preparing for and recovering from disaster
events. Ultimately, this program may increase
the availability of disaster services provided
to individuals and households throughout the
Community, including vulnerable populations.
These services are important to avoiding or
minimizing diminishing quality of life due to
loss of infrastructure or other lifelines (e.g.,
power, sewage, or water}.''? These services
may also result in lower incidents of illness and

 

NYC OEM Educational Materials

Source: www.nyc.gov/oem

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

morbidity associated with disaster situations.
In addition, the COAD will communicate with
nonprofit organizations and local agencies to
create a list of socially vulnerable populations
that would need assistance before, during, and
after disaster events. This would help ensure
that all socially vulnerable individuals are
appropriately assisted.

The Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery Plan
would focus on increasing communication and
assistance to the 2,023 individuals with limited
english proficiency, 6,338 households with at
least one disabled individual, 10,727 elderly
(over the age of 65), and 21,246 children
within the Community."5 This communication
may include expanding outreach through

other channels such as social media, email,
and other technologies such as Notify NYC.
The plan would create a voluntary registry of
elderly residents for use by the COAD, CERT,

   

CERT Networking

Source: Joe Loong

Section IV: Project Profiles 145
Idlewild Watershed Communities

and proposed NORC to provide evacuation
assistance, distribute medical supplies during
power outages, and as a means to check on
vulnerable residents after disasters.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The cost of this project is outweighed by its
economic and health and social benefits. The
Community will gain an understanding of the
assets and socially vulnerable populations that
must be protected, the process for evacuating
flood zones, and the tasks required for disaster
recovery, such as coordinating the distribution
of emergency supplies, accounting for the
livelihood of socially vulnerable populations,
and providing resources for repairs to damages.
The Southeast Queens Disaster Recovery
Plan would save City agencies, residents,
and businesses in the Community on disaster
preparation and recovery costs and ensure

 

Backup Generator

Source: www.cquest.us

146 — Section IV: Project Profiles

that critical assets and socially vulnerable
populations are protected against disasters.
These significant benefits would increase the
capacity of CBOs and government agencies to
respond to future storm events, compounding
the project’s benefit to cost ratio.

Risk Reduction

This project would reduce risk for all Community
members within the Idlewild Watershed
Communities. It would enhance the disaster
preparation and recovery capacity of the
Community by improving the ability of the
CBOs and City agencies to provide assistance
for vulnerable populations, protect assets that
are critical to the Community, and recover from
disaster events.

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for the first phase of this project
is immediate and can be completed within one
(1} year or less. The implementation of the plan
recommendations in the second phase is also
immediate and can be completed within one (1}
year or less. Ongoing coordination as well as
stakeholder involvement to guide the design of
the Plan, will need to be defined.

Regulatory Requirements

No regulatory requirements are anticipated
for this project, however it will require close
coordination with NYC OEM.

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have jurisdiction over
the project.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy C: Support Environmental Stewardship of the Community’s Natural and Manmade

Resources

C1: Idlewild Watershed Communities Green Infrastructure Workforce Training Program [Proposed] and Open

Space Restoration Fund [Featured]

 

Project Description

Neighborhoods in the Idlewild Watershed
Communities experienced flooding during
Hurricane Irene due to heavy rainfall and
during Superstorm Sandy due to extreme
storm surge and storm sewer backups. All of
these sources of flooding could be mitigated
by extensive implementation of green
infrastructure to complement the storm sewer
system by capturing stormwater, slowing runoff,
and easing the burden placed on the storm
sewer system by heavy rainfall and storm sewer
backups. The NYRCR Plan for the Idlewild
Watershed Communities emphasizes planning
and implementing green infrastructure projects,
but these capital programs are only one piece
of the puzzle. The Committee has identified a
two-phased approach in order to maximize
the impact of these projects and to support
municipal agency partners in constructing and
maintaining them. This approach provides
economic benefits to Community residents
and sets forth a strategy for establishing a
maintenance partner to assist New York City
agencies to ensure that new green infrastructure
and existing parks and wetlands are maximally
functional at mitigating stormwater flooding.

This two-phased approach has been split into
one Proposed Project and one Featured Project.
The objective is to develop a strategy that brings

together New York City agencies, a non-profit
maintenance partner, and Community residents
to build environmental stewardship for the
Community’s natural resources and manmade
green infrastructure as critical components
of the stormwater management network.
The project would develop a plan for long-
term maintenance of and advocacy for green
infrastructure in the Community, while also
providing job training, workforce development,
and volunteer programs to improve economic
opportunities for Community residents. The
primary benefits of the Idlewild Watershed
Communities Open Space Restoration Fund are
to ensure that residents benefit from expanding
green infrastructure programs, increase
awareness of the importance of natural
resources in reducing flood risks, and taking the
first steps towards ensuring that an organization
exists to provide critical, ongoing maintenance
of the Community’s stormwater management
infrastructure, including Bluebelts, bioswales,
ponds, creeks, and wetlands.

Phase 1: Green Infrastructure Workforce
Training [Proposed Project]

The first phase of the project is development of
a workforce training and volunteer development
program. The Green Infrastructure Workforce
Training Program will provide workforce training
and volunteer development and_ training

programs to encourage stewardship of the
Community’s parks and open space by local
residents and businesses. As demand grows
for green infrastructure as a complementary
strategy to reduce the risk of stormwater
flooding, the need for workers with specialized
skills will also grow. According to the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA), as
green infrastructure installations become more
prevalent across the country, the demand for
related job skills will continue to rise. Green
jobs training programs would provide outreach
to local youth and unemployed residents in
the Community to teach them skills related
to the initial design and installation of green
infrastructure practices, as well as for long
term maintenance.!7°

With the initial funding provided by NYRCR
funds, an intensive pilot course would be
provided that could train up to 80 individuals,
with priority for unemployed, Section 3, and/
or low- to moderate-income individuals. The
Section 3 program requires that recipients
of certain HUD financial assistance, to the
greatest extent possible, provide job training,
employment, and contract opportunities for low-
or very-low income residents in connection with
projects and activities in their neighborhoods. "?!
This course could be modeled after successful
courses, such as those run by DC Greenworks

Section IV: Project Profiles 147
Idlewild Watershed Communities

in Washington, D.C. or Rutgers Water Resources
Program in New Jersey. !2?

In addition to establishing the Green
Infrastructure Workforce Training Program,
the Proposed Project would also include
development of a strategy to establish a
maintenance partner to work with New York
City Department of Environmental Protection
(NYC DEP} and New York City Department of
Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR) in maintaining
green infrastructure on an ongoing basis. The
project would not include funding for ongoing
maintenance, but would take initial steps for
identifying a partner who could collaborate
with NYC DEP NYC DPR, and Community
representatives to seek additional funding to
carry out necessary maintenance.

 

Springfield Park

148 = Section IV: Project Profiles

Phase 2: Idlewild Watershed Open Space
Restoration Fund [Featured Project]
Stewardship and maintenance of wetlands
and green infrastructure was identified as a
critical need by the Committee, members of
the public, and City agencies as a strategy to
prevent stormwater flooding and to maximize
the stormwater storage capacity of the
Community’s natural resources. A maintenance
partner would need to be established in order to
coordinate between City agencies—in particular
NYC DEP and NYC DPR—and a local group
with intimate knowledge of the priorities and
needs of the Community. Similar programs are
operated by citywide organizations such as the
New York Restoration Project (NYRP}, City Parks
Foundation, and Design Trust for Public Space.

Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane lrene resulted
in significant flooding within the Community’s

eas T

stormwater system, in particular within the
Idlewild watershed. Even during regular
conditions, stormwater flooding is a problem for
the Community. As part of this NYRCR Plan for
the Idlewild Watershed Communities, several
vegetated green infrastructure projects are
recommended to mitigate stormwater flooding
(see Strategy A). However, green infrastructure
best management practices require regular
maintenance to function properly over time.
Without maintenance and funding for such
maintenance activities, these projects may
experience a reduced capacity in providing the
intended risk reduction benefits. For example,
green infrastructure may become clogged
with sediment and debris and fail to absorb
stormwater.’ The Open Space Restoration
Fund would provide funding to support a
revolving fund that puts in place adequate
resources for the ongoing maintenance of
existing parks for stormwater management and
recreation, in particular for Bluebelts, wetland
areas, and bioswales. It would also provide a
mechanism for maintenance of the proposed
NYRCR_ green infrastructure pilot projects,
including the Brookville Park Pond Restoration,
Twin Pond Park Bluebelt Enhancement, and
Green Infrastructure Pilot Project (School Green
Roof and Raingarden).

Cost: Proposed-$200,000;
Featured-$350,000

The Green Infrastructure Workforce Training
Program (Proposed Project) would include
$200,000 allotted to workforce training,
volunteer development, and developing a plan
to establish an ongoing maintenance partner.
The Idlewild Watershed Community Restoration
Fund (Featured Project} would include $350,000
to establish seed funding to support stormwater
facility maintenance tasks.

The cost estimate has a low degree of uncertainty,
but it is flexible and scalable, should the
Community wish to expand or continue it beyond
the initial two-year implementation period. No
additional operations and maintenance costs
are expected with this program aside from
those already included and no external costs
are anticipated.

Benefits and Co-Benefits

The Green Infrastructure Workforce Training
Program will contribute towards continuity of
the benefits generated by green infrastructure
and related projects in the Community. The
Idlewild Watershed Community Open Space
Restoration Fund would provide the seed money
for a variety of projects that could not have been
otherwise initiated, with indirect environmental,
economic and health and safety benefits.

Environmental Benefits

The Green Infrastructure Workforce Training
Program would provide workforce training
and volunteer development programs to
prepare members of the Community to care
for critical stormwater management resources
in their neighborhoods and contribute to the
continuation of the environmental benefits
provided by green infrastructure, such as
mitigation of stormwater flooding and improved
air and water quality. Specifically, when properly
maintained, green infrastructure can retain and
filter pollutants from stormwater before it enters
the sewer system and receiving water bodies.

Springfield Park Pond

This would reduce non-point source pollution,
improve surface water quality and aquatic
habitat, potentially decrease occurrences of
sewer overflows and disruptions, and mitigate
the damage to the environment caused by
stormwater flooding. Improved water quality
would benefit species that rely on the aquatic
habitat, some of which are listed as endangered
or threatened, including the piping plover, red
knot, and roseate tern.

Green infrastructure projects also provide for
greening of the Community and improve the
aesthetics of the surrounding neighborhoods.
In addition, green infrastructure reduces the
urban heat island effect and cools ambient
air temperatures through shading and
evapotranspiration, with potential for reduced
energy consumption.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Economic Benefits

The Green Infrastructure Workforce Training
Program would provide training to local residents
to work on a variety of Green Infrastructure
projects, which would support an estimated two
full time equivalent jobs (FTEs) for two years."8
The monies would fund training and volunteer
development programs to increase stewardship
of green infrastructure and the stormwater
management system in the Community. Green
infrastructure, including ponds, wetlands,
bioswales, and open space, can increase the
value of surrounding properties due to improved
aesthetic quality, viewscapes, air quality, and
reduction in noise. This would have benefits
for the entire Community, including the 15,720
low-income households. '%4

Section IV: Project Profiles 149
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Brookville Park Pond

By developing a network of skilled workers within
the Community, the program could help to
facilitate implementation of green infrastructure
projects that may not have otherwise been
implemented due to lack of proper training.
The Restoration Fund could help to increase
implementation of maintenance programs
that would otherwise not be undertaken due to
lack of funding. By increasing the feasibility of
implementing such projects, green infrastructure
implementation could increase. Additional green
infrastructure projects would provide shading
and insulation that effectively cools urban heat
islands, decreasing the energy required to cool
surrounding buildings. Therefore, energy costs
for these buildings could decrease.

The Green Infrastructure Workforce Training
Program would help satisfy the growing

150 = Section IV: Project Profiles

demand for specialized skills sets and develop
local, reliable, and qualified labor force
and volunteers. The workforce development
programs provided by the project would
improve knowledge and skills of primarily low-
wage workforce and other socially vulnerable
populations which may improve employment
prospects for the Community’s 15,720 low-
income households and 7.0% unemployed
labor force.'25 Training would enable at-
risk populations to advance in careers in the
construction, development, and home repair
industry. In addition, the project may reduce
unemployment rates, which would improve the
local economy. The training program would
improve the ability of the local workforce to
meet the demand for workers trained in disaster
recovery efforts, which may decrease the cost
of disaster efforts by avoiding the need to bring

temporary workers in from outside the area.
Local workers would also spend their wages and
income in the Community, supporting economic
development and growth of the area, whereas
non-local workers would spend the majority of
their earnings outside the Community.

Depending on the funded green infrastructure
maintenance projects, the Community may
experience the indirect benefit of a decrease
in repair and restoration costs after a flood
event. The continued functioning of green
infrastructure projects would decrease the
stress on sewer infrastructure and increase the
retention of stormwater, reducing the severity
of floods and damage to streets, infrastructure,
and properties. Therefore, in or after a flood
event, the project would reduce or avoid
damage to infrastructure, utilities, roadways,
and commercial assets, consequently reducing
or avoiding the costs to repair these assets.
Service and travel interruptions would be
avoided with the implementation of this project,
benefiting the Community as well as other users
of the infrastructure, highways, and services.

As this project is scalable, its benefits are
scalable. Likewise, as it would provide funding,
its benefits could grow exponentially in the
future as that funding is leveraged against other
public and private sources. Each $1 million of
additional funding from other sources would
lead to at least 11 additional FTEs generated.

Green infrastructure has been demonstrated to
be more cost-effective than traditional “grey”
infrastructure. Maintaining green infrastructure
is necessary to facilitate these benefits, including
reduced operational costs, reduced wear and
tear, and longer life span of “grey” infrastructure
and its components, which can reduce long-
term capital costs and costs to comply with
municipal storm sewer system (MS4) permits.'7¢

Health and Social Benefits:

All 93,792 residents of the Idlewild Watershed
Communities would benefit from this program,
including approximately 15,720 low-income
households (income under $67,000}, 10,727
elderly (over the age of 65}, and 21,246
children.'2?7, The workforce training program
offered through this project could train up to
AO individuals, with priority for unemployed,
Section 3,'21. and/or low- to moderate-
income individuals.

Public health benefits would result from
maintaining green infrastructure that functions
as designed, including improved water quality
that reduces water-borne illnesses, improved
air quality that could reduce asthma and other
respiratory illnesses, which are common among
socially vulnerable populations, such as children
and the elderly. Especially in areas subject to
sewer backups, the reduced occurrence of such
events would also reduce the health hazards
associated with such events.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The economic benefit of 80 additional skilled
laborers in the local workforce who are trained
to maintain green infrastructure would provide
benefits well beyond the fund’s $200,000 cost
estimate for workforce development. These
benefits include local employment opportunities,
increases in green jobs, income and economic
growth in the Community, and the availability
of trained workforce to meet the ongoing

and increased demands of the market and to
appropriately respond in the event of a flood.

The Open Space Restoration Fund could fund
the maintenance of existing greenspace and
green infrastructure throughout the Community,
as well as the pilot projects proposed in project
Al. The pilot projects in Strategy A will only
function effectively with continued maintenance
and therefore the benefits resulting from
those projects would be sustained by the
Idlewild Watershed Community Open Space
Restoration Fund. Consequently, the continued
and cumulative environmental, economic,
and health and social benefits of the green
infrastructure pilot projects described in
Strategy A above are likely to be much higher
than this fund’s low cost of $350,000 in funding
for maintenance. Important benefits include
increased property values, reduced property
damage costs and public service interruptions
in the case of a flood event and continued cost-
savings for stormwater treatment.

Risk Reduction

By contributing to the maintenance of the
projects implemented through Strategy A above,
this project would have the cumulative risk
reduction benefit of those projects, benefitting
the entire population (93,792) of the Idlewild
Watershed Communities. Although indirect, the
risk reduction benefit of this project includes
ongoing reduction in peak stormwater volumes
through green infrastructure that can mitigate
stormwater flooding.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for implementation is immediate
and can be completed within two (2) years
or less.

Regulatory Requirements

It is assumed that the Workforce Training
Program and Restoration Fund would operate
as a 501(c}(3) nonprofit organization and as
such all rules and procedures that pertain to
organizations under section 501(c)(3) of the
International Revenue Code would apply.

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have general jurisdiction
over areas and locations that may be affected
by the project.

Section IV: Project Profiles = 151
Idlewild Watershed Communities

C2: Home and Business Owner Education and Technical Assistance Program [Featured Project]

 

Project Description

This program would provide education and
technical assistance to Community home and
business owners on effective measures of flood
damage mitigation, the impact these measures
have on flood insurance rates, and potential
resources for financial assistance. Education
and technical assistance would be delivered
through two different strategies:

» — Educational Programs: Educational
campaigns, workshops, and outreach; and

= Technical Assistance: Home Resiliency
Needs Assessments and Business
Continuity Audits and Counseling.

Workshops and audits would be conducted by
trained staff that are able to answer technical
questions and identify resiliency needs and
improvements. The program would seek to hire
Section 3 qualified workers or businesses.'?!

According to preliminary Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRM), 1,856 residential units and
10 commercial lots within the Community
have been added to the 100-year flood zone.
As home and business owners face new
requirements and challenges related to flooding
and flood insurance, they will need help
understanding their options. The goal of this
program is to streamline the education process,
help home and business owners understand
flood insurance options and requirements,
and provide them with practical and concrete
steps to limit the risk of flood damage to their
home or business. Property owners can make

152 Section IV: Project Profiles

their homes and businesses more resilient
and potentially reduce their flood insurance
rates by implementing certain flood protection
measures, such as installing check valves, dry
or wet floodproofing, building elevation, adding
vents to enclosures, or installing breakaway
wall units.128

Educational Workshops

Educational workshops would leverage existing
programs conducted by City agencies, such
as the NYC Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) green infrastructure pilot
projects,’”" by providing funding for additional
education campaigns which agencies may
be unable to fund. By combining educational
materials from multiple City agencies, this
program would create a suite of materials with
interagency information.

The NYC Department of City Planning’s (DCP}
report, Retrofitting Buildings for Flood Risk
(October, 20141°°} is one resource that could
be utilized to help property owners understand
how they can adapt their buildings to reduce
flood risk. The report provides a step-by-step
approach to an adaptation project with a range
of retrofit solutions for various property types.
The report also provides building professionals
with a guide to inform architectural and
construction decision making. An_ illustrative
retrofit strategy for semi-detached homes,
a common residential building type in the
Community, is shown in Figure 4.18.

Workshops in the Community for home and
business owner education would be a key

component of the program. Educational
materials would be distributed at the workshops
(with funding for two years) as well as through
on an online clearinghouse.

Other topics of education provided at the
workshops would include education about
changes to FEMA's flood maps, flood insurance
requirements, how to obtain flood insurance,
and guidance for grants, loans, legal
support, and financial planning. Additionally,
guidance would be provided on best practices
for building retrofits and various physical
resiliency measures including installation of
backflow preventers in wastewater service lines,
prevention of basement flooding through flood
barriers placed on driveways, proper disposal of
fats, oil, and grease, the flood mitigating effects
of permeable surfaces, and residential green
infrastructure practices. The workshops would
also guide property owners to appropriate loan
and contracting resources that can implement
retrofits and resiliency measures.

Outreach would be another important
component of the education program, as
some Community members may not be aware
that they have options to reduce their flood
insurance and reduce their flood risk. Outreach
would be particularly important to reach socially
vulnerable populations in the Community (e.g.,
low to moderate income households, those with
limited english proficiency, the elderly, and the
disabled}. Program outreach would focus on
distributing educational materials as well as
making sure that residents and business owners
are aware of the services offered.
Technical Assistance

Technical assistance would be delivered in the
form of on-site building audits and counseling
performed by trained case managers.

Individual building audits would provide
homeowners with a Resiliency Needs Assessment
report and business owners with a Business
Continuity Needs Assessment report. Priority
for the audits would be given to residents and
businesses inthe 100-year flood zone (according
to FEMA Preliminary FIRM maps) and low- to
moderate-income individuals. The Community
may partner with other organizations and
NYRCR Communities that have been working
on similar educational programs.

Figure 4.18:
ih
jy Mechanical
_ aan al cam i

  

ht bi

25
rear yard

 

 

 

 

A report would be provided to the home or
business owner after an audit is performed,
which would include recommendations
on measures to mitigate flood risks and
minimize flood insurance rate increases.
Recommendations will take into account
guidelines distributed by FEMA [National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP)], NYC DCP (Flood
Resilience Zoning Text Amendment), and the
NYC Department of Buildings (NYC DOB).
Case managers would discuss the report with
the home or business owners to make sure that
they understand their various options, specific
steps they can take to mitigate flood risks, and
potential methods for reducing flood insurance
costs. Recommendations for short-, medium-
and long-term actions would be provided.

Elevate and Wet Floodproofing—Semi-Detached Homes

szee
aoa
eo
a

’ 21.5

lowest

occupiable
5 floor

  

Source: Coastal Climate Resiliency: Retrofitting Buildings for Flood Risk, NYC Department of City Planning, 2014

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Counseling would be provided by case managers
in similar topics, including business continuity
and building retrofits. Specific topics covered may
include flood insurance, flood risk, rebuilding
and resiliency retrofits, and assistance finding
organizations to complete retrofits. Examples of
retrofit options to be discussed include building
floodproofing measures, installation of backup
power generators, and elevation of mechanical
systems, where appropriate.

Housing counseling and audits would be
available to assist low- and moderate-
income households with flood risk reduction
measures and to provide guidance to first time
homebuyers in evaluating the flood risk of a
potential home purchase.

Cost: $250,000

This program would include three workshops
for business owners, six workshops for
homeowners, and the hiring of a field team
to audit properties and prepare customized
recommendations for floodproofing homes and
businesses. Individual property audits would
provide approximately 155 property owners
with technical assistance.

The costs for this program have a low degree
of uncertainty, assuming that each audit costs
approximately $850. The program is scalable
and flexible, should the Community wish to
expand or continue it beyond the initial two-
year implementation period. No additional
operations and maintenance costs are expected
with this program.

This project would give homeowners and
business owners the knowledge and technical

Section IV: Project Profiles 153
Idlewild Watershed Communities

assistance to retrofit their properties and
undertake flood damage mitigation measures.
Therefore, the indirect costs of the project
would include the future costs of mitigation and
floodproofing construction activities as well as
external costs associated with construction, such
as potential noise and air quality impacts and
potential business closures during the temporary
construction activity.

Benefits or Co-Benefits

Environmental Benefits

Environmental benefits of floodproofing
homes could be considerable, especially if
many residents and businesses take part in the
workshops and training, technical assistance
programs, and home audits. Homes that no
longer experience flooding would avoid or
minimize potential environmental impacts
of flood damages, such as home heating oil
spills in which oil mixes with flood waters and
can contaminate nearby wells, water bodies
and adjacent homes or businesses.'9’ Other
potential environmental hazards that could
be averted due to improved flood mitigation
measures could include hazardous materials,
heating systems which can contain asbestos,
and sheet rock which can contain lead paint.'9?

Economic Benefits

This project would generate a total of three
full time equivalent jobs'*? (FTEs) for one year
through workshops and training for home
and business owners and hiring a field team
for individual on-site property audits. The total
market value of residential and commercial
properties eligible to be audited is $311.5

154 Section IV: Project Profiles

million. With the audit team in the Community
for just under two years, it is estimated that
approximately 155 properties in the 100-year
FEMA flood zone (according to FEMA Preliminary
FIRM maps} could benefit from this program.
Construction and other activities to mitigate
flood risks would generate economic activity in
the area, benefiting local jobs and income.

Property audits through the technical assistance
program would identify cost-effective resiliency
retrofits and necessary improvements that
would reduce potential damage to property
from future flood events. The resiliency retrofits
and flood mitigation improvements would
avoid damage and repair costs in future storm
events. The risks of flooding would be reduced
for approximately 155 properties, , which would
lead to reduced damage and insurance claims
after a flood event. By way of comparison, paid
insurance claims by the NFIP for the New York
City region as a result of Superstorm Sandy
were $750 million through February 2013,
with the average payment of $54,000.’
Claims include the cost of pumping water or
removing mold from homes, structural damage
to buildings, and loss of personal or business
contents within buildings.

Based on the FEMA Preliminary FIRM maps,
2,545 housing units and 17 commercial lots
in the Idlewild Watershed Communities would
be in the updated FEMA 100-year flood zone.
This represents a 269% increase in housing
units and a 143% increase in commercial
lots that will now require flood insurance.
Providing education and technical assistance
on flood mitigation measures could lead to the
implementation of flood protection measures,

which could reduce insurance premiums. '95196
For example, elevating a residential building or
floodproofing a commercial structure may lower
flood insurance premiums.'%” In addition, risk-
mitigation may help to offset any property value
losses that may occur with the new requirements
to obtain flood insurance. Renters may also
benefit if insurance premiums are lowered
because the financial burden of insurance
for a property owner is often transferred to a
renter through rent payments. There are 356
renter-occupied housing units within the FEMA
preliminary 100-year flood zone.'%8

Floodproofed businesses are likely to reopen
more quickly after a flood event, decreasing
business disruptions, benefitting business
revenues, local employees and income.
Businesses in Queens generate $2.3 million
in revenues per year, averaging to $6,300
per day for each business.'%? Without the
implementation of flood mitigation measures,
business disruptions during and after a flood
even would incur lost sales for every day that
businesses are closed. In addition, businesses
will have reduced financial strain, leading to
a lower likelihood of furloughs or permanent
layoffs after a flood event.

In addition, the program would seek to hire
low- or very low-income residents and certified
Section 37! businesses to conductthe workshops,
providing workforce training opportunities in
flood mitigation. Section 3 businesses would
gain further experience in resiliency retrofits
and flood insurance plans; such experience will
empower these businesses by strengthening
their presence in NFIP related projects.
Health and Social Benefits

Residents and businesses in the 100-year FEMA
flood zone (according to FEMA Preliminary
FIRM maps} would be eligible for the technical
assistance program. The educational workshops
would be open to the entire Community within the
100-year flood zone. This population includes
approximately 15,720 low-income households
(income under $67,000}, 2,023 individuals with
limited english proficiency, 10,727 elderly (over
the age of 65), and 21,246 children.'° This
program will provide low income households,
which comprise 54% of all households in the
Community, with the tools and resources to
floodproof their homes. It will provide them
with the tools that they need to learn how to
floodproof their homes, which would decrease
their risk to future floods. Measures to mitigate
against flood risks will benefit the health, safety,
and mental well-being of residents, reducing
the risks of flooded properties, time evacuated,
exposure to contaminants, and other life
disruptions during and after a flood event.

Repeated flooding of residential properties has
lasting public health impacts, which could be
mitigated by improving the resiliency of the
Community’s housing stock and businesses.
According to the World Health Organization,
the main health impacts associated with
flooding are fatalities, injuries, and mental
health illnesses during the flood event itself and
during the restoration process.'4’ Hypothermia,
electrocution, burns, and carbon monoxide
poisoning are all associated with the use of
equipment to recover from flooding in poorly
ventilated indoor areas, while mold caused by
flood damage can trigger respiratory illnesses,
especially among children and the elderly. The

audits and educational materials provided to the
Community and socially vulnerable populations
through this program will provide residents
with the information they need to make flood
mitigation retrofits that would reduce their
vulnerability to flooding and the associated
public health risks.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Through the education provided by this
program, property owners would gain the
practical knowledge they need to make their
business or residence less vulnerable to
flood damage in future storm events. Indirect
benefits would include avoided environmental
contamination and public health impacts
associated with flooded homes and businesses
and reduced costs of repairs and restoration
after flood events. Floodproofed businesses are
likely to reopen more quickly after a flood event,
decreasing business disruptions, benefitting
business revenues, local employees and income
generation. In addition, retrofit and reliance
measures could reduce insurance premiums
and may also help to offset any property value
losses that may occur with the new requirements
to obtain flood insurance. These economic,
environmental, and health and safety benefits
are likely to be greater than the direct costs of
the technical assistance ($250,000) as well as
the indirect costs of constructing the retrofits
and mitigation projects, which could be as low
as $2,000 per property.'4?

Risk Reduction

Home and business owners would gain a better
understanding of their flood mitigation needs

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

through this technical assistance program.
Through this understanding, they would be able
to initiate steps to implement resiliency measures
at their homes or businesses. Thus, this project
could increase the number of buildings that
would be floodproofed. This would reduce risk
for residents, as well as business owners and
workers that rely on commercial properties for
income. Depending on the floodproof measure
implemented, residences and businesses will
experience a vulnerability reduction to a score
of one or two.

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for implementation is immediate
and can be completed within two (2) years
or less.

Regulatory Requirements
N/A

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have jurisdiction over
the project.

Section IV: Project Profiles 155
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Strategy C: Additional Resiliency Recommendations

 

C3: Advocate for Idlewild Park
Preserve Trail Network and Overlook
Restoration

This project would advocate for improved
connectivity of the overlook constructed by the
NYC Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP} and NYC Department of Parks and
Recreation (DPR) in Idlewild Park Preserve. The
overlook is currently being restored by creating
a network of trails and nature walks within
the Park. Idlewild Park has been designated a
Forever Wild Preserve, a natural area within
New York City that supports diverse wildlife
and plant populations, including numerous
rare, threatened, and endangered species. The
goal of this project is to increase awareness
of the purpose and function of Idlewild Park
Preserve by providing user friendly outdoor
activities and educational opportunities for the
public to experience and interact with the park
(Figure 4.19).

The first step in this project would be to develop
a conceptual plan that considers the location
of sensitive areas, scenic overlooks and
vistas, contiguous uses, access, connectivity,
and transportation to both the new Idlewild
Park Preserve Environmental Learning Center
and the Idlewild Park Preserve overlook. This
would include maps and three dimensional
renderings that illustrate key features. While
the length of trails would be determined by
the plan, it is estimated that a trails network
of at least two miles would be feasible. Costs
to implement the plan will be estimated and
itemized, including operations, maintenance,

156 Section IV: Project Profiles

 

and cycle costs. Partners will be identified for
implementation, which will include blazing the
trails, installing interpretive and educational
signage, constructing platforms or boardwalks
as necessary, and installing new benches in
scenic viewing areas. The project would also
include funding for necessary permits and
species assessment, and soil erosion and
sediment control measures.

Figure 4.19: Idlewild Park Prese

   

AY;

The project would further enhance the natural
features and character of the Preserve by
guiding hikers along designated routes to avoid
environmentally sensitive areas and habitats.
It would also provide healthy recreational
opportunities by providing uninterrupted
pedestrian connectivity to existing trails, in a
park that is a valued Community asset.

rve Trail Network and Overlook Restoration

OTR Te Oe AV ¢

yA

 
C4: Advocate for Municipal Agency
Coordination to Prioritize Resilience

This project would establish a policy position to
advocate for City agencies to better coordinate
their activities to prioritize resilience. Through
the NYC Office of Recovery and Resiliency,
PlaNYC,'3 and A Stronger, More Resilient
New York,'“4 resilience to extreme weather and
the impacts of climate change have emerged
as critical priorities for the future of the City.
While these planning documents provide City
agencies with a framework for formulating
agency-level priorities that are in line with City-
wide resilience goals, some local projects in the
Idlewild Watershed Communities are viewed by
the Community as not being supportive of the
critical goal of increasing resilience. In addition,
there is a perceived lack of enforcement of
current laws, especially with regards to illegal
dumping.

The Committee would like for all City agencies to
not only view resilience to extreme weather and
the impacts of climate change as top priorities
when planning future program development
and capital project planning but also to
coordinate these efforts on an interagency level.

C5: Support for Creation of Greater
JFK Industrial Business Improvement
District (IBID)

This project would establish a policy position
to advocate for the creation of the Proposed
Greater JFK IBID with specific recommendations
for roles that the JFK IBID could play in increasing
resilience (Figure 4.20}. In particular, the
Committee advocates that the JFK IBID evaluate
strategies to address recurring stormwater
flooding within the District boundaries, which
impacts both residents and businesses. In
addition, the Committee advocates that the

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

JFK IBID contribute to increased enforcement
of dumping within the District. Dumping along
150th Road, within the JFK IBID Boundary, has
an impact on the health of the wetlands in the
Idlewild Park Preserve, which could limit the
capacity of the wetlands to absorb stormwater.
Further, the JFK IBID could evaluate whether
dumping in other parts of the Community results
from activities by businesses that are located
within the District. Dumping along Springfield
Lane and Brookville Boulevard has a negative
impact on the health of the wetlands.

Figure 4.20: Map of Proposed Greater JFK IBID

   
    
  
     
  
 
 
 
  

§ Conduit Aye

JFK Airport

 

C PROPOSED GREATER JFK IBID
DISTRICT BOUNDARY

TL Milles
0 0.25 0.5 Oo

 

 

 

 

JFK IBID Class - Property Profile

 

Total % of
Tax Lots Total

IBID Class A - Industrial/Commercial 199 38%

IBID Classification

MME [BID Class B - Privately Owned VacantLand 103 20%

 

 

 

IBID Class C - Mixed-Use 10 2%
IBID Class D - Residential 154 29%
IBID Class E — Tax Exempt & Non-Profit 59 11%
Total 525 100%
‘. 7 =e
2
Springfield &
& ge
as Gardens §
2 s
€ £

Source: BFJ Planning

Section IV: Project Profiles 157
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Strategy D: Provide Safe and Reliable Access to Critical Goods and Services

D1: Install Backup Power Supply Systems at Critical Facilities [Proposed Project]

 

Project Description

During Superstorm Sandy, the Community’s
electrical grid was compromised and failed to
provide power to facilities that served vulnerable
populations, such as the young, elderly, and
disabled. Unreliable power or complete power
failure atthese facilities impeded the use of critical
facilities after the storm, which slowed disaster
recovery. Ensuring power at critical facilities and
those that serve vulnerable populations would
benefit the entire Community before, during,
and after storm events. For example, schools
with reliable power will not need to temporarily
transfer their students to a different school;
senior centers would not need to evacuate
their residents because of a power failure; and
functioning traffic lights and street lights would
maintain safe transportation infrastructure.

This project would initiate a competitive process
to provide funding to install fixed, permanent

an automatic transfer switch that transfers the
load from the utility feed to backup generators
without intervention of a human operator. This
would allow the facility to function during and
after storm events when the surrounding power
infrastructure fails.

Figure 4.21:

   
  

of Ny,
LOCUST MANOR
SENIOR RESIDENCE ,

“

4 = RAILROATE, 4,
5 BAILEY oe RCP LICE DEPT. Ap
POND PARK 87°" 113TH PRECINCT
ae we
~

     

eer: aie

e - 4 CHURCH INC.

3 eae ®.: is

oma %, NEIGHBORHOOD Pe
4 / ot % SNe CENTER ~~,

ag

 

caraouc

 

Se ‘Agno x

 

  

%, ee Nae

” TATION \TELLITE)
a Tien ECROOL ss My ® =
re oe re - =

Hal % Fn
ECHBORHOOD, _ , é

5 SERVI wee. BROOKVILLE
= S4e PARK OS
é

Critical facilities eligible for this project
could include emergency response facilities,
evacuation centers, MTA facilities, and critical
infrastructure such as the Rosedale Pumping
Station. Eligible facilities that serve socially
vulnerable populations include — schools,
healthcare facilities, disability clinics, and

Potential Locations of Backup Generators

   
  

Men,

 

UEENS
SOUTH TASK FORCE

fe 105™ PRECINCT NASSAU

COUNTY

     
 

““ ROSEDALE“,
UBRARY 3%,

 

% is
generators or renewable energy sources —such rere fe A Nc Seay Noun vaio
as solar panels with backup batteries—at critical srRINGFIRD GARDENS ne anon OS Py an
facilities to provide reliable power during and ~~ ObSdemn ms a
after major storm events (Figure 4.21). Funds a Ye oven 4, Bn.
would be provided exclusively for the backup AIRPORT “Sy, HOBECRR\
power supply systems. Funding for necessary site ca . ee a
preparation, including elevation of the power @ roe carrontocmton tay ‘ ee.
supply, constructing or hardening the structure ee encumes ~% Toa
where the generator would be located, or other © turcpicy eesronise ‘, }
site improvements would be secured separately PLACES OF WORSHIP « oTHER L 4
by the respondents. The power supply installed ECENT OF FLOODING FROM CA
would switch on automatically, activated by FREQUENTLY FLOODING AREAS Lea

 

 

 

HEAD OF Bay

158 Section IV: Project Profiles
government services. However, facilities located
in the 100 year floodplain would not be eligible.

The installation of generators at critical facilities
opens up the ability to develop a potential
microgrid network. A microgrid network can
create a small-scale power network that uses
the generator as a power source. The network
would be independent from the main power
network and would continue to function if the
main power network were to fail.

Cost: $500,000

The cost of the program would enable one
location to install a backup power supply
system, including either:

: The installation of a 250 kW natural
gas generator capable of powering
over 40,000 sq. ft. (with HVAC systems),
insurance for the generator, and an
assessment with cost estimate of site
preparation required to install the
generator; or

«The installation of 2,000 sq. ft. of solar
panels that could produce 100 kW of
solar power per day for two days with
backup batteries, capable of powering
25,000 sq. ft. (without HVAC systems);
and an assessment with cost estimate of
site preparation required to install the
solar panels.

The recipient of the funding would need to
provide matching funds for site preparation.

Natural gas generators and solar power were
utilized for the purpose of estimating costs
associated with this project, yet that is not to the

exclusion of other power supplies, such as fuel
cells or other renewable energy technologies.
When a facility responds to the competitive
solicitation, it would be required to indicate its
energy demand during an emergency event, the
proposed location for the backup power supply,
and an initial proposal of the most appropriate
type of backup power given site conditions.
For example, if a facility does not have existing
natural gas service yet has a large roof area;
it may apply for a photovoltaic system with
backup batteries. Therefore, this cost estimate
has a significant level of uncertainty given
that the exact facility where the power supply
would be installed is unknown. However, the
project is both flexible and scalable, depending
on the needs of the facilities that respond to
the competitive solicitation and the matching
funds that these facilities can provide. The
$500,000 allotment of CDBG-DR funds could
be divided to meet the needs of one facility, or
multiple facilities, depending on the competitive
solicitation responses.

The cost of natural gas generator may vary,
depending on the needs and size of the facility.
Table 4.2 below shows the facilities and needs
that various generators can accommodate.

Operations and maintenance costs for the
natural gas generator are estimated at
$480,000, which includes the cost of natural gas
needed to run the generator, general cleaning,
periodic emissions testing, and periodic part
replacements for an average operating life of
approximately 25 years. Conversely, operations
and maintenance costs for the solar powered
backup system are estimated at $1,784,800 for
the useful life of 25 years.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

External costs associated with this project would
vary depending on the backup power source
and facilities selected. A natural gas generator
is anticipated to have negligible air quality
impacts, as illustrated in Table 4.3. Any form
of backup power installation may require the
temporary closure of the building.

Benefits and Co-Benefits

Environmental Benefits

Environmental benefits would vary depending
on the backup power supply source utilized for
each facility. A natural gas backup power supply
will not have direct environmental benefits, but
would have several social and health benefits.
A solar system with backup batteries would
provide significantly greater environmental
benefits, as the average solar power system
can offset 30 tons of carbon dioxide over 30
years; equal to approximately 60,000 miles
driven, planting 2,400 trees, avoiding 80,000
gallons of water used in electricity production,
and avoiding 16 tons of burned coal.'*

 

Queens Public Library, Rosedale

Section IV: Project Profiles 159
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Economic Benefits

This program would create five full time
equivalent jobs'* (FTEs) for one year. These jobs
would be created through the procurement and
installation of the backup power supply system.
The operations and maintenance of the backup
power supply (not funded by this project, to be
provided as a match by the selected recipients)
would create an additional five FTEs over the
span of 25 years.

Backup power at critical facilities would have
moderate economic benefits resulting from
avoided costs associated with power outages
at one or more critical and locally significant
facilities that would have otherwise experienced
power failure. This project is scalable, meaning
that if other funding is identified the $500,000
contribution could be leveraged to provide
backup power supplies to additional facilities,
resulting in significant economic benefits.
Further, if locally significant facilities within the
Community had backup power supplies, they
could serve as resource and recovery centers,
charging stations, or warming/cooling centers,
effectively increasing the efficiency of disaster
response operations by reducing the cost and
time of local residents and business owners
who would have otherwise traveled further
distances outside of the Community for supplies
and information.

While a natural gas generator would not offer any
direct utility cost savings, a solar backup power
system could provide the added benefit of utility
savings during non-storm events, offsetting an
estimated $0.17 per kWh, totaling approximately
$136,500 over the system’s useful life.

160 = Section IV: Project Profiles

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 4.2: Facilities and needs that various generators can accommodate
Floor size of Needs Generator Size Generator cost
building (sq. ft) accommodated (kW)
5,000 | Lighting 20 kw $32,000
5,000 | Lighting, cooking, and 40 kW $53,000
air circulation
40,000 | Lighting 160 kW $250,000
40,000 _ | Lshting, cooking, and 250 kW $280,000
air circulation

 

 

 

 

*If the building is heated by natural gas, air circulation will distribute heating throughout the building

 

 

Source: Engineer's Estimate. Louis Berger. 2014.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 4.3: Potential emissions from Natural Gas Generator
Potential Emission Factors Emissions (Ibs/ hots per dey tons/year
Emissions (Ibs/MMcf) hour) for 7 days)
co 84.0000 0.0843 4.7208 0.0024
VOC 5.5000 0.0055 0.3091 0.0002
NOx 100.0000 0.1004 5.6200 0.0028
PM 7.6000 0.0076 0.4271 0.0002
SO, 0.6000 0.0006 0.0337 0.0000
co, 120000.0000 120.4285 6743.9976 3.3720
N,O 2.2000 0.0022 0.1236 0.0001
CH 2.3000 0.0023 0.1293 0.0001

 

 

Source: U.S. EPA: AP 42: Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors. Chapter 1.4, Natural Gas Combustion.

 

 

 
Health and Social Benefits:

Health and social services benefits cannot be
readily quantified, but would be significant
because the project would allow facilities
that serve socially vulnerable populations to
operate during power outages. The installation
of a backup power supply to a critical facility
will ensure access to the functions that it
provides, such as emergency medical services
or response, during Community-wide power
failures caused by extreme weather. As a
scalable program, a total of approximately 75
facilities in the Communities could be eligible
to participate. Depending on the competitive
solicitation response, healthcare patients could
have access to a medical facility with a backup
power supply, eldercare residents may not need
to evacuate their residential facility, or a school
could serve as a resource and recovery center.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Through this project, the Community would
gain reliable power at one (or more, depending
on the competitive solicitation responses}
critical facility that serves socially vulnerable
populations. The economic benefits of creating
10 full time equivalent jobs and moderately
reduced costs associated with power outages,
combined with the moderate health and social
benefits gained by reliable operation of one or
more facilities that serves socially vulnerable
populations outweigh the project’s relatively
low cost ($500,000).

Considering capital costs, a natural gas
generator is more cost effective than solar
panels, as $500,000 could power 40,000
sq. ft. with HVAC, while solar panels with

backup batteries could power 25,000 sq. ft.
without HVAC for the same cost. Likewise, the
life cycle costs of a natural gas generator are
approximately one third of the cost for the
solar backup power system. However, given
site conditions and environmental benefits, the
solar system may be more appropriate. Further,
the solar system would provide a year-round
benefit of cost savings on a facility’s utility bills,
totaling approximately $136,500.

While this cost estimate would fund one
average location, it is conceivable that certain
locations would require less or greater funds
to install backup power, due to the size of the
space and building systems (e.g., lighting,
heating) to be powered by the supply, existing
natural gas connection, and the organization’s
ability to match funding from other sources.
Therefore, the competitive solicitation process
would determine the facilities that would
directly benefit from this project and could
scale the project accordingly. For example, the
competitive solicitation could determine that
a backup power supply system at one school
would cost $300,000 to power gymnasium
lighting for three days, while two smaller social
services organizations would only require
$200,000 each to provide backup power to
their entire facilities. Therefore, this project is
scalable through the competitive process, based
on the needs and capacity of organizations to
implement the project. Likewise, the project’s
cost benefit-analysis is scalable, becoming even
more beneficial depending on the outcome of
the competitive process.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk Reduction

A backup power supply system would
significantly reduce the vulnerability of one
or more critical or locally significant assets
outside of the floodplain, reducing its risk to
a residual level and allowing for the facility to
continue operations during a storm event, as
well as serve a dual purpose (i.e., Resource
and Recovery Center) after the storm event. This
project would reduce risk for populations that
rely on the facility or infrastructure powered by
the backup supply. These populations cannot be
quantified as the exact locations are unknown.
The populations would experience a reduced
risk of evacuation of their facility and the loss of
functions of the facility that they rely on.

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for implementation is immediate
and can be completed within two (2) years
or less.

Regulatory Requirements

This project would have to comply with the New
York City Building Code. Because it would be
used for backup operation only and would
operate less than 500 hours per year, the natural
gas backup generator is classified as “exempt”
from NYSDEC air permitting requirements at a
non-litle V facility (6 NYCRR §201-3.2}.

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have jurisdiction over
the project.

Section IV: Project Profiles 161
Idlewild Watershed Communities

D2: Study to Elevate Brookville Boulevard (Snake Road) between 149th Boulevard and Rockaway Boulevard

[Featured Project]

 

Project Description

Brookville Boulevard between 149th Ave and
Rockaway Boulevard—known locally as Snake
Road—is a key transportation corridor for the
Idlewild Watershed Communities. The roadway
services 17,500 cars daily, the Q114 bus route,
and provides direct access from Brookville to
Rockaway Boulevard, one of the area’s main
east-west thoroughfares. However, Brookville
Boulevard is a dangerous road due to its
location, layout, and elevation. The road is only
24 feet wide in most locations and is situated at
an elevation of only four feet above sea level
as it winds through low-lying wetlands, causing
it to flood frequently.'47 Further, it lacks guard
rails, shoulders, and other standard roadway
safety measures.

The roadway washed out from tidal surge during
Superstorm Sandy, limiting transportation access
to the Community and limiting the Community’s
ability to access the area’s main retail centers,
including the Five Towns Shopping Center. It
continues to wash out regularly during spring
tides and storm events. The Study to Elevate
Brookville Boulevard would:

«Identify the direct causes of flooding at
Brookville Boulevard between 149th
Avenue and Rockaway Boulevard;

«Study the feasibility of elevating the entire
length of roadway between 149th Avenue
and Rockaway Boulevard (4,300 feet) to
address the identified causes of flooding;

162 Section IV: Project Profiles

* Determine necessary improvements to
roadway geometry to improve safety;

«Assess the use of infrastructure upgrades
to elevate the roadway on a trestle to
encourage the passage of intertidal waters
through the surrounding wetlands. The
passage of these waters is important for
the protection and nourishment of the
wetlands and the function of the wetlands
as a water retaining body; and

«Evaluate constructing a wetlands
boardwalk adjacent to the elevated
roadway for pedestrian and bicycle travel.

The report would evaluate the feasibility of
several alternatives and assess the effectiveness
of those alternatives for flood mitigation and
safety. The scope of work for this project would
also include baseline studies such as topographic
and geotechnical surveys, environmental site
assessments, threatened and endangered
species surveys, wetland delineations, and
tidal analysis. Ultimately, the report would
include development of a preferred alternative
that would seek to improve the function and
ecological health of the wetlands, as well as the
Community’s ability to access goods, services,
and jobs in the aftermath of major storm events
or during typical spring tides (Figure 4.22}.

Cost: $450,000

This cost includes baseline studies of the current
state of the road, traffic analysis, development
of alternatives that mitigate flooding on the

 

Flooding of Brookville Boulevard (Snake Road) at
Idlewild Park Preserve

Source: New York Daily News

road, and a comparative analysis of these
alternatives, recommendation of one “preferred
alternative,” cost estimation of this alternative,
and identification of any expected regulatory
approvals and permits necessary for project
implementation. The baseline studies would
include the following:

« — Existing information review: Review of
current projects or studies that impact
Brookville Boulevard, review of the context
of the project with other planned or
ongoing projects, and review of the current
problems with flooding on the roadway.
This cost also includes field surveys to
assess existing conditions.

«Traffic analysis: Analysis of existing traffic
conditions, temporary, and permanent
traffic impacts that would result from the
reconstruction of Brookville Boulevard.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Under Existing Conditions, Snake Road Floods Frequently due to Low Elevation Source: Google Earth

Figure 4.22: Conceptual Rendering of Snake Road Elevation

Section IV: Project Profiles 163

 
Idlewild Watershed Communities

«Topographic surveys: A surveyor licensed
in the state of New York would perform
a baseline topographic survey of the
roadway and adjacent area to locate
existing structures (e.g., manholes and
catch basins). Surveys would be performed
using aerial and/or ground based
methods to generate one-half (0.5) foot
contour intervals.

« Wetland Delineations: The survey prepared
above would also delineate adjacent state,
federal, and non-jurisdictional wetlands.

«Threatened and Endangered Species
surveys: The areas surrounding Brookville
Boulevard would be assessed for the
presence of threatened or endangered
species, critical aquatic and terrestrial
habitat, and nesting or breeding areas.

«Tidal Analysis: A tidal analysis would be
conducted to evaluate how the alternatives
would impact tidal flows and the extent
to which each alternative would protect
the roadway from tidal surge. It would
also consider the potential impacts on
tidal flows through the trestle within the
Idlewild wetlands.

The Study to Elevate Brookville Boulevard would
include a dedicated public outreach effort to
engage local community based organizations,
residents, and business owners.

Minimal uncertainties are associated with
the costs of the study; however, costs for
implementation of the preferred alternative
recommended in the study are likely to be
high but are unknown at this time. The scope
of work for the study would determine the
costs associated with design and construction.

164 Section IV: Project Profiles

Likewise, no operations and maintenance
costs are associated with the study; however,
implementation of the project would have
bridge and roadway maintenance costs that
would be estimated within the cost estimating
task performed as part of the study.

The process of performing the study would
be part field survey and part desktop survey,
which would result in minimal impacts, if any,
on Brookville Boulevard. However, the potential
implementation of the project resulting from
the study may have impacts on traffic and
circulation, including potential external costs
associated with a temporary closure of part or
all of Brookville Boulevard during construction.
The potential implementation project may also
have environmental consequences to species
in the wetlands habitat where construction of
footings for the trestle would occur. Construction
activities could also have temporary impacts to
noise, air, and water quality.

Benefits and Co-Benefits

Environmental Benefits:

While environmental benefits would not result
directly from the study, implementation of the
study’s recommendations would have moderate
environmental benefits for the Idlewild
wetlands. Increasing the elevation of Brookville
Boulevard would allow the passage of water
through culverts under the reconstructed road,
or the trestle on which the road is elevated.
Currently, the flow of water within the Idlewild
wetlands is impeded by the wetlands’ basin
geomorphology (the connectivity of the streams
and ponds} and anthropogenic modifications
(the changes in wetland structure due to

pollution}. Increasing water flow in the park
would moderately improve the hydrology of the
wetlands. The health of the wetlands and their
ability to absorb water depend on the hydrology
of the wetlands. Elevating Brookville Boulevard
would increase the flow of water within the
Idlewild Park Preserve, which would significantly
improve the water retaining capacity of the
wetlands and strengthen their function as a
tidal barrier. Increased flow would also improve
the health of the wetland ecosystem in the
Idlewild Park Preserve. According to the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, an acre of
wetland can typically store about three acre-feet
of water, or one million gallons. Therefore, the
196-acre wetlands in the Idlewild Park Preserve
surrounding Brookville Boulevard would have
the capacity to store 588 acre-feet of water, or
196 million gallons.

Economic Benefits:

The study would create five full time equivalent
jobs (FTEs}'*8 for a year, but would have few
other direct economic benefits. The design
and construction of the elevated roadway,
although not included in this project’s funding,
would generate additional FTEs, income, and
additional economic activity inthe Community. In
addition, ongoing operations and maintenance
of the reconstructed Brookville Boulevard would
also support jobs and income in the area.

In addition, NYC DOT would save on repair
costs for the damages that storms, tidal floods,
and spring tides currently cause to the road.
Avoided repair costs include fixing sink holes
and repaving of the road surface, which could
cost up to $1.3 million for the entire boulevard
and occur on average every 10 years.
Elevating Brookville Boulevard = would
decrease—and potentially eliminate—flooding
of the roadway, which would lead to a safer and
more reliable route through the Community and
would connect the Community to key economic
assets. Because of Brookville Boulevard’s
location, this affects commuter traffic, public
transit, intra-city trips, and trips between New
York City and Nassau County. The importance

Figure 4.23: Map of Brookville Boulevard from 149th Ave to Rockaway Boulevard (Snake Road)
r, , ie b ree PITT ee ae al a

 

ACHIEVE 10 YEAR
STORM PROTECTION

ra

of Brookville Boulevard is evident in its high
traffic volume, designation as a bus route, and
connectivity between communities.

The route would also be more reliable in the
aftermath of flood events or storms, when
emergency responders may need to use
the road for quick travel. Since there is no
convenient detour around Brookville Boulevard,

RAIL/BOARDWA)

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

the increase in its reliability would greatly benefit
both local residents and emergency responders.
A detour around Brookville Boulevard during
flood conditions could increase response times
by up to seven minutes. Increased response
times have both economic and social impacts.
Implementation of this project could reduce
the costs of disaster response and potentially
provide more services to individuals and

i

Section IV: Project Profiles 165
Idlewild Watershed Communities

households, including vulnerable populations.
Elevating the roadway would avoid these cost
increases, resulting in economic benefits to first
responders and to residents and businesses
served by the first responders.

Implementation of the project would improve
the functioning of wetlands to retain additional
stormwater, which could reduce the damage
and associated repair costs to nearby
homeowners and businesses in a flood or
storm event. Ensuring uninterrupted travel
on Brookville Boulevard would also support
continued and future economic activity and
possibly commercial investments in the area.

Additionally, the project could include a wetland
boardwalk adjacent to the elevated roadway,
which could provide recreational and aesthetic
value to nearby property owners, increasing
nearby property values. The boardwalk could
trigger additional visitor spending and economic
activity in the area.

Health and Social Benefits:

The Study to Elevate Brookville Boulevard would
not have direct health and social benefits.
However, implementation of recommendations
of the study could have significant benefits
to the health and safety of the motorists who
use Brookville Boulevard. It could also provide
opportunities for pedestrians or bicyclists to use
the roadway, which is presently not available
due to unsafe conditions.

Brookville Boulevard’s narrow lanes and
abundance of curves—in addition to the
surrounding tall vegetation that limit visibility—
make it a prime location for traffic accidents. In

166 Section IV: Project Profiles

the past five years, several fatalities and injuries
have occurred from traffic accidents along the
roadway. '4?

Implementation of the study’s recommendations
would reduce the frequency of traffic accidents
from two causes, roadway geometry and
routine flooding. Reconstructing the roadway
in accordance with current NYS Department
of Transportation (DOT} safety guidelines
would provide significant benefits to the health
and safety of drivers along the roadway by
improving sight lines, removing sharp curves,
and installing proper safety measures (e.g.,
retroreflective pavement markings, rumble
strips, guard rails}. Reconstructing the roadway
at an elevation that protects against the 10-
year storm event (6.3 ft. NAVD) would reduce
the frequency of traffic accidents resulting from
flood hazard conditions.

The implementation of anticipated study
recommendations may also include a path
along the reconstructed Brookville Boulevard for
bicyclists and pedestrians. This would increase
recreational opportunities within the Community,
while providing bikers and pedestrians a direct
route from Brookville and Rosedale to Rockaway
Boulevard, and offering potential future
connections to regional Greenway efforts such
as the Jamaica Bay Greenway. Public health
benefits resulting from increased accessibility
to bicycle travel would include regular exercise
(and associated benefits to cardiovascular
health and lower obesity rates) and improved
air quality from reducing auto trips. The path
may also include educational signage, which
would provide information about the wetlands
and their benefits. Increased awareness about

the wetlands would increase public support for
the preservation and protection of wetlands.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

There are few direct benefits that would result
from the Study to Elevate Brookville Boulevard;
the project cost of $450,000 would result in the
creation of five full time equivalent jobs for a
year. The study is necessary for the potential
elevation of Brookville Boulevard to occur, and
therefore the benefits of elevating the road
can be tied back to this initial study. Significant
indirect economic benefits that would result
from the study include potential jobs for design
and construction, avoided costs for road
repaving and repairs resulting from recurring
inundation, avoided costs for residences and
businesses near the wetlands after a flood or
storm event, and cost savings for emergency
response. In addition, the wetland boardwalk
could also induce visitors spending and provide
amenities for residents.

Further, the elevation and realignment of
Brookville Boulevard that could be recommended
by this study could save lives and benefit the
6,400 people that live in the region immediately
north and south of Brookville Boulevard, who
are most likely to use the roadway for either
evacuation or daily travel, and the 17,500
drivers that use Brookville Boulevard every
day. Risk reduction and economic benefits are
compounded by the environmental benefits
to ecological health and coastal resiliency, as
well as a new recreational and multi-modal
transportation asset that would benefit quality
of life. Although the costs of design and
construction of the elevated roadway are likely
to be considerable, the benefits that would
result from the elevated roadway, stormwater
retention, and the wetland boardwalk, as
described above, are also considerable. At this
time, it is not known if the benefits of the project
would outweigh the cost of its implementation.
However, the considerable environmental,
economic, and health and social benefits of
the project would indicate that the feasibility
study be undertaken at a relatively low cost
of $450,000.

Risk Reduction

The study itself would not directly reduce risk,
but would assess alternatives for reducing risk
and identify the alternative with the highest risk
reduction benefit. The potential elevation and
realignment of Brookville Boulevard as a result
of the study would reduce the risk of flooding
along the road, which is a critical element of the
transportation infrastructure system. As stated
above, the reduction of flood occurrences
would greatly decrease the risk of accidents for
17,500 drivers that use Brookville Boulevard
every day. Socially vulnerable populations
would also experience a reduced health risk
since emergency responders would be able to
rely on Brookville Boulevard for reduced travel
times during flood events.

Elevation of Brookville Boulevard would also
improve drainage capacity at the wetlands.
Improved drainage would increase the
wetlands’ function as a tidal barrier, reducing
the risk of tidal floods for the Community.

Timeframe for Implementation

The timeframe for implementation of the Study
to Elevate Brookville Boulevard is immediate;
the study can be completed within two (2) years
or less. Implementation of the recommended
plan would be long term, as the study would
need to be completed, followed by securing
funding and permits for implementation.

Regulatory Requirements

Implementation of recommendations of the
Study to Elevate Brookville Boulevard would
require coordination and input from City,
state, and federal agencies. The project would
be subject to a regulatory review from the
New York City Department of Environmental
Protection (NYC DEP}, the New York City
Department of Transportation (NYC DOT),
and the New York City Department of City
Planning (NYC DCP). Due to the scale of the
project, agencies would also likely be involved
in the review and permitting of the project; such
agencies are likely to include at a minimum the
New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYS DEC), the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers (USACE), the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
agencies associated with the New York State
Coastal Zone Management Program (CZMP}
including the New York State Department of
State (NYS DOS).

Jurisdiction

As this project is in the Borough of Queens, the
City of New York would have jurisdiction over
the project.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section IV: Project Profiles

167
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Strategy D: Additional Resiliency Recommendations

 

D3: Elevate 147th Avenue Bridge at
Brookville Park

The 147th Avenue Bridge crosses over
Brookville Park between 232nd Street and
Brookville Boulevard. South of the Belt Parkway,
this bridge is the only transportation corridor
that allows access from Rosedale to Brookville
and Springfield Gardens. A traffic report in
2003 estimates the daily traffic count on this
bridge to be around 13,000. Despite the
importance of the bridge, it possesses several
vulnerabilities. The bridge is at a low elevation,
making it susceptible to tidal inundation. During

Figure 4.24:

147 AVE GREEN STREET
PROJECT BROUNDARY

©) CURB EXTENSION

SIDEWALK CREATION
mm CROSSWALK CREATION
mmm GREEN MEDIAN

168 Section IV: Project Profiles

Superstorm Sandy, the 147th Avenue Bridge
was flooded, posing many risks stemming from
the loss of a safe transportation route through
the Community.

The bridge features culverts that allow the
passage of water from Brookville Park Pond into
the Idlewild Park Preserve wetlands. The culverts
are low lying, which do not allow an efficient
flow of water. This disruption in water flow may
cause Brookville Park Pond and the surrounding
area to flood during rain events. In addition,
due to its lower elevation and flooding issues,
the bridge has deteriorated over time. Crash

Elevate 147th Avenue Bridge at Brookville Park

 

barriers and both the edges of the bridge are
deteriorated and substandard.

There is currently a project underway that would
reconstruct a segment of Brookville Boulevard
and adjoining streets, which make up an area
named the Brookville Edgewood Triangle. The
scope of this project includes the reconstruction
of the 147th Avenue Bridge described above
(Figure 4.24). The project is currently in the
design phase and funded for construction in
2015. This project would support the elevation
of the 147th Avenue Bridge and reconstruct the
drainage beneath the bridge.

Elevation of the bridge would reduce the
occurrences of flooding, increasing hydraulic
capacity under the bridge for flood flows
and allowing safer access to the bridge for
automobiles, bikes, and pedestrians. Thus,
reconstruction of the bridge is important for the
following reasons:

«The flood water conveyance and flow
would be improved for the underlying
creek;

«The bridge services a high traffic road
(~13,000 cars daily};

«The bridge services two MTA bus lines (111
and 114);

= Adverse impacts on traffic circulation are

avoided; there is a lack of detours if the
bridge is flooded; and

«Improved public safety for pedestrian and
cyclists.
D4: Support Rockaway Turnpike/
Nassau Expressway Resilient
Corridor Study (NYRCR Plan for the
Five Towns)

The Idlewild Watershed Communities Planning
Committee supports the Rockaway Turnpike/
Nassau Expressway Resilient Corridor Study
which was included as a Proposed Project in
the NYRCR Five Towns Plan, with an expanded
scope that addresses potential impacts and
benefits for the Idlewild Watershed Communities
(Figure 4.25).

Figure 4.25: Rockaway Turnpike/Nassau Expressway Resilient Corridor Study

\

¥

4
| North Wormer Park

Queens

 

The scope of the Rockaway Turnpike/Nassau
Expressway Resilient Corridor Study was
designed to provide regional benefits and
extends beyond the Five Towns boundary into the
Idlewild Watershed Communities. The study was
designed to respond to the extent of Superstorm
Sandy inundation and the Five Towns Planning
Committee recognized that preventing future
tidal flooding would require an elevated levee
that reached beyond the length of Thurston Basin,
adjacent to JFK Airport. Elevating Rockaway
Boulevard, which was the solution described
in the Five Towns project description, could
protect the Idlewild Watershed Communities
from future tidal flooding, but would also cause

; Tare re or

. 20008 1.17 mnie.

Lawrenoc
High School

at

JFK international Airport \

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

potential unintended within

the Community.

consequences

The Idlewild Watershed Communities Planning
Committee advocates that the Rockaway
Turnpike/Nassau Expressway Resilient Corridor
Study explore strategies to mitigate severe
tidal flooding while protecting and enhancing
the wetlands in Idlewild Park Preserve that
help to reduce stormwater flooding in the
Community as well as in adjacent NYRCR
Communities, including the Five Towns and
South Valley Stream. Critically, the Committee
advocates that this project cause no negative
impacts on the Idlewild Park Preserve wetlands.

& Lawrente

Jnwood

ME Potential Flood Gate
Proposed Elevated Roadway
{3 Key Intersections

‘0.5. miles ¥ a

0 O25

Section IV: Project Profiles 169
 
Idlewild Watershed Communities

SECTION V. ADDITIONAL MATERIALS

A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Business Improvement
District (IBID)

Advocate that the JFK IBID evaluate strategies to address recurring
stormwater flooding within District boundaries and contribute to
increased enforcement of illegal dumping.

Table 5.1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations
i : Regional
Strategy Project Project Name Short Description Estimated Project
# Cost
(Y/N)
Advocate for NYC DPR to construct the funded park project at the
Advocate for Construction Southern end of Thurston Basin.
Ale : N
of Thurston Basin Park Project is to include wetland restoration along Thurston Basin and
construction of comfort stations near the kayak launch.
A: Alleviate City Purchase of Privately Use City funds to acquire 64 vacant privately owned parcels within
Localized Alf Owned Parcels on Edges of and directly adjacent to Idlewild Park Preserve. N
Flooding Idlewild Park Preserve Restore wetlands within the acquired properties, as needed.
Reconstruct culvert in Idlewild Park Preserve to install a larger
AA Idlewild Park Preserve opening. N
Culvert Expansion Improved tidal flow would help to restore areas by supporting
natural vegetation and wetland functions.
Advocate for Idlewild Park = Advocate for improved connectivity of the overlook constructed by
C3 Preserve Trail Network and = NYC DEP and NYC DPR to the network of trails in Idlewild Park N
Overlook Restoration Preserve.
Advocate for Municipal Advocate for all City agencies to view resilience to extreme
CA Agenc Courdination to weather and the impacts of climate change as top priorities Y
C: Environmental Proves Resilience when planning future program development and capital project
Stewardship planning.
; Advocate for the creation of the Proposed Greater JFK Industrial
Support for Creation of Improvement District.
C5 Greater JFK Industrial N

 

172

Section V: Additional Materials

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Table 5.1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations —(Con't)

 

 

 

 

 

Project Estimated Regional
Strategy I Project Name Short Description Project
# Cost
(Y/N)
Advocate for NYC DCT to elevate the 147th Avenue Bridge
ba Elevate 147th Avenue between 232nd St and 235th St. N
Bridge at Brookville Park Elevation of the bridge would reduce the occurrences of flooding,
allowing safer access to the bridge.
D: Access to supper Moekeviay Advocate for the Rockaway Turnpike/Nassau Expressway
Critical Goods DA By a wa Resilient Resilient Corridor Study from the NYRCR Five Towns Plan, with an Y
and Services pre y expanded scope that addresses potential impacts and benefits for
Corridor Study (NYRCR Plan : ys
. the Idlewild Watershed Communities.
for the Five Towns)
Support for Existing or New Advocate for NYC SBS to establish an information clearinghouse
D5 bPP g to provide information on flood insurance requirements and Y

Retail/Commercial

 

resiliency measures.

 

Section V: Additional Materials 173
Idlewild Watershed Communities

B. Master Table of Projects

 

Table 5.2: Master Table of Projects

 

Strategy

Project #

Project Name

Short Description

Project
Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

 

Al

Green Infrastructure
Community Master Plan

Provide funding for locally-specific Green Infrastructure Master Plan as a
component of NYC DEP's larger southeast Queens green infrastructure study.
In particular, the plan should emphasize interagency coordination, evaluate
the potential for stormwater capture on both public and private properties, and
identify critical gaps in stormwater management that are not addressed by
ongoing and planned infrastructure projects in the area.

Proposed

$750,000

 

Ala

Brookville Park Pond
Restoration

Dredge Brookville Park Pond to increase stormwater storage capacity.
Conduct riparian restoration in a 4’ wide planting area around the perimeter of
the pond.

Proposed

$1,600,000

 

Alb

Community Gateway Green
Streets

Construct right-of-way (ROW) bioswales at key community gateways to increase
stormwater retention and treatment, while improving the streetscape, fostering a
sense of place, and supporting local business growth.

Project would include construction of bioswales, rain gardens, planting of new
street trees, and stormwater tree pits on Francis Lewis Boulevard between 248th
Street and Brookville Boulevard, 225th Street between South Conduit Boulevard
and 145th Road, and the crossroads of Farmers Boulevard and Guy Brewer
Boulevard.

Proposed

$2,900,000

 

Strategy A: Alleviate
Localized Flooding

Ale

Green Infrastructure Pilot
Project (School Green Roof
and Raingarden)

Construct a green infrastructure pilot project at a public building, such as school
or library.

This pilot project would include a green roof, rain garden, and porous
pavement, serving as a demonstration of various green infrastructure best
management practices.

Educational signage and associated educational curricula would illustrate the
benefits of green infrastructure.

This project could potentially receive partial funding through NYC DEP’s NYC
Green Infrastructure grant program.

Proposed

$1,250,000

 

Ald

Twin Pond Park Bluebelt
Enhancement

As a complement to construction of outfalls by NYC DEP conduct riparian
restoration to beautify the park and construct bike path to connect Twin Ponds
Park to Brookville Park.

Featured

$850,000

 

A2

DEP Oyster Restoration in
Thurston Basin

Support the proposed NYC DEP Oyster Restoration project in Thurston Basin.
Oyster restoration could improve water quality, help reduce wetland fringe
erosion, and stabilize the banks of Thurston Basin.

Featured

$250,000

 

A3

 

Coastal Management Plan

Study the impacts of coastal defenses to protect the Community from tidal
flooding at a regional scale.

Recommended projects could include constructing a berm along the Idlewild
Park Preserve border to block storm surge, constructing tide gates at Hook
Creek, and installation of green infrastructure upland to reduce flow of
stormwater into areas with low elevation.

Featured

$465,000

 

174 = Section V: Additional Materials

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Table 5.2: Master Table of Projects (Cont)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Project Estimated Regional
rojec stimate
Strategy Project # Project Name Short Description I Project
Category Cost
(Y/N)
Phase I: Establish Idlewild Watershed COAD.
Develop Southeast Queens Disaster Preparedness and Recovery Plan.
Bla Southeast Queens Disaster " Identify assets and vulnerabilities of local not-for-profit organizations. Proposed $230,000 Y
Recovery Plan " Identify potential locations for Resource and Recovery Centers. P ‘
Strategy B: Emergency * Establish communication between CBOs and NYC OEM.
Response Capacity " Training and education for CERT, COAD and residents.
Implement Recommendations . . .
Blb of the Southeast Queens Phase I: Implement selected Recommendations of the Disaster Response and Proposed $500,000 Y
Disaster Recovery Plan pr .
Develop and implement workforce training and volunteer development
Phase 1: Green Infrastructure Programs to provide skilled training in green infrastructure installation and
cl Workfore Training Program maintenance to Community residents while also encouraging environmental Proposed $200,000 N
ce Training Treg stewardship of the Community’s natural and manmade stormwater
management facilities.
Establish a recurring fund to provide ongoing maintenance of the Community’s
parks and wetlands to ensure that they can adequately function as resources for
Strategy C: Phase 2: Idlewild Watershed — stormwater flooding mitigation.
En ven natal cl Communities Open Space Seed money will establish the fund, which will provide for ongoing maintenance Featured $350,000 N
Stewordehi Restoration Fund of parks, wetlands, and Bluebelts and bioswales, and serve as an advocate
Pp for the Community by identifying additional funding sources and securing City
resources to conduct improvements and maintenance.
Provide education and technical assistance to the Communities’ homeowners
Home and Business Owner and business owners on how to minimize flood damage, prevent sewer
C2 Education and Technical soos. and on the benefits of permeable surfaces in reducing stormwater Featured $250,000 Y
Assistance Program Provide technical assistance in the form of counseling and on-site building
audits performed by case managers.
Install generators and/or solar power at critical facilities to provide a more
Install Backup Power Supply reliable power source during and after major storm events.
DI Systems at Critical Facilities Critical facilities could include Schools, Senior Centers, Medical facilities, Proposed $1,000,000 N
Strategy D: Access to Resource and Recovery Centers, or Rosedale Pumping Station.
Critical Goods and " mesene * " "
Services Study to Elevate Brookville Study the feasibility of elevating the entire length of Brookville Blvd (Snake
D2 Boulevard (Snake Road} Road) through the Idlewild Park Preserve on a trestle to prevent flooding of Featured $450,000 Y

 

between 149th Boulevard
and Rockaway Boulevard

the roadway and encourage the passage of intertidal waters through the

surrounding wetlands.

 

 

Section V: Additional Materials = 175
Idlewild Watershed Communities

C. Public Engagement Process

Goals and Objectives

 

The Public Engagement Process for the Idlewild
Watershed Communities was structured to
encourage broad Community participation,
including people from all areas and sectors
of the Planning Area. The goal was to actively
engage the Community in the process of
creating a pragmatic program that envisions a
resilient and sustainable future for the Idlewild
Watershed Communities, which — include
Springfield Gardens, Brookville, and Rosedale.

The goals of the Public Engagement Process
were to:

« Lower barriers to participation and
encourage more people and more
diverse voices to participate in the NYRCR
planning process;

= Engage with a significant number of
stakeholders and a broad, representative
cross section of the public in an efficient
manner, including anyone displaced from
their residences or businesses due to
Superstorm Sandy and its aftermath;

«Establish ongoing, inclusive, meaningful,
and responsive two-way communication
with stakeholders;

« Ask the residents, businesses, relevant
organizations, and officials of the Idlewild
Watershed Communities to provide useful
information that can inform the NYRCR
Plan; and

176 = Section V: Additional Materials

«Develop practicable strategic policy and
project recommendations built upon a
solid base of public support.

In summary, the public outreach component
of the plan was effective in informing a wide
spectrum of the Community about the NYRCR
Program and the actions that should be taken
in the future to enhance the resiliency of the
Community. It provided multiple opportunities
for public input and direction, and helped to
identify a group of potential project “champions”
who can oversee and monitor projects as they
proceed in the future.

Public Engagement Strategy

 

Planning Committee

The ten-member NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee) was comprised of  civically
engaged residents. The Presidents and Executive
Leadership of many local civic associations were
engaged as Committee Members, including
the Rosedale Civic Association, Springfield
Rosedale Community Action Association, the
147th Road Block Association, the 148th Road
Block Association, the Springfield Gardens
Taxpayers Association, the Springfield Gardens
Community Civic Association, and the Eastern
Queens Alliance. The Committee played a
crucial role in providing input and information
to shape the Plan and in assisting with the
broader Public Engagement Strategy through
their constituent and social networks.

The Committee played a primary role in guiding
the outreach process in order to ensure that a
broad, representative, and diverse spectrum
of the Idlewild Watershed Communities were
provided the opportunity to actively participate
in, and have input in this process.

The Public Engagement Strategy included
regular, monthly NYRCR Planning Committee
meetings focused on the development of the
Plan. At these meetings, which were open to
the public, the NYRCR Planning Committee
provided input on:

= The issues currently facing the Idlewild
Watershed Communities as a result of
Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and
other extreme events.

«= The Community’s existing assets and the
opportunities they might provide for a
more resilient future.

= Input regarding the appropriate strategies
needed to make the area more resilient.

«Preliminary ideas for projects in the area
that can be initiated through the current
planning process.

« Discussions regarding the prioritization of
recommended actions and projects.

: Input regarding the format and content for
Public Engagement Events.

«Major outreach efforts focused on
“getting the word out” about the project,
the planning process, and the Public
Engagement Events.
Meetings accommodated any public members
who attended, often including them inthe working
group sessions. The breakout groups varied
throughout the meetings and included topic-
oriented working groups (Natural and Cultural
Resources, Housing, Economic Development,
Infrastructure, Health and Social Services/
Socially Vulnerable Populations, Community
Engagemen}), as well as geographically based,
and theme based breakout groups.

Discussions focused on the following:

« Current issues, conditions and needs.

«The elements that comprise the
Community’s strengths and assets.

« Visions of the future and how these can be
translated into achievable opportunities.

«Feedback regarding the technical risk
assessment.

«Input regarding the assessment of the
Community’s economic and housing
needs, and guidance to the technical
team as it defined opportunities and
recommendations for addressing these.

« Guidance and decisions on the various
investment, funding, program and policy
implementation strategies needed to
achieve the Community vision as defined
for the area.

«= Review of the NYRCR Plan, in order to
ensure that it is one that the Community
can continue to support and champion
over time.

Public Engagement Events

Public meetings were held to offer participation
opportunities for individuals in all the
communities of the impacted area. Public
Meetings were scheduled at key points in the
development of the Community Reconstruction
Plan to ensure that the public had an opportunity
to provide meaningful input and shape the
NYRCR Plan.

Meetings were held in the evenings to allow
those who work during regular business hours
the opportunity to attend. A total of 71 members
of the public attended public meetings and
observed Committee meetings.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section V: Additional Materials = 177
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Public Meeting #1
Date: July 31, 2014

 

Location: St. Clare’s School, Brookville Blyd.,
Rosedale, NY

This meeting was held in an Open House format.
Attendees signed-in, received informational
materials, and assembled for a presentation.
Following the presentation, attendees circulated
through ordered stations that presented various
aspects of the program on display boards. At
each station, attendees had the opportunity to
talk with a project team member and provide
input via comment forms, post-it notes, and/
or dots on boards. The meeting was promoted
through the Planning Committee members’
organizations, at local religious services, and
through the distribution of flyers at high traffic
public places including the Francis Lewis
Boulevard and 243rd Street Economic Corridor.
The total attendance of Committee members
and the public was 31.

178 Section V: Additional Materials

 
Public Meeting #2
Date: September 16, 2014

 

Location: Birch Family Center, Springfield
Gardens, NY

This meeting was held in an Open House format.
Attendees signed-in, received informational
materials, and assembled for a presentation.
Following the presentation, attendees circulated
through ordered stations that presented various
aspects of the program on display boards. At
each station, attendees had the opportunity to
talk with a project team member and provide
input via comment forms, post-it notes, and/
or dots on boards. The meeting was promoted
through the Planning Committee members’
organizations, local community calendars,
at local religious services, and through the
distribution of flyers at high traffic public
places the Francis Lewis Boulevard and 243rd
Street Economic Corridor. In addition, project
personnel attended the Spring-Gar Community
Civic Picnic on Saturday, August 16th to discuss
the upcoming public meeting with attendees.
The total attendance of Committee members
and the public was 19.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section V: Additional Materials

 

179
Idlewild Watershed Communities

Public Meeting #3
Date: November 13, 2014

 

Location: St. Peter’s Lutheran Church, Brookville,
NY

This meeting was held in an Open House format.
Attendees signed-in, received informational
materials, and assembled for a presentation.
Following the presentation, attendees circulated
through ordered stations that presented
information on the program and _ potential
projects on display boards. At each station,
attendees had the opportunity to talk with a
project team member and provide input via
comment forms, post-it notes, and/or dots on
boards. Attendees provided further information
about projects that had been identified and
suggested additional projects for the Project
Team to investigate. The meeting was promoted
through the Planning Committee members’
organizations, local community calendars,
at local religious services, and through the
distribution of flyers. The total attendance of
Committee members and the public was 35.

180 Section V: Additional Materials

 
Public Meeting #4

 

The fourth and final Public Engagement Event
will be held in January 2015. During this
meeting, the Committee will present the final
NYRCR Plan to the Community.

Project Website and Social Media

The Community’s website (http://stormrecovery.
ny.gov/nyrer/community/idlewild-watershed-
communities} was used to provide information
about the development of the plan and to
host project documents. Information about the
Idlewild Watershed Community Reconstruction
effort was available on this website, including:

NY RIS

SING .
Community Reconstruction Program

First Public Engagement Event

Springfield Gardens, Brookville, Rosedale

 

Thursday, July 31, 2014 | 4)
7:30PM - 9:30PM i Pe. fi se cidren'schbot
St. Clare’s School Cafeteria i Ss
(Entrance on 241* Street,
off 137% Avenue)

137-25 Brookville Blvd
Rosedale, NY 11422

About NY Rising
The NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Program,
your community CTeated by Governor Cuomo and
canhave asayin funded with federal recovery
spending $6 million dollars, will make the Springfield
Gardens, Brookville, & Rosedale
communities stronger and
better able to withstand and
be prepared for future storms.
Acommittee of local residents and civic leaders is
working with the Governor's Office of Storm Recovery
to develop a Community Reconstruction Plan that will
protect residents and businesses from future storms.

Public Meeting Objectives

We are looking for your ideas to:

Learn how

on resiliency
projects!

Please come and

help shape the plan
* Create a vision to make your community more
resilient, and the future!

* Identity important community assets in the area.

 

www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr Saha]

 

UNAS Cm lag

2

 

= News and Announcements, including
meeting announcements;

= Project Documents; and

«= An Electronic Comment form — for the
public to write questions, and share
comments with the project team. The
Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery
posted meeting notices and photographs
on Facebook, Twitter and Tumblr.

Flyers

Flyers were prepared to advertise each public
meeting. The flyers were available in print
and electronic formats and were distributed
through the 8 Committee Contact lists

NY RISIN fe ud ai

Community oa Program

      

  

a

Birch Family Center

Tuesday, September 16, 2014 145-02 Farmers Blvd

Pees dees] )

Springfield Gardens, NY 11434

A committee of local residents and civic
leaders from the Idlewild Watershed
Communities is working with the
Governor's Office of Storm Recovery to
develop a Community Reconstruction Plan
that will protect residents and businesses
from future storms.

HOW SHOULD
THE COMMUNITY
SPEND S6 MILLION
ON RESILIENCY
PROJECTS?

Tse y
Public Engagement Event Objectives: 7 4
The Committee is looking for your ideas to: a

ee
* Develop Reconstruction Strategies to “\, Birch Family Center, ',

increase the Community's resilience. “aS 4
fa
SS bie

eC UNAS Ee) 7d ie

é

* Brainstorm project ideas that should be
evaluated for inclusion in the plan

SG moi ont

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

and well as distributed at high-traffic pedestrian
areas including the Francis Lewis Boulevard
and 243rd Street Economic Corridor. All flyers
included a brief description of the program and
explained the opportunity to participate.

News outlets

The public meeting information for the Idlewild
Watershed Communities was posted to the
following community calendars:

= NY 1 Online;
= Queens Chronicle; and
= Queens Courier.

NY RISING

Community Reconstruction Program

Public Meeting

Idlewild Watershed Communities
Springfield Gardens, Brookville, and Rosedale

 

cEETH ROOFS >
fed

 

A) MTU med Leo)
224-04 147th Ave
Brookville, NY

Thursday, November 13, 2014
7:30 PM - 9:30 PM

 

There is
to help rebuild and protect residents and
businesses from future storms.

A committee of local residents and civic leaders
is working to develop projects to protect your
Community.

Help us decide which projects are best!

SOLO LS ALN abi
EUS IC

 

Section V: Additional Materials 181
Idlewild Watershed Communities

D. Community Asset Inventory

Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment
Tool (“Risk Assessment Tool”)

The Risk score for each group of assets is
determined by multiplying its hazard, exposure
and vulnerability values (Risk = Hazard x
Exposure x Vulnerability). The Coastal Hazard
and Risk Assessment Tool automatically
generates this risk score, which represents
the relative risk of the Community. Risk scores
include some subjective analysis and should not
be compared from one Community to another.
Risk scores can range from 1.5, the lowest score
reflecting negligible or ‘residual’ risk, to 75,
the highest score reflecting severe risk. These
ranges are broken down as follows:

Residual (Risk Score <6}: Residual risk scores
result from both low exposure and vulnerability,
however if assets are critical or have a very high
Community value, actions may be warranted to
reduce their risk.

Moderate (Risk Score 6 - 23): A moderate risk
score represents that the assets may suffer
moderate to serious storm impacts, but that
adaptation may be of a lower priority because
either exposure or vulnerability are low.

High (Risk Score 24 - 53}: Risk scores in the
high range are indicative of conditions that
could lead to significant negative impacts from
a storm, and actions should be taken to reduce
the assets’ vulnerability and restore the assets’
coastal protections.

182 Section V: Additional Materials

Severe (Risk Score >53): A severe risk score
represents that the assets are in a dangerous
situation and that both exposure and
vulnerability should be reduced.

Risk scores help identify assets with increased
potential for storm damage and serve as one
of many factors that helped the Committee
to determine the potential projects to include
in the NYRCR Plan; see Section IV for further
discussion on project screening and selection.
In addition to the risk score, other contributing
factors in determining which assets should be
addressed and how immediately they should be
addressed include:

= The assets’ contribution to life safety;

= If the asset(s) are critical or
locally significant;

«The assets’ Community value;

= — Environmental services provided by
the assets;

«= Economic contribution of the assets;

= Availability or alternative assets or
facilities; and

«= The capacity of the assets to adapt.

The Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment
Tool measures against a 100-year storm,
or a Hazard Score of 3. The Hazard score is
based on the likelihood an event would occur
and the magnitude (destructive capacity) of
the event. For the purpose of preparing a NY
Rising Community Reconstruction Plan, NY

State recommends that Bay Park/East Rockaway
consider a 100-year storm (1% annual chance).
Because the magnitude of storm events
increases as the likelihood decreases (100-
year storms have higher magnitude than 10-
year storms), the Hazard score increases as the
likelihood goes down. Therefore, the Coastal
Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool is calibrated
to a 100-year storm. Although the NYRCR Plan
seeks to protect against a 100-year storm,
equally important is protecting against smaller,
more frequent storm events such as the 10-year
storm, which has a 10% chance of occurrence
each year. Several projects may have risk
reduction benefits for the 10-year storm, which
are described qualitatively.

The Tool is appropriate for measuring coastal
hazards, and risk reduction associated with
projects that provide coastal protection or
defense measures. Several proposed and
featured NYRCR projects address other hazards,
such as those posed by stormwater flooding,
or other vulnerabilities, such as inadequate
communications systems during disaster
response. The risk reduction benefits provided
by these “non-coastal” projects cannot be
quantified using the Coastal Hazard and Risk
Assessment Tool, but are described qualitatively
through a discussion of mitigating hazard,
exposure or vulnerability.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 5.3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment
Asset Information Risk Assessment
Asset Risk Area Asset Class Critical Facility Community Hazard Exposure Vulner. Risk Score
Value Score Score Score

KENTRA INTERNATIONAL SERVICES Moderate Economic Yes, FEMA High 3 2 1 6
SPRINGFIELD GARDENS INDUSTRIAL AREA Moderate Economic No High 3 2 1 6
SMITH ELECTRONICS High Economic No Low 3 2 3 18
TIVY TRUCKING INC High Economic No Low 3 2 3 18
W S JOHN ENTERPRISE High Economic No Low 3 2 3 18
AT&T STORE High Economic No Low 3 2.5 3 23
BROOKVILLE BLVD High Economic No High 3 2.5 3 23
HUXLEY CONSTRUCTION CORP High Economic No Low 3 2.5 3 23
JARA MARKETING CORP-RECOVERY High Economic No Low 3 2.5 3 23
ONCE OVER CLEANING SERVICE High Economic No Low 3 2.5 3 23
ROYAL CLEANING SERVICE High Economic No Low 3 2.5 3 23
UNIQUE FITNESS SERVICE High Economic No Low 3 2.5 3 23
AT & SONS TRANSPORTATION CORP High Economic No Low 3 2 4 24
ATLANTIC FREIGHT High Economic No Low 3 2.5 4 30
CARGO PARTNER NETWORK INC High Economic No Low 3 2.5 4 30
IHOP RESTAURANT High Economic No Low 3 2.5 4 30
KAS CARPET SHOWROOM High Economic No Low 3 2.5 4 30
PIZZA HUT High Economic No Low 3 2.5 4 30
APPLEBEE’S NEIGHBORHOOD GRILL Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
BOOST MOBILE Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
CHILDREN’S PLACE Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
CONWAY STORES Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
D KS HOUSE OF ELEGANCE Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
GAMESTOP Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
JIMMY JAZZ Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42

 

 

 

Section V: Additional Materials 183
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Table 5.3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment (Con’t)

 

Asset Information

Risk Assessment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community Hazard Exposure Vulner.
Asset Risk Area Asset Class Critical Facility Risk Score
Value Score Score Score
KMART Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
LOWE’S HOME IMPROVEMENT Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
MODELS SPORTING GOODS Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
ROCKAWAY BLVD ECONOMIC CORRIDOR Extreme Economic No High 3 3.5 4 42
SOUTH WEST NASSAU OPTOMETRIC Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
SUBWAY Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
SUPER DEAL STORES INC Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
TJ MAXX Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
T-MOBILE Extreme Economic No Low 3 3.5 4 42
BAYHOUSE WATERFRONT BAR & GRLL Extreme Economic No Low 3 4 4 48
REGENCY RECYCLING CORP Extreme Economic No Low 3 4 4 A8
. . No, Locally .
MARTIN DE PORRES SCHOOL Health and Social Services Ln a High 3 FALSE 3 0
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
MERRICK ACADEMY Health and Social Services oe 1. High 3 FALSE 3 0
Significant Facility
OEM EVACUATION CENTER - BELMONT . . .
Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 3 FALSE 1 0
RACETRACK
OEM EVACUATION CENTER - HILLCREST HS Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 3 FALSE 1 0
OEM EVACUATION CENTER - JOHN ADAMS HS Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 3 FALSE 1
OEM EVACUATION CENTER - PS 268 Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 3 FALSE 1 0
. . No, Locally .
PS 38 Health and Social Services on ae High 3 FALSE 3 0
Significant Facility
QUEENS HEALTH NET SPRINGFIELD GARDENS Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 3 FALSE 3 0
. . No, Locally .
ROSEDALE CHILD DEVELOPMENT CENTER Health and Social Services Lan a. High 3 FALSE 3 0
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
SAINT CLARE CATHOLIC ACADEMY Health and Social Services High 3 FALSE 3 0

 

Significant Facility

 

 

184 Section V: Additional Materials

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 5.3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment (Con'’t)
Asset Information Risk Assessment
Community Hazard Exposure Vulner.
Asset Risk Area Asset Class Critical Facility Risk Score
Value Score Score Score
. . No, Locally .
U.S. POST OFFICE - 21810 MERRICK BLVD. Health and Social Services on a High 3 FALSE 0
Significant Facility
LINDEN SEVENTH-DAY ADVENTIST ELEMENTARY . . No, Locally .
Moderate Health and Social Services an “. High 3 1.5 5
SCHOOL Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
AUGUST MARTIN HIGH SCHOOL Moderate Health and Social Services on ae High 3 2 6
Significant Facility
CATHERINE AND COUNT BASIE MIDDLE SCHOOL . . No, Locally .
Moderate Health and Social Services on ae High 3 2 6
72 Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
CATHOLIC GUARDIAN SOCIETY OF NEW YORK Moderate Health and Social Services on ae High 3 2 6
Significant Facility
SPRINGFIELD GARDENS COMMUNITY RESIDENCE Moderate Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 3 2 6
. . No, Locally .
ROCHDALE ADULT LEARNING CENTER Moderate Health and Social Services on ae High 3 2.5 8
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
AMERICAN LEGION - POST 483 Moderate Health and Social Services oe a. High 3 1.5 14
Significant Facility
FDNY ENG 314 Moderate Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 3 1.5 14
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CENTER FOR THE . . No, Locally .
Moderate Health and Social Services Lon a. High 3 1.5 14
HANDICAPPED AT 148TH AVE Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
PS 156 LAURELTON Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 3 1.5 14
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
PS 181 BROOKFIELD Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 3 1.5 14
Significant Facility
QUALITY SERVICES FOR THE AUTISTIC . . No, Locally .
Moderate Health and Social Services Loe - High 3 1.5 14
COMMUNITY (QSAC), INC. Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
A.C.T. COMMUNITY RESIDENCE Moderate Health and Social Services Lon a. High 3 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
BIRCH FAMILY SERVICE Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 3 2 18
Significant Facility
CATHOLIC CHARITIES NEIGHBORHOOD . . .
SERVICES Moderate Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 3 2 18

 

 

 

Section V: Additional Materials

185
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Table 5.3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment (Cont)

 

Asset Information

Risk Assessment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community Hazard Exposure Vulner.
Asset Risk Area Asset Class Critical Facility Risk Score
Value Score Score Score
. . No, Locally .
CHRIST LUTHERAN SCHOOL Moderate Health and Social Services on ae High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
COLLABORATIVE ARTS MIDDLE SCHOOL Moderate Health and Social Services own a High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
COMMUNITY VOICES MIDDLE SCHOOL Moderate Health and Social Services on ae High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
CYNTHIA JENKINS SCHOOL Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
EXCELSIOR PREPARATORTY HIGH SCHOOL Moderate Health and Social Services Lon a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
FDNY ENG 311, LAD 158 Moderate Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 2 18
GEORGE WASHINGTON CARVER HIGH SCHOOL . . No, Locally .
Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2 18
FOR THE SCIENCES Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
KIDWISE SCHOOL-BASED INIT. Moderate Health and Social Services Lon a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
NYC POLICE DEPT 113TH PRECINCT Moderate Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 2 18
NYPD QUEENS SOUTH TASK FORCE Moderate Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 2 18
NYS BERNARD M. FINESON DEVELOPMENT . . No, Locally .
Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2 18
DISABLITIES REGIONAL OFFICE Significant Facility
PREPARATORY ACADEMY FOR WRITERS: A No, Locall
Moderate Health and Social Services ° . oe ¥ a. High 2 18
COLLEGE BOARD SCHOOL Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
PS 251 Moderate Health and Social Services oan a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
PS 30 Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
PS 354 Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
PS 52 Moderate Health and Social Services Lon a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
PS/MS 138 SUNRISE Moderate Health and Social Services High 2 18

 

Significant Facility

 

 

186 Section V: Additional Materials

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 5.3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment (Con'’t)
Asset Information Risk Assessment
Community Hazard Exposure Vulner.
Asset Risk Area Asset Class Critical Facility Risk Score
Value Score Score Score
. . No, Locally .
QS SCHOOL SAFETY DIVISION Moderate Health and Social Services on ae High 2 18
Significant Facility
QUEENS FEDERAL CORRECTIONS FACILITY Moderate Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 2 18
. . No, Locally .
QUEENS PREPARATORY ACADEMY Moderate Health and Social Services on ae High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
QUEENS VILLAGE DAY SCHOOL INC Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
ROCHDALE VILLAGE NURSERY SCHOOL Moderate Health and Social Services Loe a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
ROCHDALE VILLAGE NURSERY SCHOOL & . . No, Locally .
Moderate Health and Social Services Lon a. High 2 18
KINDERGARTEN Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
ROCHDALE VILLAGE SENIOR CENTER Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
ROSEDALE POST OFFICE Moderate Health and Social Services Lon a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
SPRINGFIELD GARDENS HIGH SCHOOL Moderate Health and Social Services Lon a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
SPRINGFIELD GARDENS HOMELESS SHELTER Moderate Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 2 18
. . No, Locally .
SPRINGFIELD PUBLIC SCHOOL 37 Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
SPRINGFIEND GARDENS DMV OFFICE Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
SUNRISE PUBLIC SCHOOL 138 Moderate Health and Social Services oan a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
TRI COMMUNITY JUNIOR HIGH 231 Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
U.S. POST OFFICE - 14506 243RD ST. Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
U.S. POST OFFICE - 165100 BAISLEY BLVD. Moderate Health and Social Services Lon a. High 2 18
Significant Facility

 

 

 

Section V: Additional Materials

187
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Table 5.3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment (Cont)

 

Asset Information

Risk Assessment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community Hazard Exposure Vulner.
Asset Risk Area Asset Class Critical Facility Risk Score
Value Score Score Score
No, Local
LIFE’S WORC, INC. Moderate Health and Social Services. High 2.5 23
Significant Facility
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CENTER FOR THE . . No, Locally .
Moderate Health and Social Services oun a High 2.5 23
HANDICAPPED AT 181ST ST Significant Facility
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CENTER FOR THE . . . .
High Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 2.5 23
HANDICAPPED AT CRAFT AVE
No, Locall
PS 195 High Health and Social Services High 2.5 23
Significant Facility
. . No, Locally .
PS 80 Moderate Health and Social Services on a. High 2.5 23
Significant Facility
ROBERT COUCHE NEIGHBORHOOD SENIOR . . .
Moderate Health and Social Services Yes, FEMA High 2.5 23
CENTER
. No, Locally .
LIFESPIRE SPRINGFIELD GARDENS Housing ae a. High FALSE 0
Significant Facility
. No, Locally .
NORTHEASTERN CONFERENCE HOUSE Moderate Housing on . High 2 6
Significant Facility
LAURELTON SOUTH RESIDENTIAL . No, Locally .
Moderate Housing on a. High 1.5 14
NEIGHBORHOOD Significant Facility
. No, Locally .
ROSEDALE RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD Moderate Housing pe . High 1.5 14
Significant Facility
. No, Locally .
BROOKVILLE RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD Moderate Housing un a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
. No, Locally .
LOCUST MANOR SENIOR RESIDENCE Moderate Housing ae a. High 2 18
Significant Facility
SPRINGFIELD GARDENS RESIDENTIAL . No, Locally .
Moderate Housing on . High 2 18
NEIGHBORHOOD Significant Facility
. No, Locally .
ROCHDALE VILLAGE Moderate Housing on a High 2.5 23
Significant Facility
. No, Locally .
MEADOWMERE RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD Extreme Housing High 3.5 53

 

Significant Facility

 

 

188 Section V: Additional Materials

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Table 5.3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment(Con’'t)

 

Asset Information

Risk Assessment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community | Hazard Exposure Vulner. .
Asset Risk Area Asset Class Critical Facility Risk Score
Value Score Score Score
ELECTRICITY TOWERS (MULTIPLE ALONG CON .
Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 FALSE 3 0
EDISON LINE)
No, Locally .
JFK MTA BUS DEPOT Moderate Infrastructure oan a. High 3 2 1 6
Significant Facility
No, Locally .
LOGAN GROUP SCHOOL BUS GARAGE Moderate Infrastructure on a. High 3 2 1 6
Significant Facility
CON EDISON POWER LINE Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 1.5 3 14
No, Locally .
LIRR STATION LAURELTON Moderate Infrastructure an a High 3 1.5 3 14
Significant Facility
No, Locally .
SOUTH CONDUIT AVE Moderate Infrastructure on a. High 3 1.5 3 14
Significant Facility
BELT PARKWAY Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
No, Locally .
GUY R BREWER BLVD Moderate Infrastructure on a High 3 2 3 18
Significant Facility
No, Locally .
LIRR LONG BEACH AND FAR ROCKAWAY LINES Moderate Infrastructure on a. High 3 2 3 18
Significant Facility
No, Locally .
LIRR STATION ROSEDALE Moderate Infrastructure Ln a High 3 2 3 18
Significant Facility
No, Locally .
SPRINGFIELD BLVD Moderate Infrastructure on a. High 3 2 3 18
Significant Facility
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 112658 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 112659 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 112691 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 116957 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 116958 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117149 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117313 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117314 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117315 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117316 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18

 

 

 

Section V: Additional Materials

189
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Table 5.3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment (Cont)

 

Asset Information

Risk Assessment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community | Hazard Exposure Vulner. .
Asset Risk Area Asset Class Critical Facility Risk Score
Value Score Score Score
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117317 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117318 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117319 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117320 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117328 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 3 18
. No, Locally .
147TH AVE High Infrastructure oe a. High 3 2.5 3 23
Significant Facility
No, Locally .
FARMERS BLVD Moderate Infrastructure ou. a. High 3 2.5 3 23
Significant Facility
. No, Locally .
FRANCIS LEWIS BLVD High Infrastructure ow a. High 3 2.5 3 23
Significant Facility
. No, Locally .
HOOK CREEK BLVD High Infrastructure oun a. High 3 2.5 3 23
Significant Facility
No, Locally .
LIRR STATION LOCUST MANOR Moderate Infrastructure on a. High 3 2.5 3 23
Significant Facility
ROSEDALE PUMPING STATION High Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2.5 3 23
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 116953 High Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2.5 3 23
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 116954 High Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2.5 3 23
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 116955 High Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2.5 3 23
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 116956 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2.5 3 23
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117100 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2.5 3 23
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 117327 Moderate Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2.5 3 23
. No, Locally .
BROOKVILLE BLVD High Infrastructure Lon ae High 3 2 4 24
Significant Facility
NYC DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL . .
High Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 2 4 24
PROTECTION- JAMAICA WATER SUPPLY WELLS
. No, Locally .
ROCKAWAY BLVD High Infrastructure on ae High 3 2 4 24
Significant Facility
CSO OUTFALL - ID JAM-005 Extreme Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 3.5 3 32
CSO OUTFALL - ID JAM-007 Extreme Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3 3.5 3 32

 

 

 

190 Section V: Additional Materials

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

 

Table 5.3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment (Cont)

 

Asset Information

Risk Assessment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community Hazard Exposure Vulner.
Asset Risk Area Asset Class Critical Facility Risk Score
Value Score Score Score
No, Locally .
HUNGRY HARBOR RD Extreme Infrastructure on ae High 3.5 32
Significant Facility
STORMWATER OUTFALLS - ID 112690 Extreme Infrastructure Yes, FEMA High 3.5 32
RUSSO RECYCLING Extreme Infrastructure No Low 3.5 42
Natural and Cultural No, Locally .
LAURELTON LIBRARY ne . High FALSE 0
Resources Significant Facility
QUEENS BOROUGH PUBLIC LIBRARY - Natural and Cultural .
Moderate Yes, FEMA High 2.5 8
ROCHDALE VILLAGE COMMUNITY LIBRARY Resources
. Natural and Cultural
IDLEWILD KAYAK LAUNCH High No Low 2.5 15
Resources
. Natural and Cultural
IDLEWILD PARK RECREATIONAL FIELD High No Low 2 18
Resources
Natural and Cultural No, Locall
ROSEDALE LIBRARY Moderate aterarane Sue eee High 2 18
Resources Significant Facility
. Natural and Cultural
BROOKVILLE POND High No Low 2.5 23
Resources
. Natural and Cultural
FRESHWATER EMERGENT WETLANDS High No Low 2.5 23
Resources
. Natural and Cultural
GREENSTREET AT HUXLEY ST & 149TH AVE High No Low 2.5 23
Resources
. Natural and Cultural
GREENSTREET AT HUXLEY ST & 149TH DR High No Low 2.5 23
Resources
. Natural and Cultural
GREENSTREET AT HUXLEY ST & 149TH RD High No Low 2.5 23
Resources
. Natural and Cultural
GREENSTREET AT HUXLEY ST & 253RD ST High No Low 2.5 23
Resources
. Natural and Cultural
GREENSTREET AT HUXLEY ST & CRAFT AVE High No Low 2.5 23
Resources
. Natural and Cultural
HOOK CREEK High No Low 2.5 23

Resources

 

 

Section V: Additional Materials 191

 
Idlewild Watershed Communities

 

Table 5.3: Community Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment (Cont)

 

Asset Information

Risk Assessment

 

 

 

 

 

Community Hazard Exposure Vulner.
Asset Risk Area Asset Class Critical Facility Risk Score
Value Score Score Score
Natural and Cultural No, Locally .
ROCHDALE VILLAGE LIBRARY Moderate an a. High 2.5 23
Resources Significant Facility
. Natural and Cultural
ST PIUS X CHURCH High No Low 2.5 23
Resources
. Natural and Cultural
ESTUARINE AND MARINE WATER BODIES High No Low 2 24
Resources
. Natural and Cultural
HOOK CREEK PARK High No Low 2 24
Resources
. Natural and Cultural .
SUNRISE PLAYGROUND High No High 2.5 30
Resources
. Natural and Cultural
THURSTON BASIN High No Low 2.5 30

 

Resources

 

 

192 Section V: Additional Materials

 
E.

Endnotes

Pritchard, Evan T., Native New Yorkers: The Lega-
cy of the Algonquin People of New York. Council
Oak Books, 2002.

hitp://www.nycgovparks. org/parks/Q1 07 /history

Arrt’s Archives. Springfield Station. Retrieved June
16, 2014, from http://www.arrts-arrchives.com/
SPRGRDNS.hitml.

“Real Estate Scene: A Tree-Lined City Oasis,
Springfield Gardens Offers a Varied Mix”. Daily
News (New York). June 17, 1999. Retrieved June
16, 2014, from http://archive.today/YRoDH.

U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2010 American Com-
munity Survey

Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. His-
tory of John F Kennedy Airport. Retrieved June
16, 2014, from hitp://www.panynj.gov/airports/
ifk-history.html.

American Community Survey 2008-2012
Trulia, April-July, 2014.

Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy,
2010.

Eastern Queens Alliance White Paper: A Com-
prehensive Plan—Maximizing Quality of Life in
Southeast Queens. January 15, 2006.

OnTheMap: U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Eco-
nomic Studies

U.S. Department of Commerce. Hurricane/Post-
Tropical Cyclone Sandy, October 22-29, 2012.
(Accessed 6/2014 at http://www.nws.noaa.gov/
os/assessments/pdfs/Superstorm Sandy] 3.pdf}

National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Re-
port: Hurricane Sandy. (AL182012) 22 — 29 Oc-
tober 2012. (Accessed on 6/2014 at http://www.
nhc.noga.gov/data/tcr/AL182012 Superstorm
Sandy.pdf}

USGS. Hurricane Sandy Storm Tide Mapper. (Ac-
cessed on 6/2014 at http://54.243.149.253/

15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

home/webmap/viewer.html?webmap=c07fae08
¢20c4117bdb8e92e3239837e).

Sandy Inundation, New York State GIS.
NYC PLUTO

National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Re-
port: Hurricane Sandy (AL182012) 22 — 29 Octo-
ber 2012. Retrieved June 2014, from http://www.
nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012 Superstorm
Sandy.pdf).

NYC Open Data. Department of Environmental
Protection. Damaged Trees — Hurricane Sandy.
https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Social-Services/
Damaged-Trees-Hurricane-Sandy/vna7-je5q

U.S. Department of Commerce. Service Assess-
ment Hurricane Irene, August 21-30, 2011. Re-
trieved June 2014, from http://www.nws.noaa.
gov/os/assessments/pdfs/lrene20 12.pdf.

NOAA Water Level and Meteorological Data Re-
port. Hurricane Irene. Retrieved June 2014, from
http://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/publications/
Hurricane Irene Water Level and Meteorologi-
cal Data_Report.pdf.

U.S. Department of Commerce. Service Assess-
ment Hurricane Irene, August 21-30, 2011. Re-
trieved June 2014, from http://www.nws.noaa.
gov/os/assessments/pdfs/lrene20 12.pdf

Limited Mass Transit, HOV Restrictions Begin As
Sandy Outages Persist. NY 1. Retrieved Novem-
ber 2014, from http://www.ny].com/content/
news/171644/limited-mass-transit--hov-restric-
tions-begin-as-sandy-outages-persist].

U.S. Department of Commerce. Hurricane Irene,
August 21-30, 2011. (Accessed 6/2014 at http://
www.nws.noaa.gov/om/assessments/pdfs/
lrene2012.pdf}

NYC Department of Environmental Conservation.
Southeast Queens Overview Meeting. 21 July
2014.

U.S. Geological Survey. Web Soil Survey.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.
31.
32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.
38.
39.

AO.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

NYC Wastewater Resiliency Plan. Chapter 3
Pumping Stations. Retrieved September 2014,
from http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/about_
dep/wastewater_resiliency_plan.shtml.

http://www.timesledger.com/stories/2014/13/
ifkrunway_tl 2014 03 _28 g.html

http://www.nycedc.com/opportunity/jtk-develop-
ment-site-rfp

NYC PLUTO.
NYC PLUTO.
U.S. Census American Community Survey, 2012.

New York City Department of Environmental Pro-
tection. Groundwater Supply System. Retrieved
October 10, 2014, from http://www.nyc.gov/
html/dep/html/drinking_water/groundwater. sht-
ml.

http://money.cnn.com/201 2/1 1/02/news/econ-
omy/gas-shortage-sandy/

New York City Department of Parks and Recre-
ation. Forever Wild Sites. (Accessed on 8/2014
at http://www.nycgovparks.org/greening/nature-
preserves)

http://www. nyc.gov/html/dep/html/press _
releases/12-70pr.shtml#.U_HudU1tqUuk

http://www.nan.usace.army.mil/Media/Fact-
Sheets/FactSheetArticleView/tabid/11241/Ar-
ticle/487246/fact-sheet-jamaica-bay-ny.aspx

hitp://www.nan.usace.army.mil/Home.aspx
U.S. Census American Community Survey, 2012.

Comments made during Idlewild Watershed
Communities NYRCR First Public Engagement
Event, July 31, 2014.

Comments made during Idlewild Watershed
Communities NYRCR First Public Engagement
Event, July 31, 2014.

Section V: Additional Materials 193
Idlewild Watershed Communities

4).

42.

43.

44.

45.

A6.

47.

A8.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

194

Zip Code Business Statistics: Zip Code Business
Patterns by Employment Size Class 2012 Business
Patterns

New York City Business Solutions. Hurricane
Sandy Recovery Services. Retrieved October 10,
2014, from http://www.nyc.gov/html/sbs/nycbiz/
html/home/Hurricane Sandy Recovery Services.
shtml.

New York City Department for the Aging. NORC
Programs. Retrieved October 10, 2014, from
http://www. nyc.gov/html/dfta/html/services/re-
tirement.shtml.

NYC Department of City Planning. Coastal Cli-
mate Resilience: Designing for Flood Risk. 2013.

ALIGN. Sandy’s Mold Legacy: the Unmet Need
Six Months After the Storm, 2013. Page 1.

2008-2012 American Community Survey, Fur-
man Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy,
2011

RAND Corporation. Flood Insurance in New York
City Following Hurricane Sandy. 2013. Page 32.

RAND Corporation. Flood Insurance in New York
City Following Hurricane Sandy. 2013. Page 63

Comments made during Idlewild Watershed
Communities NYRCR First Public Engagement
Event, July 31, 2014.

Dombrow, J., M. Rodriguez, and C.F Sirmans.
2000. The Market Value of Mature Trees in Sin-
gle-Family Housing Markets. Appraisal Journal
68, 1:39-43.

Wolf, K.L. August 2007. City Trees and Property
Values. Arborist News 16, 4: 34-36.

Donovan, G.H., and D.T. Butry. 2010. Trees in
the City: Valuing Street Trees in Portland, Oregon.
Landscape and Urban Planning 94, 1:77-83.

Public Data Corporation, New York City Depart-
ment of Finance, Furman Center

https://afl.salsalabs.com/o/4001/c/225/imag-
es/Disaster+ Homeownership + Repairt+and+Reb
uilding.pdf

Section V: Additional Materials

55.
56.
57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

http://cnycn.org/program/nrt/
http://www/sba/gov

http://www.fema.gov/public-assistance-local-
state-tribal-and-non-profit/recovery-directorate/
assistance-individuals-and

ALIGN. Sandy’s Mold Legacy: the Unmet Need
Six Months After the Storm, 2013. Page 16

http://realny.org/hurricanesandynyassistance/#i
nsuranceproblems

NYC Wastewater Resiliency Plan. Chapter 3
Pumping Stations. Retrieved September 2014,
from http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/about_
dep/wastewater_resiliency_plan.shtm.

NYC Department of Environmental Protection.
NYC Green Infrastructure 2013 Annual Report.

NYC Department of Environmental Protection.
Waterbody/Watershed Facility Plan. Jamaica Bay
and CSO Tributaries. October 2011.

http://easternqueensalliance. org/viewpoints/the-
air-we-breathe.html

NYC DEP 2010 NYC Green Infrastructure Plan.
http://www. nyc.gov/html/dep/pdf/green_infra-
structure/NYCGreenInfrastructurePlan_LowRes.

pdf

U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Threatened and en-
dangered species list. http://www.fws.gov/endan-
gered/

NYC Open Data. 311 Service Requests from
2010 to Present. Value depicts Highway Flooding
and Street Flooding complaints created in 2013.

NYC DEP The State of the Sewers 2013. http://
www.nyc.gov/html/dep/pdf/reports/state-of-the-
sewers-2013.pdf

Joseph L. Balkin Inc. Main Sewer Line Replace-
ment Cost in New York City. http://www.balkan-
plumbing.com/main-sewer-line-replacement-
cost-new-york/

The FEMA FIRM Preliminary 100-year flood zone
was overlaid on NYC DCP’s PLUTO Data. Proper-
ty value reflects 2014 market values. These mar-

70.

71.

72.

73.

74,

75.

76.

77.

ket values were calculated by converting PLUTO
data assessed values to market values using a
state equalization rate provided by the New York
State Office of Real Property Tax Services.

Business revenues were estimated using IMPLAN
2008 economic output for Queens County (www.
implan.com). The number of businesses was ob-
tained from the County Business Patterns for 2008
for the county (http://censtats.census.gov/cgi-bin/
cbpnaic/cbpsect.pl)

NYC DEP Department of Environmental Protec-
tion and Queens Community Groups Announce
New Storm Sewers Coming to St. Albans. June
16, 2014. http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/
press_releases/14-051pr.shtml#.VGOLSfnF-gY

ECONorthwest. The Economics of Low-Impact
Development: A Literature Review. http://www.
econw.com/media/ap_files/ECONorthwest-Eco-
nomics-of-LID-Literature-Review_2007. pdf

ECONorthwest. The Economics of Low-Impact
Development: A Literature Review. http://www.
econw.com/media/ap_files/ECONorthwest-Eco-
nomics-of-LID-Literature-Review_2007. pdf

American Rivers. Growing Green: How Green
Infrastructure Can Improve Community Livabil-
ity and Public Health. http://www.americanriv-
ers.org/assets/pdfs/green-infrastructure-docs/
growing-green-how-green-infrastructure-can-im-
prove-community-livability. pdf

U.S. Census Bureau. 2008-2012 ACS Population
Summary. Data obtained from ESRI Community
Analyst

NYC DEP Department of Environmental Protec-
tion and Queens Community Groups Announce
New Storm Sewers Coming to St. Albans. June
16, 2014. http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/
press_releases/14-051pr.shtml#.VGOLSfnF-gY

Joseph L. Balkin Inc. Main Sewer Line Replace-
ment Cost in New York City. hitp://www.balkan-
plumbing.com/main-sewer-line-replacement-
cost-new-york/
78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.
84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

U.S. EPA. Sediment Removal to Improve Water
Quality. http://epa.gov/ord/annualreport/2012/
sed-removal.htm

NYC DEP Green Infrastructure Co-Benefits Cal-
culator with an annual retained fraction of 40%.

Ontario Turfgrass Symposium. Budgeting for
Sports Field Construction. Mar 2012. http://ar-
chive. lib. msu.edu/tic/stnew/article/2002mar1 2.
pdf

WHO. Physical Activity and Adults. http://www.
who. int/dietphysicalactivity/factsheet_adults/en/

ESRI Community Analyst. Health and Beauty Mar-
ket Potential with usage data by GfK MRI.

NYC Department of City Planning. PLUTO. 2014.

City of New York. Department of Transportation.
6.6 Stormwater-Capturing Installations. Street
Design Manual. 2013. http://www.nyc.gov/html/
dot/html/pedestrians/streetdesignmanual.shtml.

City of New York. Department of Environmental
Protection. Office of Green Infrastructure. Stan-
dards for Green Infrastructure. 29 August 2014.
http://www. nyc.gov/html/dep/pdf/green_infra-
structure/bioswales-standard-designs.pdf.

Virginia BMP Clearinghouse, available at http://
vwrrc.vt.edu/swc/NonProprietaryBMPs.html and
Chesapeake Bay Program Urban Stormwater
Work Group, available at http://www.chesa-
peakebay.net/groups/group/urban_ stormwater _
workgroup

Total load is defined as the total amount of pollut-
ant present in the stormwater that falls within the
managed tributary area. Effluent concentration is
the concentration of the pollutant in the stormwa-
ter runoff from the managed tributary area.

Virginia BMP Clearinghouse, available at http://
vwrrc.vt.edu/swc/NonProprietaryBMPs.html and
Chesapeake Bay Program Urban Stormwater
Work Group, available at http://www.chesa-
peakebay.net/groups/group/urban_ stormwater _
workgroup

NYC DEP Green Infrastructure Co-Benefits Cal-
culator with an annual retained fraction of 40%.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

Properties other than residential, commercial and
mixed-use parcels, such as transportation and
public parcels, were not included in the market
value figure. The calculation used to obtain the
market value figure could not be applied to these
properties.

Virginia BMP Clearinghouse, available at http://
vwrrc.vt.edu/swc/NonProprietaryBMPs.html and
Chesapeake Bay Program Urban Stormwater
Work Group, available at http://www.chesa-
peakebay.net/groups/group/urban_stormwater_
workgroup

A pollutant-generating surface is a surface con-
sidered to be a significant source of pollutant in
surface and stormwater runoff. Such surfaces in-
clude those subject to vehicular use or storage of
erodible, pesticides, fertilizers, or leachable ma-
terials, wastes, or chemicals and which receive
direct rainfall-runon.

Virginia BMP Clearinghouse, available at http://
vwrrc.vt.edu/swc/NonProprietaryBMPs.html and
Chesapeake Bay Program Urban Stormwater
Work Group, available at http://www.chesa-
peakebay.net/groups/group/urban_stormwater_
workgroup

U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Threatened and en-
dangered species list. http://www.fws.gov/endan-
gered/

NYC DEP Green Infrastructure Co-Benefits Cal-
culator with an annual retained fraction of 40%.

ECONorthwest. The Economics of Low-Impact
Development: A Literature Review. http://www.
econw.com/media/ap_files/ECONorthwest-Eco-
nomics-of-LID-Literature-Review_2007.pdf

NYC DEP Green Infrastructure Co-Benefits Cal-
culator with an annual retained fraction of 40%.

Average NYC tree canopy size obtained from
http://www. milliontreesnyc.org/html/about/ur-
ban_forest_facts.shtml. Average tree air pollution
removal values obtained from https://www.itree-
tools.org/eco/resources/UFUG Air Pollution Re-
moval.pdf

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

American Rivers. Growing Green: How Green
Infrastructure Can Improve Community Livabil-
ity and Public Health. http://www.americanriv-
ers.org/assets/pdfs/green-infrastructure-docs/
growing-green-how-green-infrastructure-can-im-
prove-community-livability. pdf

U.S. Census Bureau. 2008-2012 ACS Population
Summary. Data obtained from ESRI Community
Analyst

WHO. Physical Activity and Adults. http://www.
who. int/dietphysicalactivity/factsheet_adults/en/

ESRI Community Analyst. Health and Beauty Mar-
ket Potential with usage data by GfK MRI.

Oyster Reef Restoration. Frequently Asked Ques-

tions. http://www. oysterrestoration.com/faq.
html#9

U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Threatened and en-
dangered species list. http://www.fws.gov/endan-
gered/

http://www. nature.org/ourinitiatives/regions/
northamerica/oyster-restoration-study-kroeger.

pdf

Sewage Overflows from Hurricane Sandy, Cli-
mate Central, April 2013. http://www.climatecen-
tral.org/pdfs/Sewage.pdt

U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service. Threatened and en-
dangered species list. http://www.fws.gov/endan-
gered/

NYS Department of Health. Residential Oil Spills
and Flooding. http://www. health. ny.gov/environ-
mental/emergency/flood/.

NY Department of Health. Health Checklist for
Repairing for Flood Damaged Home. http://www.
health.ny.gov/environmental/indoors/air/flood_
checklist.htm

Climate Central. Sewage Overflows From Hurri-
cane Sandy. April 2013. http://www.climatecen-
tral.org/pdts/Sewage.pdt

. The FEMA FIRM Preliminary 100-year flood zone

was overlaid on NYC DCP’s PLUTO Data. Proper-
ty value reflects 2014 market values. These mar-
ket values were calculated by converting PLUTO

Section V: Additional Materials 195
Idlewild Watershed Communities

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

196

data assessed values to market values using a
state equalization rate provided by the New York
State Office of Real Property Tax Services.

Business revenues were estimated using IMPLAN
2008 economic output for Queens County (www.
implan.com). The number of businesses was ob-
tained from the County Business Patterns for 2008
for the county (http://censtats.census.gov/cgi-bin/
cbpnaic/cbpsect.pl)

Sewage Overflows from Hurricane Sandy, Cli-
mate Central, April 2013. http://www.climatecen-
tral.org/pdfs/Sewage.pdt

New York Department of Environmental Protec-
tion. New York City Wastewater Resiliency Plan:
Climate Risk Assessment and Adaptation Study.
October, 2013 — http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/
pdt/climate/climate-executive-summary.pdf

U.S. Census Bureau. 2008-2012 ACS Population
Summary. Data obtained from ESRI Community
Analyst

ECONorthwest. The Economics of Low-Impact
Development: A Literature Review. http://www.
econw.com/media/ap_files/ECONorthwest-Eco-
nomics-of-LID-Literature-Review_2007. pdf

Hudson-Raritan Estuary Comprehensive Restora-
tion Plan — Potential Restoration Opportunities,
2014

In estimating the job-years created by direct gov-
ernment spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the
simple rule provided by the Office of the Presi-
dent Council of Economic Advisors that $92,000
creates one job year. This procedure is somewhat
crude and does not take into account the obvious
differences in wages and other costs across dif-
ferent types of projects and across different parts
of the country. It does, however, take into account
the key difference between tax changes or state
fiscal relief, and direct government investment
spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and
conservatism. Because it is derived to be consis-
tent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it
minimizes discrepancies between the aggregate
jobs estimates across the various geographies.
Estimates of Job Creation from the American Re-
covery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, EXECUTIVE

Section V: Additional Materials

119.

120.

122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT COUNCIL OF ECO-
NOMIC ADVISERS, May 2009.

C. Kousky. Informing Climate Adaptation: A Re-
view of the Economic Costs of Natural Disasters,
Their Determinants, and Risk Reduction Options.
2012. http://www. rf. org/rff/Documents/RFF-
DP-12-28. pdf

Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure.
Green Jobs Training, A Catalog of Training Op-
portunities for Green Infrastructure Technologies.
2010. Available at: www.epa.gov/greeninfra-
strucutre.

. Section 3 is a provision of the Housing and Ur-

ban Development (HUD) Act of 1968 that helps
foster local economic development, neighbor-
hood economic improvement, and individual self-
sufficiency. The Section 3 program requires that
recipients of certain HUD financial assistance, to
the greatest extent feasible, provide job training,
employment, and contracting opportunities for
low- or very-low income residents in connection
with projects and activities in their neighborhoods.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Develop-
ment. Section 3 - Economic Opportunities. Re-
trieved Decemner 23, 2014, from http://portal.
hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?@src=/program_offices/
fair housing equal_opp/section3/section3.

Rutgers Water Resources Program. http://water.
rutgers.edu/

American Rivers. Staying Green: Strategies to
Improve Operations and Maintenance of Green
Infrastructure in Chesapeake Bay Watershed.
http://www. americanrivers.org/assets/pdfs/re-
ports-and-publications/staying-green-strategies-
improve-operations-and-maintenance.pdf

U.S. Census Bureau, 2008-2012 American Com-
munity Survey

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Unemployment in
the New York Area by County - July 2014

Banking on Green: A Look at How Green Infra-
structure Can Save Municipalities Money and Pro-
vide Economic Benefits Community-Wide. A Joint
Report by American Rivers, the Water Environment

127.

128.

129.

130.

132.

133.

Federation, the American Society of Landscape
Architects and ECONorthwest. April 2012.

Household number obtained from U.S. Census
Bureau, 2008-2012 American Community Sur-
vey. A limit of $67,500 income per household was
considered low to moderate income (LMI), which
is the low-income limit for a household with 4 in-
dividuals.

National Flood Insurance Program Reform — Fre-
quently Asked Questions. FEMA. hitps://www.
fema.gov/region-vi/national-flood-insurance-
program-reform-frequently-asked-questions

NYC DEP Green Infrastructure Plan Research and
Development. hitp://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/
html/stormwater/nyc_green_infrastructure_pilot_
monitoring _results.shtml

http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/html/retrofitting/
retrofitting2.shtml

. NYS Department of Health. Residential Oil Spills

and Flooding. http://www. health. ny.gov/environ-
mental/emergency/flood/.

NY Department of Health. http://www.health.
ny.gov/environmental/indoors/air/flood_check-
list.htm

In estimating the job-years created by direct gov-
ernment spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the
simple rule provided by the Office of the Presi-
dent Council of Economic Advisors that $92,000
creates one job year. This procedure is somewhat
crude and does not take into account the obvious
differences in wages and other costs across dif-
ferent types of projects and across different parts
of the country. It does, however, take into account
the key difference between tax changes or state
fiscal relief, and direct government investment
spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and
conservatism. Because it is derived to be consis-
tent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it
minimizes discrepancies between the aggregate
jobs estimates across the various geographies.
Estimates of Job Creation from the American Re-
covery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, EXECUTIVE
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT COUNCIL OF ECO-
NOMIC ADVISERS, May 2009.
134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

RAND Center for Catastrophic Risk Management
and compensation. 2013. Flood Insurance in New
York City Following Hurricane Sandy. http://www.
rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_re-
ports/RR300/RR328/RAND_RR328.pdf

National Flood Insurance Program Reform — Fre-
quently Asked Questions. FEMA. hitps://www.
fema.gov/region-vi/national-flood-insurance-
program-reform-frequently-asked-questions

RAND Center for Catastrophic Risk Management
and compensation. 2013. Flood Insurance in New
York city Following Hurricane Sandy. http://www.
rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_re-
ports/RR300/RR328/RAND_RR328.pdf

National Flood Insurance Program Reform — Fre-
quently Asked Questions. FEMA. hitps://www.
fema.gov/region-vi/national-flood-insurance-
program-reform-frequently-asked-questions

The FEMA FIRM Preliminary 100-year flood zone
was overlaid on NYC DCP’s PLUTO Data. Proper-
ty value reflects 2014 market values. These mar-
ket values were calculated by converting PLUTO
data assessed values to market values using a
state equalization rate provided by the New York
State Office of Real Property Tax Services.

Business revenues were estimated using IMPLAN
2008 economic output for Queens County (www.
implan.com). The number of businesses were ob-
tained from the County Business Patterns for 2008
(http://censtats. census. gov/cgi-bin/cbpnaic/cb-
psect. pl).

U.S. Census Bureau, 2008-2012 American Com-
munity Survey

http://www.euro.who. int/en/data-and-evidence/
evidence-informed-policy-making/publications/
hen-summaries-of-network-members-reports/
what-are-the-human-health-consequences-of-
flooding-and-the-strategies-to-reduce-them

Source: Aerts et al. Annals of The New York Acad-
emy Of Sciences. Issue: Cost Estimates for Flood
Resilience and Protection Strategies in New York

City. 2013

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

Mayor's Office of Long Term Planning and Sus-
tainability. PlaNYC. 2007. http://www.nyc.gov/
html/planyc/html/about/about.shtm

NYC Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resil-
iency. A Stronger, More Resilient New York. 2012.
http://www.nyc.gov/html/sirr/html/home/home.
shtml

http://www.solarcity.com/residential/benefits- of-
solar-energy

In estimating the job-years created by direct gov-
ernment spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the
simple rule provided by the Office of the Presi-
dent Council of Economic Advisors that $92,000
creates one job year. This procedure is somewhat
crude and does not take into account the obvious
differences in wages and other costs across dif-
ferent types of projects and across different parts
of the country. It does, however, take into account
the key difference between tax changes or state
fiscal relief, and direct government investment
spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and
conservatism. Because it is derived to be consis-
tent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it
minimizes discrepancies between the aggregate
jobs estimates across the various geographies.
Estimates of Job Creation from the American Re-
covery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, EXECUTIVE
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT COUNCIL OF ECO-
NOMIC ADVISERS, May 2009.

NY Daily News. Federal funds sorely needed
for Queens infrastructure, pols say. http://www.
nydailynews.com/new-york/queens/federal-
funds-sorely-needed-queens-infrastructure-pols-
article-1.364153

In estimating the job-years created by direct gov-
ernment spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the
simple rule provided by the Office of the Presi-
dent Council of Economic Advisors that $92,000
creates one job year. This procedure is somewhat
crude and does not take into account the obvious
differences in wages and other costs across dif-
ferent types of projects and across different parts
of the country. It does, however, take into account
the key difference between tax changes or state
fiscal relief, and direct government investment
spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

149.

conservatism. Because it is derived to be consis-
tent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it
minimizes discrepancies between the aggregate
jobs estimates across the various geographies.
Estimates of Job Creation from the American Re-
covery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, EXECUTIVE
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT COUNCIL OF ECO-
NOMIC ADVISERS, May 2009.

http://newyork.cbslocal.com/2012/12/30/sev-
eral-injured-when-car-plunges-into-marsh-near-
ifk/. http://nypost.com/2009/05/27 /fatal-crash-
spurs-calls-to-widen-snake-road/.

Section V: Additional Materials 197
Idlewild Watershed Communities

F. Glossary

Base Flood Elevation (BFE)

Water surface elevation corresponding to a flood
having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in a given year (100-year floodplain).

BMPs
Best Management Practices

Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool
(“Risk Assessment Tool”)

The Risk score for each group of assets is
determined by multiplying its hazard, exposure
and vulnerability values (Risk = Hazard x
Exposure x Vulnerability). The Coastal Hazard
and Risk Assessment Tool automatically
generates this risk score, which represents
the relative risk of the Community. Risk scores
include some subjective analysis and should not
be compared from one Community to another.
Risk scores can range from 1.5, the lowest score
reflecting negligible or ‘residual’ risk, to 75,
the highest score reflecting severe risk. These
ranges are broken down as follows:

Residual (Risk Score <6}: Residual risk scores
result from both low exposure and vulnerability,
however if assets are critical or have a very high
Community value, actions may be warranted to
reduce their risk.

Moderate (Risk Score 6 - 23): A moderate risk
score represents that the assets may suffer
moderate to serious storm impacts, but that
adaptation may be of a lower priority because
either exposure or vulnerability are low

198 Section V: Additional Materials

High (Risk Score 24 - 53}: Risk scores in the
high range are indicative of conditions that
could lead to significant negative impacts from
a storm, and actions should be taken to reduce
the assets’ vulnerability and restore the assets’
coastal protections.

Severe (Risk Score >53): A severe risk score
represents that the assets are in a dangerous
situation and that both exposure and
vulnerability should be reduced.

« Risk scores help identify assets with
increased potential for storm damage
and serve as one of many factors that
helped the Committee to determine the
potential projects to include and prioritize
in the NYRCR Plan; see section IV for
further discussion on Project Prioritization.
In addition to the risk score, other
contributing factors in determining which
assets should be addressed and how
immediately they should be addressed
include:

«The assets’ contribution to life safety,

= If the asset(s} are critical or locally
significant,

«The assets’ Community value,

« — Environmental services provided by the
assets,

«= Economic contribution of the assets,

«Availability or alternative assets or facilities,
and

«= The capacity of the assets to adapt.

The Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment
Tool measures against a 100-year storm,
or a Hazard Score of 3. The Hazard score is
based on the likelihood an event would occur
and the magnitude (destructive capacity) of
the event. For the purpose of preparing a NY
Rising Community Reconstruction Plan, NY
State recommends that Bay Park/East Rockaway
consider a 100-year storm (1% annual chance).
Because the magnitude of storm events increases
as the likelihood decreases (100-year storms
have higher magnitude than 10-year storms),
the Hazard score increases as the likelihood
goes down. Therefore, the Coastal Hazard and
Risk Assessment Tool is calibrated to a 100-year
storm. Although the NYRCR Plan seeks to protect
against a 100-year storm, equally important is
protecting against smaller, more frequent storm
events such as the 10-year storm, which has a
10% chance of occurrence each year. Several
projects may not have risk reduction benefits,
measured by the Tool or qualitatively, for the
10-year storm. These benefits are described
qualitatively.

CBO
Community-Based Organization

Community Assets

Identified assets are places or facilities where
economic, environmental and social functions
occur or are critical infrastructure required to
support those functions. These assets were
identified by the NYRCR Committee and
residents and are grouped into the following
categories: Economic, Housing, Health and
Social Services, Infrastructure, Natural and
Cultural Resources, and Socially Vulnerable
Populations.

Community Based Organization
A non-profit organization that operates within a
local community.

CDBG-DR
Community Development Block Grant-Disaster
Recovery

HUD provides flexible grants to help cities,
counties, and States recover from Presidentially
declared disasters, especially in low-income
areas, subject to availability of supplemental
appropriations. CDBG-DR is a type of funding
appropriated by congress to help rebuild and
provide seed money for recovery activities.
Further information on CDBG-DR funds and
other disaster recovery grants is available at
hitp://portal.hud.gow/.

CDFI
Community Development Financial Institution

A financial institution that provides credit and
financial services within underserved markets
and communities.

CERT
Community Emergency Response Team

An organization composed of volunteers trained
and tasked with providing supplementary
emergency care during a major disaster.

COAD
Community Organizations Active in Disaster

cso
Combined Sewer Outtall

Water pollution caused by large variations of
flow in a sewer system that collects both sanitary
sewage and stormwater runoff in a single pipe
system.

CWP
New York City Comprehensive Waterfront
Plan—Vision 2020

DMV
Department of Motor Vehicles

EQA
Eastern Queens Alliance

FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency

FDNY
New York City Fire Department

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)

The official map of a community on which
FEMA has delineated both the special hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.

FTE
Full Time Equivalent

Green Infrastructure
General name given to an approach using

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

environmentally friendly techniques to manage
stormwater.

Grey Infrastructure

Facilities that are constructued to take storm-
water and sewage away from roads and
buildings, typically including sewers and storm
sewers.

HUD

U.S. Department
Development

of Housing and Urban

HVAC
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning

IBID
Industrial Business Improvement District

JFK
John F Kennedy International Airport

JSPOA
Jamaica Service Program for Older Adults

JWS
Jamaica Water Supply Company

LIRR
Long Island Railroad

LISC
Local Initiatives Support Corporation

MTA
Metropolitan Transportation Authority

Section V: Additional Materials 199
Idlewild Watershed Communities

NAVD88

NICE
Nassau Inter County Express

NFIP
National Flood Insurance Program

NOAA
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration

NORC
Naturally Occurring Retirement Community

NWS

National Weather Service

NYC DOB
New York City Department of Buildings

NYC DCP
New York City Department of City Planning

NYC DCAS
New York City Department
Administrative Services

of Citywide

NYC DEP
New York City Department of Environmental
Protection

NYC DDC

New York City Department of Design and
Construction

200 Section V: Additional Materials

NYC DOT
New York City Department of Transportation

NYC DPR
New York City Department of Parks and
Recreation

NYC EDC
New York City Economic Development
Corporation
NYC HPD
New York City Department of Housing

Preservation and Development

NYC OEM
New York City Office of Emergency Management

NYC SBS
New York City Small Business Services

NYPD
New York City Police Department

NYRCR Program
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

NYRCR Committee

The NYRCR Planning Committee is composed
of local civically minded residents and was
established to help develop a plan that
accurately reflects the Community and_ its
needs. The NYRCR Committee worked closely
with the appropriate municipal, non-profit and
consultant representatives to identify a vision,
goals and objectives for the NYRCR Plan. The
Committee actively advised on all aspects of the
project and will help shape the overall direction

of the NYRCR Plan and the actions that flow
from it. The members of the Committee were
not paid, and were required to follow a detailed
code of ethics provided by New York State.

NYRCR Community

The NYRCR Community planning area follows
the Census-designated place boundary for Bay
Park and the Village of East Rockaway. This
boundary has been reviewed and accepted by
the NYRCR Committee.

NYRCR Project Categories

Proposed Projects: Projects proposed for funding
through the NYRCR Community’s allotment of
CDBG-DR funding.

Featured Projects: Innovative projects where
an initial study or discrete first phase of the
project is proposed for CDBG-DR funding or
other identified funding; and regulatory reforms
and other programs that do not involve capital
expenditures.

Additional — Resiliency © Recommendations:
Resiliency projects and actions the NYRCR
Committee would like to highlight for further
consideration.

NYS CZMP
New York State Coastal Zone Management
Program

NYS DOS
New York State Department of State

NYS DEC
New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation
PANYNJ
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey

QEDC
Queens Economic Development Corporation

Recovery Support Functions

The Recovery Support Functions (RSFs} comprise
the National Disaster Recovery Framework’s
(NDRF’s) coordinating structure for key
functional areas of assistance. Their purpose
is to support local governments by facilitating
problem solving, improving access to resources
and by fostering coordination among State and
Federal agencies, nongovernmental partners
and stakeholders.

The six RSFs are: “Community Planning
and Capacity Building,” “Economic
Development,” “Health and Social Services,”
“Housing,” “Infrastructure,” and “Natural and
Cultural Resources.”

Risk Reduction Benefits

A qualitative analysis of reduction in risk to
assets that results from implementation of
each potential NYRCR project was prepared
for each project. Three factors contribute to
risk: hazard, exposure and vulnerability. The
Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool
was utilized, where applicable, to quantify
risk reduction benefits. The Tool was assumed
to apply to implementation projects within the
theme ‘Coastal Protection,’ as it is intended to
measure the risk for coastal communities and
test whether various projects would reduce the
risk to those assets. In this case, a snapshot of
reduction in the risk score to assets is provided.
Where the Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment

Tool do not apply, Risk Reduction benefits were
described in terms of the qualitative mitigation
of hazard, exposure and vulnerability.

Risk reduction benefits consider the population
positively impacted by the project, either
directly or indirectly. This population can be
local or regional, ranging from a discrete
street to the NYRCR Community. While this
plan evaluates the potential risk reduction
benefits, actual benefits may vary depending
on project design and circumstances arising
during implementation; the Final NYRCR Plan
does not provide a guarantee of risk reduction,
but rather a projected, and intended, benefit to
minimizing risk for a given population.

Risk Reduction Benefits resulting from the
proposed project were qualitatively evaluated
using ESRI Community Analyst. Population data
was gathered at the census tract or block group
level depending on the size of the project. If
the project was expected to have very localized
effects in an area that was much smaller than
a block group, a polygon was drawn manually
in ESRI to serve as the study area and the data
corresponding to that polygon was used instead.
The size of the study area was determined based
on the project description. The specific data set
used was from the Demographic and Income
Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013 based
on U.S. Census Bureau 2010 Census data.

Some projects, such as select capacity building
or economic development projects, may not
directly reduce risk, however they provide
other significant benefits to the Bay Park/East
Rockaway Community in the categories below.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Economic Benefits: Economic _ benefits
considered for the purpose of the NYRCR Plan
include estimated permanent and temporary
jobs secured or added, contribution to a Regional
Economic Development Plan, — estimated
potential increase in economic activity (as
applicable), and net effect on local government
expenditures for disaster recovery (such as
reduced emergency and recovery costs).

In estimating the job-years created by direct
government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes
the simple rule provided by the Office of the
President Council of Economic Advisors that
$92,000 creates one job-year. This procedure
is somewhat crude and does not take into
account the obvious differences in wages and
other costs across different types of projects and
across different parts of the country. It does;
however, take into account the key difference
between tax changes or state fiscal relief, and
direct government investment spending. The
rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism.
Because it is derived to be consistent with the
macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes
discrepancies between the aggregate jobs
estimates across the various geographies.

Environmental Benefits: Environmental
Benefits of potential NYRCR projects include
the environmental assets secured by the
potential project, as well as the environmental
remediation or cleanup provided by the project
and open space created by the project. Each
project was evaluated for its impacts on high-
priority habitat defined as a habitat type with
unique or significant value to one or more
species, threatened and endangered species,
migration or habitat connectivity. Benefits to

Section V: Additional Materials 201
Idlewild Watershed Communities

environmental quality were also noted, such as
improving air, surface and ground water quality.

Health and Social Benefits: Health and Social
Benefits resulting from the proposed project were
qualitatively evaluated using ESRI Community
Analyst. Population data was gathered at the
census tract or block group level depending
on the size of the project. If the project was
expected to have very localized effects in an
area that was much smaller than a block group,
a polygon was drawn manually in ESRI to serve
as the study area and the data corresponding to
that polygon was used instead. The size of the
study area was determined based on the project
description. The specific data set used was from
the Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI}
ESRI Forecasts for 2013 based on U.S. Census
Bureau 2010 Census data.

Projects were evaluated for their health and
social services benefits to the Community by
considering the following benefit types:

“Overall population with improved access
to health and social services facilities” was
reported as the entire population of the area
(census tract, block group or polygon) that
would benefit from the proposed project. The
population was reported regardless of whether
the project actually involves a health and social
services asset because presumably all projects
would improve access to facilities in one form
or another.

“Type and population size of socially vulnerable
population secured” was evaluated across four
categories of socially vulnerable populations:

202 Section V: Additional Materials

= poverty/low income (annual household
income less than $35,000);

«elderly population (over age 65 years};
and

= minority population.

“Population served by essential health and social
services facilities that are secured to provide or
continue service during acute events as a result
of the action”, was considered to be applicable
only if the project itself proposed an action
that directly affected/pertained to a health and
social services facility. (Health and social services
facilities were previously identified/determined
during the asset inventory). If the project
directly impacted a health and social services
facility, that facility (asset) was noted, and the
population of the entire area (as reported under
the previous criteria) can be considered to be
the “population served”.

Risk Assessment Map Risk Areas (NYS DOS)
Extreme Risk Areas: Areas currently at risk of
frequent inundation, vulnerable to erosion in
the next 40 years, or likely to be inundated in
the future due to sea level rise. Extreme Risk
Areas include:

FEMA V zone.
Shallow Coastal Flooding per National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

(NOAA) National Weather Service’s (NWS)
advisory threshold.

Natural protective feature areas susceptible
to erosion.

Sea level rise - Added three feet to the mean
higher high water (MHHW) level shoreline

and extended this elevation inland to point of
intersection with ground surface.

High Risk Areas: Areas outside the Extreme
Risk Area that are currently at infrequent risk of
inundation or at future risk from sea level rise.
High Risk Areas include:

Area bounded by the 1% annual flood risk zone
(FEMA V and A zones). Often referred to as base
flood or 100-year flood, this is the area that has
a 1% chance of inundation from a flood event
in any given year.

Sea level rise - Added three feet to NOAA
NWS coastal flooding advisory threshold
and extended this elevation inland to point of
intersection with ground surface.

Moderate Risk Areas: Areas outside the Extreme
and High Risk Areas but currently at moderate
risk of inundation from infrequent events or at
risk in the future from sea level rise. Moderate
Risk Areas include:

Area bounded by the 0.2% annual risk (500
year) flood zone, where available.

Sea level rise - Added 3 feet to the Base Flood
Elevation for the current 1%

Annual risk flood event and extended this
elevation inland to point of intersection with
ground surface.

Area bounded by the Sea, Lake, and Overland
Surges from Hurricanes (SLOSH) category 3
hurricane inundation zone (NOAA NWS}.

ROW
Right of Way Bioswale
SCA
School Construction Authority

SPDES
New York — State
Elimination System

Pollutant Discharge

Socially Vulnerable Populations

The NYRCR Program Guidance notes that
“Socially vulnerable populations” may be defined
by the following criteria: poverty/low income,
racial/ethnic minority status, immigrant status,
education level, institutionalization, renter-
occupied household status, single senior-citizen
household status” (NYRCR Program Guidance
to Firms Project Evaluation, 12/30/2013).

Spring AWPCP
Spring Auxiliary
Control Plant

Creek Water Pollution

Subwatershed

TPL
Trust for Public Land

Urban heat island effect

Urban heat islands develop in areas with dry,
impermeable surfaces such as buildings, roads,
and other infrastructure. Heat islands tend to
occur in urban areas with a large area of roof
coverage and pavement, causing temperatures
that are higher than surrounding rural areas.

USACE
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

U.S. EPA
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

U.S. SBA
U.S. Small Business Administration

UWAS
Urban Waterfront Adaptive Strategies

WPCP
Water Pollution Control Plant

WRP
The New York City Waterfront Revitalization
Program

WWTP
Wastewater Treatment Plant

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section V: Additional Materials

203
