Lido Beach/Point Lookout
Community Reconstruction Plan
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

March 2014

This document was developed by the NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Lido Beach/Point Lookout Planning Committee as part of the
NYRCR Program within the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR
Program is supported by the New York State (NYS) Homes and Community
Renewal, NYS Department of State, and NYS Department of Transportation.
The document was prepared by the following consultant firms:


URS Corporation



The LiRo Group



Sustainable Long Island



Planning4Places, LLC



Aim Development



Two Twelve

Members of the NYRCR Planning Committee:


Denis Collins, co-chair



Adeline Quinn, co-chair



Donald Kelly



Elizabeth Kelly



Thomas Doheny



Pauline Seremetis



Darlene Haut



Jeremy Thornton

Municipal Liaison


Representative from Nassau County Department of Public Works

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Foreword
Introduction
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in August 2011, the State
of New York experienced three extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the lives of
New Yorkers and their communities. These tragic disasters signaled that New
Yorkers are living in a new reality defined by rising sea levels and extreme
weather events that will occur with increased frequency and power. They
also signaled that we need to rebuild our communities in a way that will
mitigate against future risks and build increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo led the charge
to develop an innovative, community-driven planning program on a scale
unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program empowers the State’s most impacted
communities with the technical expertise needed to develop thorough and
implementable reconstruction plans to build physically, socially, and
economically resilient and sustainable communities.
Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo in April of 2013, is a
more than $650 million planning and implementation process established to
provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities severely
damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy.
Drawing on lessons learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program
is a unique combination of bottom-up community participation and Stateprovided technical expertise. This powerful combination recognizes not only
that community members are best positioned to assess the needs and
opportunities of the places where they live and work, but also that decisions
are best made when they are grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by
the latest innovative solutions.
One hundred and two storm-affected localities across the State were
originally designated to participate in the NYRCR Program. The State has
allocated each locality between $3 million and $25 million to implement
eligible projects identified in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for these projects
is provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

Foreword

(HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
program.1
Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising one or more of the 102
localities, were created and led by a NYRCR Planning Committee composed
of local residents, business owners, and civic leaders. Members of the
Planning Committees were identified in consultation with established local
leaders, community organizations, and in some cases municipalities. The
NYRCR Program sets a new standard for community participation in recovery
and resiliency planning, with community members leading the planning
process. Across the State, more than 500 New Yorkers represent their
communities by serving on Planning Committees. More than 400 Planning
Committee Meetings have been held, during which Planning Committee
members worked with the State’s NYRCR Program team to develop
community reconstruction plans and identify opportunities to make their
communities more resilient. All meetings were open to the public. An
additional 125-plus Public Engagement Events attracted thousands of
community members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR planning
process and proposals. The NYRCR Program’s outreach has included
communities that are traditionally underrepresented, such as immigrant
populations and students. All planning materials are posted on the NYRCR
Program’s website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several
ways for community members and the public to submit feedback on
materials in progress.
Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were supported by
staff from the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR), planners from
New York State (NYS) Department of State (DOS) and NYS Department of
Transportation (DOT), and consultants from world-class planning firms that
specialize in engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green infrastructure, and
more.
With the January 2014 announcement of the NYRCR Program’s expansion to
include 22 new localities, the program comprises over 2.7 million New

1

Five of the 102 localities in the program—Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and
Montgomery Counties—are not funded through the CDBG-DR program.

Page i

Foreword

Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent to 14% of
the overall State population and 12% of the State’s overall geography.

a series of comprehensive reconstruction and resiliency strategies, and
identified projects and implementation actions to help fulfill those strategies.

The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR Plan. Governor Cuomo
has allocated over $650 million of funding to the program for implementing
projects identified in the NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Communities are also eligible
for additional funds through the program’s NY Rising to the Top Competition,
which evaluates NYRCR Communities across eight categories, including best
use of technology in the planning process, best approach to resilient
economic growth, and best use of green infrastructure to bolster resilience.
The winning NYRCR Community in each category will be allocated an
additional $3 million of implementation funding. The NYRCR Program is also
working with both private and public institutions to identify existing funding
sources and create new funding opportunities where none existed before.

The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan are divided into three
categories. The order in which the projects and actions are listed in this
NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the NYRCR Community’s
prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects
proposed for funding through a NYRCR Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR
funding. Featured Projects are projects and actions that the Planning
Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and has
analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through the NYRCR
Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are projects and
actions that the Planning Committee would like to highlight and that are not
categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects. The Proposed
Projects and Featured Projects found in this NYRCR Plan were voted for
inclusion by official voting members of the Planning Committee. Those voting
members with conflicts of interest recused themselves from voting on any
affected projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics Handbook and Code of
Conduct.

The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated with State and Federal
agencies to help guide the development of feasible projects. The program
has leveraged the Regional Economic Development Council’s State Agency
Review Teams (SARTs), comprised of representatives from dozens of State
agencies and authorities, for feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR
Communities. The SARTs review projects with an eye toward regulatory and
permitting needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources.
The NYRCR Program is continuing to work with the SARTs to streamline the
permitting process and ensure shovels are in the ground as quickly as
possible.
On the pages that follow, you will see the results of months of thoughtful,
diligent work by NYRCR Planning Committee, passionately committed to
realizing a brighter, more resilient future for their Community.
The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more resilient
community. Each NYRCR Planning Committee began the planning process by
defining the scope of its planning area, assessing storm damage, and
identifying critical issues. Next, the Planning Committee inventoried critical
assets in the community and assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On the
basis of this work, the Planning Committee described recovery and resiliency
needs and identified opportunities. The Planning Committee then developed

Foreword

NYRCR Lido Beach/Point Lookout is eligible for up to $6 million in CDBG-DR
implementation funds.2
While developing projects for inclusion in this NYRCR Plan, Planning
Committee took into account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the
effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical
assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committee also
considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be eligible
for CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented with this source of
Federal funding must fall into a Federally-designated eligible activity
category, fulfill a national objective (meeting an urgent need, removing
slums and blight, or benefiting low to moderate income individuals), and
have a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding is linked. These are
among the factors that the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery will
consider, in consultation with local municipalities and nonprofit organizations,
when determining which projects and actions are best positioned for
implementation.
2

The following localities’ allocations comprise the NYRCR Community’s total allocation: Lido
Beach - $3 million; Point Lookout - $3 million.

Page ii

Foreword

The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR
Community’s CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed
Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review, HUD
eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the
projects and actions found in this NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan
does not guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for
CDBG‐DR funding or that it will be implemented. The Governor’s Office of
Storm Recovery will actively seek to match projects with funding sources.
In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions outlined
in this NYRCR Plan will become a reality helping New York not only to
rebuild, but also to build back better.

Foreword

Page iii

Foreword
NYRCR Communities

Find out more at
www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr
Note: map includes those NYRCR Communities funded through the CDBG-DR program, including the NYRCR Communities announced in January 2014.

Foreword

Page iv

Table of Contents

Executive Summary

ES-1

A. Overview

ES-1

B. Working together to rebuild stronger, smarter, and safer

ES-3

C. Blueprint for implementation

ES-4

Section I: Community overview

1

A. Geographic scope of NYRCR Plan

2

B. Description of storm damage

8

C. Critical issues

12

D. Community vision

15

E. Relationship to regional plans

16

F. Regional perspectives

17

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

19

A. Description of community assets and assessment of risk

20

B. Assessment of needs and opportunities

31

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies 39
A. Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles
A. Proposed Projects

Table of Contents

Revetment Repair and Reconstruction

53

Tidal Backflow Prevention and Stormwater Treatment

57

Drainage Improvements

61

Repair Dunes and Construct Dune Walkovers

66

Critical Facility Resiliency

70

Evacuation Education/Outreach Program and Lifeline Safety Plan

74

B. Featured Projects

78

Alternative Stormwater Opportunities

80

Shoreline and Marsh Restoration and Open Space Protection

84

Encourage Stormwater Capture during Sidewalk Replacement

87

Section V: Additional materials

89

A. Additional resiliency recommendations

91

B. Master table of projects

93

C. Public engagement process

97

D. Community asset inventory

100

E. Endnotes

104

F. Glossary

109

40

48
51

Page v

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figures
Figure ES-1: Geographic Scope of the Lido Beach and Point
Lookout NRHCR Plan
Figure ES-2: NYRCR Lido Beach/Point Lookout Vision Statement
Figure I-1: Location of Lido Beach and Point Lookout
Figure I-2: Geographic Scope of the Lido Beach and Point Lookout
NYRCR Plan
Figure I-3: Topographic Map of Lido Beach and Point Lookout
Figure I-4: Lido Boulevard, Lido Beach, October 2012
Figure I-5: Hurricane Irene Storm Surge Area
Figure I-6: Superstorm Sandy Extent of Flooding
Figure I-7: Lido Towers, September 2013
Figure I-8: East Marina, Point Lookout, October 2012
Figure I-9: Ponding at catch basin after minor rainstorm, Regent
Drive at Reynolds Drive, Lido Beach, November 2013
Figure I-10: Lack of vegetation on dunes, Lido Beach, September
2013
Figure I-11: Rubble revetment, Point Lookout, September 2013
Figure II-1: Public Engagement Event, Lido Beach, October 2013
Figure II-2: Point Lookout Fire Station is an example of a Health
and Social Services Asset, September 2013
Figure II-3: Asset Inventory Map
Figure II-4: Camp Anchor, September 2013
Figure II-5: Risk Assessment Mapent Map
Figure II-6: West Marina, a key economic asset identified by the
Committee and the public, Point Lookout, September
2013
Figure II-7: Asset Assessment Scoring Map
Figure II-8: Commercial development, Point Lookout, September
2013
Figure II-9: West Marina, Point Lookout, September 2013
Figure II-10: Bellmore Avenue, Point Lookout, September 2013

Table of Contents

ES-2
ES-4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
12
13
14
15
21
22
26
27
28

29
30
32
33
34

Figure II-11: Solar photovoltaic panels on roof of adult group
home, Lido Beach, September 2013
Figure II-12: Long Beach Middle School, Lido Beach, September
2013
Figure II-13: Catch basin at Long Beach High School, November
2013
Figure II-14: Remaining sand dune, Point Lookout, September
2013
Figure IV-1: Location of Proposed Projects
Figure IV-2: Existing stone revetment, looking north
Figure IV-3: Example of stone revetment construction
Figure IV-4: Revetment Repair and Reconstruction Project Location
Figure IV-5: Example of outfall backflow prevention
Figure IV-6: Tidal Backflow Prevention and Stormwater Treatment
Project Location
Figure IV-7: Example of potential stormwater system
improvements
Figure IV-8: Drainage Improvements Project Location
Figure IV-9: Example of existing accessible dune walkover,
September 2013
Figure IV-10: Repair Dunes and Construct Dune Walkovers Project
Location
Figure IV-11: Lido–Point Lookout Fire District, Lido Beach Station
Figure IV-12: Lido–Point Lookout Fire District, Point Lookout
Station
Figure IV-13: Point Lookout Volunteer Fire Company
Figure IV-14: Critical Facility Resiliency Project Location
Figure IV-15: Evacuation Education/Outreach Program and Lifeline
Safety Plan Project Location
Figure IV-16: Locations of Featured Projects
Figure IV-17: Example of stormwater management system
Figure IV-18: Alternative Stormwater Opportunities Project
Location

Page vi

34
35
37
38
52
53
56
56
57
60
62
65
66
69
70
70
70
73
77
79
80
83

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure IV-19: Shoreline and Marsh Restoration and Open Space
Protection Project Location
Figure IV-20: Example of stormwater management system best
practice underneath sidewalk
Figure V-1: Committee Meeting on September 24, 2013
Figure V-2: Public Engagement Meeting on October 15, 2013

86
87
97
98

Tables
Table ES-1: Table of Projects
Table I-1: DHAP Damage Registrations for Owner-Occupied
Housing
Table I-2: DHAP Damage Registrations for Renter-Occupied
Housing
Table II-1: Asset Inventory
Table III-1: Strategy 1 – Proposed Projects
Table III-2: Strategy 2 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Table III-3: Strategy 3 – Proposed Project
Table III-4: Strategy 4 – Proposed Project
Table III-5: Strategy 5 – Proposed Project
Table III-6: Strategy 6 – Featured Project
Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Table V-2: Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional
Resiliency Recommendations
Table V-3: Community Asset Inventory

Table of Contents

ES-6
11
11
23
41
42
43
44
45
46
92
94
101

Page vii

Executive Summary
A. Overview
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program was established
to provide additional rebuilding and revitalization assistance to communities
severely damaged by Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical
Storm Lee. Through the NYRCR Program, New York State is assisting
communities to rebuild better and safer based on community-driven plans
that consider current damage, future threats to community assets, and the
community’s economic future. There are 13 communities in Nassau County
participating in the NYRCR Program and all but one of the communities is
located on the South Shore of Long Island. These coastal communities were
hit hard by Superstorm Sandy.
The communities of Lido Beach and Point Lookout are located on a Barrier
Island along the South Shore of Nassau County (Figure ES-1). Lido Beach
and Point Lookout are two hamlets in the Town of Hempstead. Both
communities were heavily damaged by Superstorm Sandy. Through the
NYRCR Program, the NYRCR Lido Beach/ Point Lookout Community
(Community) has been allocated up to $6 million ($3 million each for Lido
Beach and Point Lookout) for the implementation of resiliency projects
identified in this plan. The geographic scope of the Community includes all of
Lido Beach—from its border with the City of Long Beach at Maple Boulevard
to the shared border of Point Lookout at the Town Park at Malibu—and all of
Point Lookout—from the Town Park at Malibu on the west to Jones Inlet on
the east. The communities are bounded by Reynolds Channel to the north
and the Atlantic Ocean to the south.
Storm impacts
Superstorm Sandy struck New York on October 29, 2012. It was the largest
storm to land ashore in New York’s history. A high water mark of 10.2 feet
was recorded by the U.S. Geological Survey in the Lido Dunes neighborhood
of Lido Beach. Floodwater from the bayfront met floodwater from the ocean
in both communities. Lido Boulevard, a major thoroughfare and the primary
evacuation route for Point Lookout, Lido Beach, and the adjacent City of
Long Beach was covered by more than a foot of water. Flooding was

Executive Summary

exacerbated by additional water forced through the storm drain outfalls on
the bay back through the stormwater system and onto neighborhood streets.
Homes, businesses, and critical facilities throughout Lido Beach and Point
Lookout sustained flood damage. According to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s Disaster Housing Assistance Program, residents
reported more than $10.5 million in damages to homes. The Lido Towers, a
five-story condominium on the oceanfront, was flooded up to the ceiling of
the first floor and suffered foundation damage.
Critical facilities throughout both communities were damaged by the storm.
The Long Beach Elementary School/Pre-K Center, Long Beach Middle School,
and School District Offices, all located in Lido Beach, were damaged by
floodwater, which forced schools to close for several weeks and children to
be bussed to schools off the island. The District Offices were heavily
damaged and are still closed. All three fire stations in the Community
sustained damage. Flooding at the Lido–Point Lookout Fire District Lido
Beach Fire Station reached a depth of 4 feet inside the building. The Point
Lookout Rescue Company, located on Reynolds Channel, was so heavily
damaged by flooding that it has been decommissioned by the Fire District.
Power was disrupted throughout both communities, resulting in the loss of
electricity to homes. Both communities were without electricity for nearly 2
weeks and without natural gas for several days. Cellular communication was
intermittent as a result of damage to communication equipment. Effectively,
Lido Beach and Point Lookout were isolated for almost 2 weeks following the
storm.
Superstorm Sandy impacted the local economy by damaging commercial
areas, including the waterfront along Reynolds Channel in Point Lookout and
the Town Parks along the oceanfront. Some businesses were closed for
nearly a year after the storm.
Natural areas in both communities also suffered damage due to the storm.
Reynolds Channel, located along the bayfront of both communities, was
reported by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to have at least 40 vessels
sunk in its waters as a result of Superstorm Sandy. The Lido Beach Passive

Page ES-1

Lido Beach/Point Lookout

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure ES-1:

Executive Summary

Geographic Scope of the Lido Beach and Point Lookout NRHCR Plan

Page ES-2

Lido Beach/Point Lookout

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Nature Preserve, the last salt marsh on the Barrier Island, suffered shoreline
erosion and was littered with debris deposited by floodwater. On the
oceanfront, the primary frontal dune at Lido Beach was completely destroyed
from Maple Boulevard to Biarritz Street. The dunes were also breached in
several locations by the storm surge from Lido Beach down to Point Lookout,
allowing floodwater to enter neighborhoods. Superstorm Sandy also
accelerated erosion along the unprotected northeastern and southeastern
tips of Point Lookout.
Critical issues
The aftermath of Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy highlighted the
need to address several issues facing the community to improve the
resiliency of infrastructure and critical facilities and to enhance emergency
preparedness. Critical facilities, including schools and fire stations, and the
stormwater system infrastructure were heavily damaged and remain
vulnerable to damage from future storm events. Natural resources, such as
the marsh and the dunes, also require protection to enhance their resiliency
to future events.
Schools, municipal buildings in Town Parks, and fire houses were hard hit by
Superstorm Sandy and remain vulnerable to future storm events. The Lido–
Point Lookout Fire District has been working to repair facilities and to
improve resiliency to future events.
Access to power and cellular communication during and after an emergency
was identified as a critical issue for Lido Beach and Point Lookout. Power and
cellular outages were widespread during and after Superstorm Sandy. Lack
of power and the inability to communicate increased the isolation of
residents during response efforts.
The inability of stormwater to drain is a major issue for both communities.
Stormwater systems have been damaged in major storm events, including
Superstorm Sandy. In addition, stormwater outfall drains located on the
bayfront are open, allowing tidal water to flow back into the stormwater
system, forcing water through the system and onto streets. The backflow
into the stormwater system causes flooding during normal rainfalls and hightide events and catastrophic system failures during major storm events.
A critical issue facing both communities is the ability for residents to access
evacuation routes. Evacuating prior to a storm event is the first step to

Executive Summary

protecting the health and safety of residents. Lido Boulevard is the only
evacuation route for Lido Beach and Point Lookout residents. Lido Boulevard
was impassable during and after Superstorm Sandy as a result of flooding
because the stormwater system was unable to drain floodwaters. Residents
were unable to evacuate and were forced to remain on the island without
electricity or cellular communication.
Coastal erosion and storm damage to natural protective systems has
increased the vulnerability of both communities to future storm events. The
loss of the primary frontal dune on the western end of Lido Beach and dune
breaches increase the vulnerability of both communities to storm surge and
flooding. Superstorm Sandy accelerated coastal erosion at the northeastern
tip of Point Lookout. A stone and rubble revetment protects most of the
shoreline of Point Lookout along Jones Inlet; however, the revetment does
not continue up to and around the northern end of the community, leaving
residences vulnerable to coastal erosion. The Lido Beach Passive Nature
Preserve also experienced erosion of its shoreline as a result Superstorm
Sandy. The marsh is the last remaining salt marsh on the Barrier Island,
provides habitat for shorebirds, and functions as an area of floodwater
conveyance and storage. The dunes, the northern tip of Point Lookout, and
the marsh areas need protection and enhancement to restore their storm
buffer capacity and other environmental functions.

B. Working together to rebuild stronger,
smarter, and safer
The NYRCR Planning Committee, with input from the public, developed goals
for enhancing resiliency of Community assets that were aligned with the
Community’s core values. The Community developed the Vision Statement in
Figure ES-2 to guide the development of its goals.
Public outreach
The Community Vision Statement and NYRCR Plan recommendations were
shaped in a public engagement process that included 11 Planning Committee
Meetings, 3 Public Engagement Events, and outreach through a variety of
mediums and methods.
The three Public Engagement Events were held from October 2013 through
March 2014 to share project information and solicit feedback from the
Page ES-3

Lido Beach/Point Lookout

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

NYRCR Lido Beach and Point Lookout
Vision Statement
Point Lookout and Lido Beach will continue to be vibrant,
island residential communities that provide a healthy
environment and resilient infrastructure and maintain a
high quality of life for residents and visitors by preserving
natural resources, providing beautiful beaches and other
recreational opportunities, and maintaining a working
waterfront.
Figure ES-2: NYRCR Lido Beach/Point Lookout Vision Statement

Community to shape NYRCR Plan recommendations. The three Public
Engagement Events were each attended by 40 to 45 members of the public.
The first Public Engagement Event, held October 15, 2013, in Lido Beach,
was designed to provide an overview of the NYRCR Program, while engaging
community members in a small group forum for a discussion about a
community vision, community assets, vulnerabilities, and strategies for
making the Community more resilient.
At the second Public Engagement Event, held November 4, 2013, in Lido
Beach, a small group discussion format was used to conduct three interactive
sessions to gather information on the effects of Superstorm Sandy and
identify projects for achieving resiliency, and for residents to select
innovative strategies to pursue. The public identified locations of flooding
events, discussed issues with post-storm communication due to damaged
cellular communications equipment and intermittent coverage, and provided
information about disaster recovery immediately after Superstorm Sandy.
The public also recommended additional strategies for resolving the recovery
issues they identified during the event.
An open house format at the third Public Engagement Event, held February
20, 2014, in Point Lookout, provided nine project stations that included
project boards staffed by subject matter experts in civil engineering and
coastal protection and Planning Committee Members to answer questions.

Executive Summary

The project boards contained illustrations, benefit analyses, maps, and
prompts for the public to facilitate obtaining feedback on the projects.
The final Public Engagement Event, to be held in spring 2014, will present
the final NYRCR plan to the Community.

C. Blueprint for implementation
Goals and associated strategies were developed through the Planning
Committee Meetings, the three Public Engagement Events, an online survey,
an asset inventory, a risk assessment, and a needs and opportunities
analysis for Lido Beach and Point Lookout. Strategies guided the
development of projects to increase the resiliency of assets and reduce
future risk to storm events. Metrics such as resiliency, time frame, and
technical feasibility were used to develop a series of capital projects,
feasibility studies, policy recommendations, and regional cooperation
initiatives for recovering and rebuilding from the impacts of Superstorm
Sandy and Hurricane Irene. The Plan includes three sets of projects to
address critical community needs: Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and
Additional Resiliency Recommendations. NYRCR projects are classified in the
following ways:


Proposed Project: Proposed Projects are proposed for funding
through a Community’s allocation of Community Development Block
Grant–Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding.



Featured Project: Featured Projects are innovative projects for
which an initial study or discrete first phase of the project is
proposed for CDBG-DR funding or other identified funding and
regulatory reforms and other programs that do not involve capital
expenditures.



Additional Resiliency Recommendations: Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are resiliency projects and actions the Committee
would like to highlight and are not categorized as Proposed or
Featured Projects.

All of the projects included in the NYRCR Plan are important to the
Community. Projects for NYRCR Lido Beach and Point Lookout are listed
below in Table ES-1 by strategy (some of the projects fit multiple strategies

Page ES-4

Lido Beach/Point Lookout

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

and are listed more than once). The order of appearance is not a reflection
of project priority or ranking.

Executive Summary

Page ES-5

Lido Beach/Point Lookout

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table ES-1: Table of Projects

Reconstruction and Resiliency
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Project Category

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Revetment Repair/Reconstruction

Construct sections of rock revetment at northeast end of Point Lookout for
protection of homes, businesses, and recreational facilities

Proposed Project

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Repair Dunes & Construct Dune
Walkovers

Fill breaches and repair dunes to prevent tidal surge from flooding streets,
homes, and businesses; construct walkovers to provide beach access

Proposed Project

Improve stormwater drainage

Tidal Backflow Prevention and
Stormwater Treatment

Prevent tidal water from infiltrating low-lying areas at stormwater outfalls
that are partially or fully submerged during high tides and storms, causing
flooding. Reduce contaminants discharged from outfalls.

Proposed Project

Improve stormwater drainage

Drainage Improvements (Phase 3A)

Comprehensive stormwater study to identify improvement areas to reduce
flooding along evacuation routes, primary roadways, low-lying areas, and
economic corridors

Proposed Project

Section 3A (along Lido Boulevard from Maple Boulevard to Harrogate Street,
Lido Beach) will be the first phase of construction.
Improve stormwater drainage

Alternative Stormwater Opportunities

Conduct an analysis of the stormwater management system in the vicinity of
the Town Parks and Nickerson Beach. Design and construct stormwater
management systems at key project locations in Town Parks based on
recommendations of stormwater management system study.

Featured Project

Improve stormwater drainage

Encourage Stormwater Capture during
Sidewalk Replacement

Install stormwater management system under sidewalks when sidewalks are
replaced

Featured Project

Increase resiliency of critical
facilities

Critical Facility Resiliency

Provide resiliency enhancement to emergency service buildings and secure
critical facilities with resiliency enhancements and flood protection

Proposed Project

Meet communication needs preevent

Evacuation Education and Outreach
Program and Lifeline Safety Plan

Develop a Lifeline Safety Plan and establish a program for providing regular
education and outreach about emergency evacuation; includes development
of a reverse 911 system for the Lido–Point Lookout Fire District

Proposed Project

Shoreline and Marsh Restoration and
Open Space Protection

Provide stabilization of the shoreline of the Lido Beach Passive Nature
Preserve and Tidal Salt Marsh with creation of natural habitat

Featured Project

Promote evacuation
Increase resiliency of salt marsh to
coastal erosion

Executive Summary

Page ES-6

Section I:
Community overview

Section I:
Community overview
The State of New York has developed the New York Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program, an innovative post-disaster planning
process, to help communities rebuild better and safer.
The NYRCR Lido Beach/Point Lookout Planning Committee (Committee) is
composed of community representatives from Lido Beach and Point Lookout
partnered with planning experts from the Governor’s Office of Storm
Recovery and New York State Department of State. The Committee used a
community-based planning process to develop an NYRCR Plan that
addresses repairing existing damage and mitigating future threats to create a
safer and more resilient community. The Committee developed the NYRCR
Plan in coordination with the State Planner, State Region Lead, and
Consultant Team through Committee meetings, Public Engagement Events,
and meetings with stakeholder representatives.

Center provided primary and specialty medical care for the area until it was
severely damaged by Superstorm Sandy, and it has remained closed since
the storm. The City of Long Beach School District serves both Lido Beach and
Point Lookout. Lido Elementary School / Long Beach Pre-K Center, Long
Beach Middle School, and Long Beach High School are in Lido Beach.
Further, the City of Long Beach wastewater treatment plant receives sanitary
sewage from Lido Beach.
Topographically, Lido Beach and Point Lookout slope downward from the
ocean to the bay (Figure I-3). The high point on the island north of Lido
Boulevard is artificial and was part of the Nike Missile Base, which was
operated from 1955 until 1963 by the U.S. Department of Defense. The Nike
Missile Base used rock and soil to elevate an area that is now used for Long
Beach School District bus parking to about 14 feet above mean sea level.

A. Geographic scope of NYRCR Plan

Lido Beach

The NYRCR Planning Committee for the hamlets of Lido Beach and Point
Lookout identified both communities in their entirety as the geographic scope
for the purposes of the Lido Beach/Point Lookout NYRCR Community
Reconstruction Plan (NYRCR Plan). This geographic scope, referred to as the
NYRCR Community, incurred substantial damage during Superstorm Sandy in
October 2012.

Lido Beach has a population of about 2,897.2 The median income in Lido
Beach is $113,430 and the median value of owner-occupied housing units is
$754,800.2 Approximately 95% of the homes are owner-occupied.3 On
average, homeowners and renters in Lido Beach spend more than 35% of
their total annual income for housing. The U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) threshold for affordability of housing is 30% of a
household’s annual income.4

Lido Beach and Point Lookout are Census Designated Places within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Hempstead in Nassau County, New York. Both
communities are located on the eastern end of Long Beach Island, a barrier
island on the southern shore of Long Island (Figure I-1).1 Point Lookout
occupies the eastern tip of the island (Figure I-2). Lido Beach shares its
eastern border with Point Lookout and its western border with the City of
Long Beach. Reynolds Channel establishes the northern border of each
community. Point Lookout is bordered to the east by Jones Inlet.
Lido Beach and Point Lookout share health and social services and
infrastructure assets with the City of Long Beach. The Long Beach Medical

Section I: Community Overview

Development of Lido Beach began in the early 1920s, starting with the Lido
Dunes neighborhood.5 Approximately 44% of the housing units in Lido Beach
were constructed between 1960 and 1969, prior to the adoption and
enforcement of a flood damage prevention ordinance by the Town of
Hempstead.6
Lido Beach was a popular summer resort for several decades. The Lido
Hotel, a Moorish-style building on the coast, was completed in 1929 as an
exclusive seaside resort. The Navy used the hotel as a discharge center

Page 2

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

during World War II. The hotel reopened afterwards, but was converted to
condominiums in 1981.
The Lido Beach Golf Club is located on the north side of Lido Boulevard in
Lido Beach. One of three Lido–Point Lookout Fire District Buildings and three
Long Beach School District buildings, the high school, middle school, and one
elementary school, are located in Lido Beach. A wastewater pump station is
located in Lido Beach that moves wastewater from the western end of Lido
Beach to the City of Long Beach wastewater treatment plant.
Lido Beach West Town Park, Town Park at Sands, Nickerson Beach Nassau
County Park, and Lido Beach Town Park are large public beaches located
along the Atlantic Ocean in Lido Beach.
Camp Anchor, a facility operated by the Town of Hempstead, is located in
Lido Beach at the Atlantic Ocean and provides year-round programs for
children and adults with special needs.
Infrastructure in Lido Beach includes roads, sidewalks, and a stormwater
drainage system. The main road through Lido Beach is Lido Boulevard. To
travel from Lido Beach to the mainland, there are three bridges: one
connects to the mainland from the City of Long Beach, one from the Village
of Atlantic Beach, which is to the west of the City of Long Beach, and the
other from Point Lookout.
Lido Beach is protected from minimal storm surge by a combination of
natural and hard shoreline infrastructure elements including a dune system,
a nature preserve, bulkheads, and a stormwater drainage system.
An engineered dune system along the Atlantic includes several breaks
intended to allow people to walk to the ocean without having to climb over a
dune. There are some walkways over the dunes. Dunes are not of uniform
height or width. Several breaches in the dune system occurred during
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy from Buxton Street west to the Long
Beach city line and the entire primary dune along Lido Beach was lost in the
storm.
Lido Beach has two Passive Nature Preserves that occupy approximately
50 acres. The preserves are located to the north of Lido Boulevard. The
western preserve is adjacent to Long Beach schools and covers
approximately 37 acres. The eastern preserve is the Town of Hempstead
Lido Nature Preserve.
Section I: Community Overview

Lido Beach has a tidal salt marsh on the bay side of the island that covers
185 acres from the Lido Beach Golf Course to the Town of Hempstead West
Marina. The tidal salt marsh is owned by New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Approximately 1.5 miles of bulkhead have been constructed along Reynolds
Channel on the bay side of the island. Bulkheads are not of uniform height
and are not continuous along Reynolds Channel or along the sides of the
canals that connect to the channel along either Lagoon Drive or Blackheath
Road. Other than the bulkhead at the high school and along part of the
Town of Hempstead owned Lido Beach Golf Club, bulkheads are located on
private property.
The stormwater drainage system in Lido Beach follows the natural drainage
pattern for surface water from Lido Boulevard to the north and was designed
to convey water from the ocean side of the island toward the bay. Outfalls or
discharge points from the stormwater drainage system are along Reynolds
Channel. However, the streets perpendicular to Lido Boulevard from Allevard
Street to Prescott Street slope toward Ocean Boulevard and the drainage
causes pooling of water at Ocean Boulevard.
With the schools, nature preserves, and beaches, well over 50% of the land
in Lido Beach is tax exempt.

Point Lookout
Point Lookout has a population of about 1,219.7 The median income in Point
Lookout is $107,354 and the median value of owner-occupied housing units
is $777,893.8 Approximately 78% of the homes are owner-occupied.9 On
average, homeowners and renters in Lido Beach spend more than 38% of
their total annual income for housing, which exceeds the HUD threshold for
affordability of housing.10
Approximately 53% of the housing stock in Point Lookout was constructed
before 1939, prior to the adoption and enforcement of a flood damage
prevention ordinance by the Town of Hempstead. 11
The development pattern of Point Lookout began in the 1920s when
concrete streets were laid and the land was subdivided and sold for singlefamily housing.

Page 3

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Point Lookout is a walkable community. It restricts on-street parking and
protects pedestrians with a 15-mile per hour speed limit.
Point Lookout maintains its beach district for use by Point Lookout residents.
The Town of Hempstead Department of Conservation and Waterways and
Energy Park, a Post Office, and the second of three Lido–Point Lookout Fire
District Buildings are located in Point Lookout along Lido Boulevard. Along
the bay in Point Lookout, there are four marinas or commercial fishing
stations as well as some seafood restaurants and other related businesses
and the third of the three Lido-Lookout Fire District Buildings.
Town Park at Point Lookout and Town Park at Malibu are two large public
beaches located along the Atlantic Ocean in Point Lookout. A third large
public recreational area, Point Lookout Beach District Park, is located at the
eastern end of Point Lookout along Jones Inlet.
Infrastructure in Point Lookout includes roads, sidewalks, and a stormwater
drainage system. The main road through Lido Beach is Lido Boulevard. Loop
Parkway Bridge connects Point Lookout to the mainland. Two other bridges
connect Point Lookout to the mainland; these are located in the Village of
Atlantic Beach and the City of Long Beach.
Point Lookout is protected from minimal storm surge and flooding by a
combination of natural and hard shoreline infrastructure elements including a
dune system, revetment, bulkheads, and a stormwater drainage system.
An engineered dune system along the ocean includes some breaks intended
to allow people to walk to the ocean without having to climb over a dune
and some walkways over dunes that protect the dune. Dunes are not of
uniform height or base width. Dunes were overtopped and damaged or lost
in Superstorm Sandy.

Section I: Community Overview

Jones Inlet is located at the eastern end of Point Lookout. A revetment, a
wall of rocks of varying sizes, was built along Jones Inlet over a period of
several years to limit erosion of the eastern end of the island and to prevent
flooding of the Point Lookout residents. The revetment reaches the Atlantic
Ocean side of the island, but does not reach all the way to Reynolds
Channel. Prior to construction of the revetment in 1953, an entire street at
the east end of Point Lookout was reclaimed by the ocean during a coastal
storm. The revetment has been credited with limiting damage in Point
Lookout over the past five decades, but it has deteriorated and efficacy in
the future is uncertain.12 Two groins extend into the Atlantic from Point
Lookout near Jones Inlet.
Approximately 0.8 mile of bulkhead has been constructed along the Reynolds
Channel side of Point Lookout. Bulkheads are not of uniform height, are not
continuous, and are located on private property.
The stormwater drainage system in Point Lookout was designed to convey
water from the oceanfront of the barrier island toward the bay with outfalls
along Reynolds Channel. However, the natural movement of surface water at
the eastern end of Point Lookout is from the center of the island toward
Jones Inlet where the ground elevation is lowest. Because movement of
water in the drainage system is intended to be accomplished by gravity, the
system is not effective and, during Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy,
this caused significant drainage problems and flooding.
With the Town of Hempstead buildings and beaches, as in Lido Beach, over
50% of the land in Point Lookout is tax exempt.

Page 4

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-1: Location of Lido Beach and Point Lookout

Section I: Community Overview

Page 5

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-2: Geographic Scope of the Lido Beach and Point Lookout NYRCR Plan

Section I: Community Overview

Page 6

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-3: Topographic Map of Lido Beach and Point Lookout

Section I: Community Overview

Page 7

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Description of storm damage

near the intersection of Hewlett Avenue and Beech Street was recorded as a
USGS high-water mark of 9.3 feet.22 Sustained winds of 49 knots with gusts
of up to 64 knots were recorded in Point Lookout.23

Hurricane Irene
Hurricane Irene moved across New York City on August 28, 2011, with the
strongest winds at landfall located east of the center, striking Long Island,
measured at roughly 63 mph.13 The storm surge generated by Irene was
roughly 4.42 feet above ground surface, with a storm tide of 8.17 feet above
ground surface at Point Lookout (Figure I-5).14 The storm surge caused
hundreds of millions of dollars in property damage in New York City and
Long Island. Tropical storm-force winds along with heavy rains resulted in
power outages for 1.1 million residents that lasted up to around 1 week
across much of Long Island, and included more than $1.3 billion in damages
and 10 fatalities.15 Flooding in Lido Beach was sufficient to allow kayaking on
the streets. The dune system in Lido Beach was severely eroded during the
storm. Structures and basements in Lido Beach and Point Lookout had some
damage.16

Superstorm Sandy
Superstorm Sandy struck New York on October 29, 2012, bringing a storm
surge of 3 to 6 feet above ground level in Nassau County.17
Superstorm Sandy was the largest storm to land ashore in New York’s
recorded history. The storm caused 53 fatalities.18 Sandy also destroyed an
estimated 305,000 homes, affected more than 2,000 miles of roads,
produced catastrophic flooding in subways and tunnels, and damaged major
power transmission systems. 19 Fourteen counties in New York were declared
Federal disaster areas.20 Economic losses in New York were estimated to be
between $30 and $50 billion, with an estimated $10 to $20 billion in insured
losses.20
According to the Committee, the majority of homes and businesses in Lido
Beach and Point Lookout experienced flooding and sustained various levels
of structural damage as a result of Superstorm Sandy (Figure I-4).
The storm tide (water level resulting from the combination of storm surge
and the astronomical tide) at the Lido Townhouses was observed to be at
the U.S. Geological Survey high-water mark of 10.2 feet, and the storm tide

Section I: Community Overview

Figure I-4: Lido Boulevard, Lido Beach, October 2012

Courtesy, Kate Murray

According to the Point Lookout Chamber of Commerce Web site, storm surge
in Lido Beach and Point Lookout was approximately 3 feet deep from the
Reynolds Channel side of the island and flood waters from Reynolds Channel
and from the Ocean met on the island.24 Because a system of dunes
provided some protection along the oceanfront of Lido Beach and Point
Lookout and because ground elevation is lower on the bay side of the island
than on the oceanfront, the majority of damage occurred on the bay side;
facilities used by the commercial marinas on the Reynolds Channel were
damaged and homes and businesses were flooded. Homes and businesses in
other parts of Lido Beach and Point Lookout, as well as critical facilities and
assets, also sustained damage due to flooding including residential structures
closest to Jones Inlet. Damage was caused not only by storm surge flooding,
locations of which are depicted in Figure I-6, but also flooding caused by
ponding in low-lying areas due to rainfall and poor drainage throughout the
communities.

Page 8

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-5: Hurricane Irene Storm Surge Area

Section I: Community Overview

Page 9

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-6: Superstorm Sandy Extent of Flooding

Section I: Community Overview

Page 10

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Disaster Housing
Assistance Program (DHAP) is a joint HUD and FEMA initiative that provides
assistance to families displaced from their homes by disasters such as
Superstorm Sandy. June 2013 data show that there were 1,074 FEMA
registrations by homeowners in Lido Beach and Point Lookout with total
damage of approximately $10.5 million (Tables I-1 and I-2).
Table I-1: DHAP Damage Registrations
for Owner-Occupied Housing
Average
Damage
per
Housing
Unit

Location

No. of Valid
Registrations

Lido Beach

805

$12,948

$8,947,344

Point Lookout

269

$7,604

$1,497,978

TOTAL

1,074

—

Total Damage

$10,445,322

Source: FEMA Housing Assistance Program database as of 6/23/13. Zip code
based data. Zip code boundaries may not coincide exactly with NYRCR
Community boundaries for Lido Beach and Point Lookout. Income
information is self-reported.

Water was as high as 15 inches deep on Lido Boulevard and about 18 inches
deep inside businesses along Lido Boulevard, which is at an elevation of
about 7 feet. Homes and businesses were flooded to varying depths
throughout Lido Beach and Point Lookout. The pump station in Lido Beach
and restrooms and maintenance buildings at Lido Beach Town Park and
Town Park at Point Lookout were damaged. The elementary and middle
schools sustained flood damage during Superstorm Sandy. The dune system
was breached by the storm in several locations, allowing floodwaters into
both communities. In Lido Beach, the primary frontal dune was completely
destroyed from Maple Boulevard to Biarritz Street.

Section I: Community Overview

Table I-2: DHAP Damage Registrations
for Renter-Occupied Housing

Units with
Major/
Substantial
Damage

Total
Approved
Individuals
and
Households
Program
Amount

Location

No. of Valid
Registrations

Units
with
Moderate
Damage

Lido Beach

143

35

30

$396,303

Point Lookout

136

37

18

$221,592

TOTAL

279

72

48

$617,895

Source: FEMA Housing Assistance Program Database as of 6/23/13. Zip code based
data. Zip code boundaries may not coincide exactly with NYRCR Community
boundaries for Lido Beach and Point Lookout. Income information is self-reported.

Lido Towers (Figure I-7), a five-story condominium building on the beach at
the western end of Lido Beach, had flooding that reached the ceiling of the
first floor, with 18 first-floor apartments damaged or destroyed. Sandy also
destroyed the building’s electrical system and elevators.25 Damage was so
severe at Lido Towers that the structure remained uninhabitable for over a
year after the storm.
Structures in Lido Beach and Point Lookout including the high school also
sustained wind damage. The roof of the elevated high school and some
windows were damaged by wind, not by flooding.
National Grid shut off gas service on the island for safety for several days.
Long Island Power Authority began to restore electricity to Lido Beach and
Point Lookout 11 days after the storm and power was not fully restored for
at least 2 weeks.26
The storm did not disrupt the supply of potable water, which is derived from
an aquifer approximately 1,500 feet below ground. However, the storm
significantly damaged the wastewater treatment plant in the City of Long
Beach that serves part of Lido Beach. According to the Committee, cesspools
in the remainder of Lido Beach and throughout Point Lookout failed to

Page 11

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

function properly as a result of inundation, causing wastewater to back up
into basements.

Storm tides destroyed docks at the East Marina (on Bayside Drive) and West
Marina (in the Energy Park) in Point Lookout (Figure I-8). It was reported
that there were at least 40 submerged vessels within Reynolds Channel
deposited or sunk due to the storm.27 The storm also deposited debris in the
Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve.

Figure I-7: Lido Towers, September 2013

URS Corporation

Floodwaters from Superstorm Sandy were forced through bayfront
stormdrain outfalls into the stormwater drainage system in Lido Beach and
Point Lookout, adding to the volume of floodwaters in the street, which
hindered access to evacuation routes for residents. Residents of Lido Beach
and Point Lookout believe that the storm caused some stormwater
conveyance structures, including underground pipes and drainage basins, to
fill with sand and others to collapse or break. The stormwater drainage
system no longer conveys water to outfalls located on the bayfront of the
Island as intended and since Sandy, streets have flooded during relatively
minor rainstorms.
Superstorm Sandy accelerated erosion in several locations within the project
areas including the unprotected northeastern and southeastern tips of the
island in Point Lookout, along the edge of the Lido Beach Passive Nature
Preserve, and at the western edge of the Lido Beach Golf Club where there is
no bulkhead.

Section I: Community Overview

Figure I-8: East Marina, Point Lookout, October 2012

Courtesy, Kate Murray

C. Critical issues
Since Superstorm Sandy, the Town of Hempstead, on behalf of Lido Beach
and Point Lookout, has applied for and utilized FEMA funding to implement
the following actions:


Repair of public facilities at the Point Lookout Town Park;



Repair of parks and recreation facilities at the Point Lookout Beach
District Park;



Repair of Long Beach schools in Lido Beach;



Repair of Lido Boulevard pump station in Lido Beach; and

Page 12

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Repair of private homes and places of business.

FEMA Public Assistance funding has helped address some of the issues facing
the communities today; however, multiple critical issues remain to be
addressed. A list of critical issues within the NYRCR Community was
developed through research and analysis. The list of critical issues was
vetted and expanded both by the Committee and residents during several
Committee Meetings, two Public Engagement Events, and through
community feedback received through the NY Rising website. The public
engagement process is described in Section V of this plan.
These critical issues are addressed more thoroughly in the assessment of risk
and needs in Section II.


Tidal flooding and tidal surge: At the time of Superstorm Sandy,
tidal inundation significantly affected Lido Beach and Point Lookout,
damaging the stormwater system infrastructure, roadways, marine
structures, homes, and other buildings.
As mentioned in Section I.B, “Description of storm damage,” the
storm tide was observed at the USGS high-water mark of 10.2 feet
in some areas.28
Although tidal surge from large storms, such as Superstorm Sandy,
is a critical issue, focus on the frequent flooding that occurs as a
result of smaller storms, nor’easters, and moon tides overwhelming
the stormwater system is also vital to addressing the issues within
the communities.
Lido Beach and Point Lookout frequently have tidal surge and
flooding during full moons  locally known as moon tides. During
moon tides, inundation from both the ocean and bay cause flooding
as water is forced back into the stormwater system through bayfront
stormdrain outfalls, and overwhelms the system.
This more common or nuisance flooding results in standing water or
pooling on street surfaces, which can impede evacuation and
emergency response and affects homes and structures located at
low elevations.

Section I: Community Overview

Figure I-9: Ponding at catch basin after minor rainstorm,
Regent Drive at Reynolds Drive, Lido Beach, November 2013

URS Corporation



Stormwater drainage: The combination of tidal surge and rain
events, as identified by the Committee, places added pressure on an
already overburdened stormwater drainage system.
Several causes of stormwater drainage issues were identified by the
Committee and merit further study. The issues are as follows:
˗

The stormwater drainage system is outdated and pipes are
undersized. According to Committee members, the drainage
system was not originally developed for the amount of
development in the area today.

˗

Impervious surfaces that prevent water from percolating into the
ground have increased over time and further overburden the
overall system. Development of structures, parking lots, and
roads prevents water from being absorbed into the ground and
causes water to flow into the stormwater conveyance system.

˗

Because of the limited slope and low elevation of Lido Beach and
Point Lookout, the drainage system is ineffective in multiple
areas and does not move water away from structures and
roadways and into the bay as intended. Multiple roadways are

Page 13

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

specifically subject to frequent pooling and nuisance flooding as
a result of this ineffective drainage (Figure I-9).
˗

Stormwater inlets, catch basins, gutters, and outfalls require
consistent maintenance and cleanout. In areas of Point Lookout,
additional catch basins may be necessary.

˗

Outfalls along the bay are unprotected, allowing water, sand,
and debris to be forced back into the stormwater system, which
further stresses the system.

˗

Green infrastructure and other current Best Management
Practices are not being extensively utilized to decrease
consistent and nuisance flooding.

˗

Communities need detailed information about the demands
made on the stormwater drainage system.

Figure I-10: Lack of vegetation on dunes, Lido Beach, September 2013

URS Corporation

The stormwater infrastructure system in Lido Beach and Point
Lookout requires significant upgrades to address both tidal and rain
event flooding. Further study and analysis of the overall system are
required to address these issues.

Section I: Community Overview



Natural and hard shoreline infrastructure system breaches:
Natural and hard shoreline infrastructure systems lack uniformity.
Protection from storm inundation was negatively affected by
breaches in the dune systems caused by Superstorm Sandy, gaps in
the hard shoreline infrastructure systems such as the revetment in
Point Lookout, and a lack of protection from increasing erosion in
several areas including the marsh, Point Lookout, and the western
end of the Lido Beach Golf Course. The NYRCR Planning Committee
identified the following issues:
˗

Perimeter dune system breaches: Breaches caused by Hurricane
Irene and Superstorm Sandy in the perimeter dune system and a
lack of dune vegetation (Figure I-10) resulted in increased
flooding caused by tidal and water inundation during the storm.

˗

Hard infrastructure gaps: Hard shoreline infrastructure, such as
existing bulkheads, does not provide sufficient protection from
tidal surge. Although bulkheads are provided in some areas, a
continuous protective system that is uniform in both height and
length is lacking. Gaps in the shoreline infrastructure system
result in costly protection measures such as sandbagging that
are relatively ineffective in protecting the area against tidal
flooding. Lastly, there is an area along the western bay side of
the Town of Hempstead owned Lido Beach Golf Course that is
eroding due to a break in the bulkhead. To provide protection
from erosion and flooding, the bulkhead system at the golf
course should be continuous.

˗

Erosion and lack of revetment: The easternmost area of Point
Lookout requires additional protection from tidal surge and is
also eroding. The revetment along Jones Inlet has provided
storm protection for Point Lookout over the past several decades
(Figure I-11), but the revetment does not extend to the northern
end of the inlet, which leaves an expansive area open to tidal
inundation. The revetment was also damaged during Superstorm
Sandy, leaving it weakened and vulnerable to additional damage
and failure. The Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve also has an
erosion problem, which can be accelerated during storm events.
Because the Passive Nature Preserve protects the last salt marsh

Page 14

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

on the Barrier Island, loss of marsh areas is of particular concern
to residents.

equipment, particularly the emergency generators that provide
backup power in the event of an outage, is key to the ability of first
responders to provide emergency response during and after a storm
event.


Figure I-11: Rubble revetment, Point Lookout, September 2013

URS Corporation



Emergency response services and systems protections: The
Lido–Point Lookout Fire District implements emergency response
measures that are effective during and after storms and
emergencies. The critical issue is evacuation of the Barrier Island
preceding storms and emergencies. The Committee has determined
that evacuation of the island before disasters is the first step in
effectively protecting the safety, health, and welfare of the
Community’s residents. This issue is addressed by stressing
evacuation as the number one, crucial step to ensuring safety and
the foundation upon which to build protection and save lives.
Effective emergency response also requires protection of the
buildings that house emergency responders and equipment.
Emergency response in the Community is largely the responsibility of
the Lido–Point Lookout Fire District, which operates out of three
buildings: two in Point Lookout and one in Lido Beach. An alternative
power source is critical during emergencies to ensuring safety and
maintaining continuity of operations of the firehouses during and
after storm events. Elevation of electrical, mechanical, and plumbing

Section I: Community Overview

Energy, including electricity and gas systems protections: As
stated in Section I.B, Description of storm damage, residents went
without power for approximately 2 weeks following Superstorm
Sandy. Energy and communications are critical issues for the
community. Although evacuation is stressed as the number one
priority for the Community preceding disasters, the NYRCR Planning
Committee recognizes the need to restore energy and
communication systems as soon as possible so residents can return
to normal activities. Both the NYRCR Planning Committee and the
public indicated that energy and communications were significantly
affected during and after the storm. Alternative energy and
alternative or redundant communication systems are necessary for
providing emergency and basic services in the aftermath of another
storm that leads to prolonged power outages.

D. Community vision
To begin the process of addressing the stated critical issues and developing
a plan that provides guidance and direction for future protection and
resiliency of Lido Beach and Point Lookout, the Planning Committee
developed a community vision statement through the visioning process.
Visioning is an interactive process for setting goals, planning, and problem
solving. The purpose of the Vision Statement is to provide an overarching
goal for community recovery and resiliency strategies and projects and be
aligned with regional goals for economic development. To create a
Community Vision Statement, the Committee was asked to describe the
unique qualities inherent in their communities. Based on the Committee’s
input, a draft Vision Statement was created. The draft Vision Statement was
presented to the community and Committee during the first Public
Engagement Event in October 2013.
Feedback from the Public Engagement Event and through the NY Rising
website resulted in the creation of two draft Vision Statements. The two
draft Vision Statements were condensed into a single vision by the NYRCR

Page 15

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Planning Committee during a subsequent committee meeting and the final
Vision Statement for Lido Beach and Point Lookout was approved by the
NYRCR Planning Committee during the committee meeting on November 22,
2013.

estuarine health of the bay, restore and protect coastal habitats, and
increase open space preservation.
Nassau County Hazard Mitigation Plan (2007)30


Vision Statement for the Communities
of Lido Beach and Point Lookout
Point Lookout and Lido Beach will continue to be vibrant island
residential communities that provide a healthy environment and
resilient infrastructure and maintain a high quality of life for residents
and visitors by preserving natural resources, providing beautiful
beaches and other recreational opportunities, and maintaining a
working waterfront.

E. Relationship to regional plans
The communities of Lido Beach and Point Lookout have unique qualities and
issues, yet they are also part of a regional system of communities. Local and
regional systems affect one another. It is important to understand the
relationships and connections that exist, including shared challenges and
issues.
To develop this plan, local and regional planning documents were reviewed
for information relevant to Lido Beach and Point Lookout including the Town
of Hempstead Building Zone Ordinance. Documents with a regional focus
included documents written before and after Superstorm Sandy and were in
various stages of planning and execution. Many of the recommendations in
this plan are consistent with strategies proposed in the regional plans briefly
summarized below.
Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve: Comprehensive
Management Plan (2001)29


The vision this plan is to preserve, protect, and restore the
ecosystem of the Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve. The
goals are to reduce nonpoint and point-source pollution, improve the

Section I: Community Overview

This plan contains historical data on hazard impacts to the
communities, long-term erosion projections and flood zones, and
hazard mitigation opportunities through capital improvements.

Sustainable Strategies for Long Island 2035 (2010)31


This plan proposes policies and strategies to help communities
prepare for economic, social, and environmental change. Strategies
include developing a climate change resilience plan that addresses
sea level rise and coordinating emergency preparedness across
jurisdictions.

Strong Island – The Story of a Region’s Recovery and Resurgence
(2013)32


The Long Island Regional Economic Development Council (LIREDC)
recently prepared this plan that addresses critical issues postSuperstorm Sandy in the region.

Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan (2013)33


This plan identifies regional priorities that are relevant to the NYRCR
planning process. Key regional priorities for sustainability include
reduction of the duration of power outages, enhancement of energy
efficiency, use of alternative sources of energy, and planning for sea
level rise.

Regional issues and challenges are described in more detail in Section I.F,
but include:


Storm and tidal surge from the ocean and the bay;



Gaps, and breaches in soft and hard infrastructure systems;



Inadequate and/or inefficient stormwater drainage systems;



Expansive impervious surfaces and a lack of green spaces;



Power and energy sources damaged and down during and after
storms and a lack of alternative power generation;

Page 16

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Communication systems failure during and after the storm and a lack
of alternative or redundant communication systems;



Medical and emergency response limitations;



Sanitary sewer backups and other issues related to the operation of
the Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant in the City of Long Beach;



Housing stock inadequacies, including a lack of affordable and rental
housing; and



Economic development and small business needs.

Beach Island, New York Coastal Storm Risk Assessment Project.” This project
provides a beach berm, dune, and groin system to reduce the potential for
future storm damage along approximately 35,000 linear feet of shoreline
along the barrier island. The project will provide 11 timber dune walkovers
and seven vehicle access ways. At a minimum, the project will result in
beach berms or higher berms at various points along the Point Lookout and
Lido Beach coast and rehabilitation of the two groins at Point Lookout. A
5,000-foot-long dune will be constructed along Nickerson Beach in Lido
Beach but the existing berm there will remain undisturbed to allow for bird
nesting and foraging areas for piping plovers and least terns.34

Identifying issues and challenges on a regional scale has paved the way to
initiate additional regional coordination, actions, and projects. Some of the
projects included in the NYRCR Plan cross political jurisdictions and require
coordination on a regional basis.

In addition, the Committee has learned that the Town of Hempstead has
moved forward with work to fill breaches in the dunes with sand provided
from the USACE, collected by dredging Jones Inlet. The Town has also
purchased plants appropriate for planting on the dunes this spring.

The NYRCR Lido Beach/Point Lookout Planning Committee has also been
involved in discussions with the following entities that merit consideration of
regional coordination as a result of connections beyond the political
boundaries of the NYRCR Plan:

Further, in considering regional perspectives, a meeting was held to bring
together the south Nassau County NYRCR Planning Committee Co-Chairs. On
December 5, 2013, representatives from the Nassau County NYRCRs
(Atlantic Beach / East Atlantic Beach, Long Beach, Lido Beach, and Barnum
Island / Oceanside / Village of Island Park / Harbor Isle) held a workshop to
discuss issues of regional interest and concern. These issues included coastal
protection for the bayfront and oceanfront, stormwater management, green
infrastructure, the design of streets, water/wastewater, and microgrid
systems. The purpose of the workshop was to provide an educational
context for the Nassau County NYRCR Planning Committees to discuss the
benefits and applicability of resilient and protective measures and provide
examples of models that have worked well in other areas.



New York State including the State Agency Review Team that has
been involved in development of this plan;



Town of Hempstead;



City of Long Beach;



Village of Atlantic Beach;



East Atlantic Beach;



Village of Island Park;



Nassau County;



U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE);



New York State Department of Environmental Conservation; and



National Grid and Long Island Power Authority/Public Service Electric
and Gas Company (LIPA/PSEG).

The Committee has learned that the USACE is implementing a $178 million
dollar “Atlantic Coast of Long Island: Jones Inlet to East Rockaway Inlet Long

Section I: Community Overview

F. Regional perspectives
Mitigating the risk of damage from future storms to increase resiliency will
require regional as well as local actions. Lido Beach and Point Lookout are
part of the Town of Hempstead and follow its development codes. Although
the Town has many of its own capabilities and authorities, it is still
dependent on other entities, including utility companies (e.g., electric,
natural gas) for some services. Several of the issues that are discussed in
this Lido Beach/Point Lookout NYRCR Plan cross political jurisdictions and will
need to be coordinated regionally.

Page 17

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Neighboring municipalities and communities on the barrier island include the
Village of Atlantic Beach and the unincorporated areas of East Atlantic Beach,
which are part of the Town of Hempstead, and the City of Long Beach.
Coordination with these communities and those across Reynolds Channel
(e.g., Village of Island Park, Oceanside) may help provide economies of scale
to obtain needed resources for regional projects such as larger regional
coastal protection projects, improvements to established evacuation routes,
stormwater improvements, implementation of microgrid systems,
improvements in emergency services, and potential alternative power
generation. For example, it may be possible for jurisdictions in the region to
work collaboratively to:


Develop a NYRCR-wide green stormwater infrastructure strategy;



Restore natural habitat areas adversely affected by storm events;



Prepare a coordinated evacuation plan;



Improve the natural environment through more effective treatment
of wastewater;



Further investigate the feasibility of alternative power generation and
micro-distribution systems;

Section I: Community Overview



Develop a regionally based tidal surge protection program that
combines natural solutions, such as marshland restoration, aquatic
vegetation, oyster reefs, and others, along with barrier systems;



Secure backup power sources and protect transmission and
distribution facilities that are still vulnerable;



Install smart meters on homes and businesses to better monitor
energy usage and to build a smart grid;



Maintain and enhance the oceanfront dunes and develop a plan for
resiliency on the bayfront;



Develop and implement a plan to ensure uninterrupted cellular
telephone service during a storm or emergency; and



Develop a regional emergency radio broadcast or crowdsourcing
system to facilitate communication with residents when
telecommunications and traditional media outlets are unavailable,
and Coordinate with the City of Long Beach to ensure continued
operation of sewage lift station located on Regent Drive in Lido
Beach. The sanitary sewage system of Lido Beach is tied into the
sanitary sewage system of the City of Long Beach.

Page 18

Section II:
Assessment of risk
and needs

Section II:
Assessment of risk and needs
Section II consists of a risk assessment of the assets in the New York Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Community of Lido Beach/Point Lookout
that were identified and determined to be vulnerable to natural hazards
(Section II.A) and the resilience and revitalization needs and opportunities
(Section II.B).

A. Description of community assets and
assessment of risk
Addressing risk to flooding and coastal erosion requires an understanding of
hazard severity in relation to people and property, hazard mapping, and
identification of at-risk assets and their vulnerability. This section describes
the at-risk assets that were identified in the NYRCR Community of Lido
Beach/Point Lookout and the assessment of risk to these assets.
In the context of this planning process, risk was defined as a combination of
hazard, exposure and vulnerability, and a software tool created by the New
York State Department of State (NYS DOS) was used to calculate risk values.
Using current conditions and future goals and strategies, the NYRCR
Planning Committee for Lido Beach/Point Lookout (Committee) assessed the
impact of hazards on assets by performing a risk analysis using this risk
assessment tool. The process helped identify methods to mitigate the
potential for damage from future hazards.

Recovery support functions
In accordance with the National Disaster Recovery Framework, the Lido
Beach/Point Lookout NYRCR Plan addresses the needs, risks, and
opportunities related to the six Recovery Support Functions: Community
Planning and Capacity Building, Economic Development, Health and Social
Services, Housing, Infrastructure, and Natural and Cultural Resources.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Recovery Support Functions (RSFs)
Community Planning and Capacity Building: How the community will
restore or enhance its ability to organize, plan, manage, and implement its
recovery.
Economic Development: How the community will restore economic and
business activities and develop new economic opportunities.
Health and Social Services: How the community will restore and
improve essential health and social services, including those for vulnerable
populations.
Housing: Meeting the demand for affordable housing (and promotion of
affordable housing), addressing post-disaster housing needs, and
encouraging disaster-resistant housing for all income groups.
Infrastructure: How the community will restore, repair, and manage
essential infrastructure services.
Natural and Cultural Resources: Natural and cultural resource
management from a risk reduction and economic development context.

Residents of Lido Beach and Point Lookout are located on a barrier island
and are isolated from the larger portion of the Town of Hempstead located
on mainland Long Island. Being located on a barrier island between Reynolds
Channel and the Atlantic Ocean makes both communities vulnerable to a
variety of storm events. The isolation and vulnerability have fostered an
independent spirit and self-reliance. The NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee) and residents focused on the six Recovery Support Functions,
knowing that response and recovery would come from within their own
Community and that support for resiliency would come from outside their
Community.

Page 20

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Community Planning and
Capacity Building
Capacity building is important
to both communities,
particularly communication
between residents, visitors, and
first responders before and
after storm events. Building
capacity comes from training
Figure II-1: Public Engagement Event,
and empowering organizations
Lido Beach, October 2013
and individuals to respond to
URS Corporation
situations. This includes taking
measures to strengthen ways
to communicate to individuals, such as implementing reverse 911,
subscribing to text message notification services, and expanding local
websites and newsletters. Communication during non-emergency times was
expressed by residents as also important, especially emphasis on educating
residents and visitors on the importance of evacuation and how to evacuate
safely, flood mitigation information, and information on green infrastructure.
Economic Development
During Committee meetings and Public Engagement Events (Figure II-1),
residents expressed a desire to limit economic development to its current
level and to focus on the residential, recreational, and natural resources of
their community, which they feel are the keys to maintaining a high quality
of life. Residents are supportive of strategies that increase resiliency in the
existing commercial development within their communities and help expedite
recovery after an event.
Health and Social Services
Protection of schools, critical facilities (Figure II-2), and the facilities that
serve socially vulnerable populations within the community was cited as an
important concern of residents during asset identification, strategy
development, and project selection.

important assets. Strategies and projects identified for protecting homes also
coincide with protecting the community at large, an indicator of how
important “community” is to the residents.
Infrastructure
Improvements and protection of the stormwater system was a key concern
of residents. The aging stormwater system was damaged by Superstorm
Sandy, and even small rain events are enough to flood streets, which can
hinder egress along evacuation routes and roads leading to those routes for
both residents and first responders. Stormwater system overloading by small
rain events also causes flooding in residences located near catch basins.
Natural and Cultural Resources
With numerous parks situated along the beach and marinas on the bay,
residents enjoy a variety of water-oriented recreational activities. Residents
are also aware of the necessity of protecting natural resources such as the
dunes and the Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve, understanding that in
turn, these natural features also protect them and offer a habitat to
terrestrial and aquatic wildlife.

i. Description of community assets
An asset is a resource or critical facility whose loss or impairment would
compromise any essential cultural, social, economic, or environmental
function of the community. Assets can be, but are not limited to, people,
community services, natural resources, or physical locations.
The identification of assets in the Community consisted of two steps. First,
the Committee identified assets in five of the six Recovery Support Functions
(Economic Development, Health and Social Services, Housing, Infrastructure,
and Natural and Cultural Resources) and for socially vulnerable populations.
The residents of Lido Beach and Point Lookout then vetted and expanded the
list of assets during the first Public Engagement Event in October 2013. Asset
locations were mapped and the locations were verified by the Committee.

Housing
The major concern of residents was protecting their homes. All residential
areas in the NYRCR Community were identified by the communities as

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 21

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Health and Social Services: Health and social services assets
include fire stations and the rescue company, schools, and the U.S.
Post Office in Point Lookout. These assets are considered critical
facilities for the community, especially during emergencies.



Housing: Housing assets include neighborhoods within Lido Beach
and Point Lookout. This includes single-family residential
neighborhoods and multi-family housing at Lido Towers and Lido
Townhouses.



Infrastructure: Infrastructure assets located in the NYRCR
Community include potable water systems, stormwater, and energyrelated facilities, such as the compressed natural gas (CNG) fueling
facility and the Energy Park. The potable water system assets are
primarily located in Point Lookout, including several wells, the Water
Tower, and the Town Department of Water Facilities. Stormwater
systems are split up to correspond to housing neighborhoods. Lido
Beach is connected to the sanitary sewage system in the City of
Long Beach. Wastewater goes to a pump station on Regent Drive.
Wastewater in Point Lookout is via private cesspools / onsite sewage
treatment systems.



Natural and Cultural Resources: The Community includes a wide
range of natural and cultural assets. These include park and
recreational areas along both the ocean and bay sides of the
Community, preservation areas, and religious assets. These assets
are facilities and places that have cultural significance to the
Community.



Socially Vulnerable Populations:35 Assets that support vulnerable
populations include Camp Anchor, a facility that provides a yearround recreation program dedicated to children and adults with
special needs (Figure II-4) and three adult group homes, located on
Seaspray Drive in Lido Beach, that are operated by the Brookville
Center for Children’s Services and provide an environment in which
children in residence are helped to succeed in becoming full
participants in their lives and the community. Both assets are
mapped in the health and social services group in Figure II-3.

Figure II-2: Point Lookout Fire Station is an example of a
Health and Social Services Asset, September 2013

URS Corporation

Assets and the associated asset classes and subcategories are listed in Table
II-1. Asset locations are shown in Figure II-3. Most of the assets north of
Lido Boulevard were affected by Superstorm Sandy flooding from the bay,
while assets south of Lido Boulevard were affected by ocean flooding.
The Community identified a large number of assets, many of which share
functional commonalities that put them into the same risk category.
Therefore, some assets were grouped by risk category to simplify the
assessment process, as shown in Table II-1. The grouping decisions were
based on flood sources, distance to shorelines, and proximity to other assets.
The Community assets in each Recovery Support Function and the assets
critical to support socially vulnerable populations are as follows:


Economic Development: A majority of the economic assets are in
Point Lookout, including the Point Lookout Commercial District, the
East and West Marinas, and other local businesses along the Bay. In
Lido Beach, several businesses along Lido Boulevard are also
included on the asset list.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 22

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table II-1: Asset Inventory
Asset Name

Community

Asset Class (Recovery
Support Function)

Asset Subcategory

Critical Facility

Marvel Dairy Whip

Lido Beach

Economic Development

Restaurants

N

Dunes Delicatessen

Lido Beach

Economic Development

Restaurants

N

Ted's Fishing Station

Point Lookout

Economic Development

Marina / Water-Based Business

N

Scotty's Marina and Fishing Station and Restaurant

Point Lookout

Economic Development

Marina / Water-Based Business

N

East Marina

Point Lookout

Economic Development

Marina / Water-Based Business

N

West Marina

Point Lookout

Economic Development

Marina / Water-Based Business

N

Point Lookout Commercial District

Point Lookout

Economic Development

Small Business

N

Lido Beach Fire District Station

Lido Beach

Health and Social Services

Emergency Operations/Response

Y

Point Lookout Fire District Station

Point Lookout

Health and Social Services

Emergency Operations/Response

Y

Point Lookout Volunteer Fire Company

Point Lookout

Health and Social Services

Emergency Operations/Response

Y

Ye Olde Firehouse

Point Lookout

Health and Social Services

Government and Administrative
Services

Y

U.S. Post Office

Point Lookout

Health and Social Services

Government and Administrative
Services

Y

Point Lookout Rescue Company

Point Lookout

Health and Social Services

Emergency Operations/Response

Y

Fire Dept. Training Facility

Point Lookout

Health and Social Services

Emergency Operations/Response

Y

Town Public Safety Facility

Point Lookout

Health and Social Services

Emergency Operations/Response

Y

Lido Elementary School / Long Beach Pre-K Center

Lido Beach

Health and Social Services

Schools

Y

Long Beach Middle School

Lido Beach

Health and Social Services

Schools

Y

Long Beach High School

Lido Beach

Health and Social Services

Schools

Y

School District Offices

Lido Beach

Health and Social Services

Schools

Y

District school bus parking area

Lido Beach

Health and Social Services

Schools

Y

Nike Alternative School

Lido Beach

Health and Social Services

Schools

Y

Nike Environmental Center

Lido Beach

Health and Social Services

Schools

Y

Camp Anchor

Lido Beach

Health and Social Services

Schools

Y

Adult Group Homes

Lido Beach

Health and Social Services

Government and Administrative
Services

Y

Lido Townhouses

Lido Beach

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

N

Lido Towers

Lido Beach

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

N

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 23

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table II-1 (Continued)
Asset Name

Community

Asset Class (Recovery
Support Function)

Asset Subcategory

Critical Facility

Lido Beach North Housing

Lido Beach

Housing

Single-Family Residence

N

Lido Beach Dunes Housing

Lido Beach

Housing

Single-Family Residence

N

Lido Beach South Housing

Lido Beach

Housing

Single-Family Residence

N

Lido Beach East Housing

Lido Beach

Housing

Single-Family Residence

N

Point Lookout Housing

Point Lookout

Housing

Single-Family Residence

N

Drinking Water Well #3

Lido Beach

Infrastructure

Water Supply

Y

Town Dept. of Water Facility

Point Lookout

Infrastructure

Water Supply

Y

Water Tower

Point Lookout

Infrastructure

Water Supply

Y

Drinking Water Well #1

Point Lookout

Infrastructure

Water Supply

Y

Drinking Water Well #2

Point Lookout

Infrastructure

Water Supply

Y

Lido Beach North Stormwater

Lido Beach

Infrastructure

Stormwater

Y

Lido Beach Dunes Stormwater

Lido Beach

Infrastructure

Stormwater

Y

Lido Beach South Stormwater

Lido Beach

Infrastructure

Stormwater

Y

Lido Beach East Stormwater

Lido Beach

Infrastructure

Stormwater

Y

Point Lookout Commercial District Stormwater

Point Lookout

Infrastructure

Stormwater

Y

Point Lookout Residential Stormwater

Point Lookout

Infrastructure

Stormwater

Y

Town of Hempstead Dept. of Conservation and
Waterways District

Point Lookout

Infrastructure

Navigable Waterway Facilities

Y

Town of Hempstead Dept. of Conservation and
Waterways Laboratory

Point Lookout

Infrastructure

Navigable Waterway Facilities

Y

CNG fueling facility for school buses

Lido Beach

Infrastructure

Liquid Fuels

Y

Town Energy Park

Point Lookout

Infrastructure

Power Supply

Y

Lido Beach Synagogue

Lido Beach

Natural and Cultural Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

N

Point Lookout Community Church

Point Lookout

Natural and Cultural Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

N

Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal

Point Lookout

Natural and Cultural Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

N

Bishop Molloy Recreational Center

Point Lookout

Natural and Cultural Resources

Cultural or Religious Establishments

N

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 24

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table II-1 (Continued)
Asset Name

Community

Asset Class (Recovery
Support Function)

Asset Subcategory

Critical Facility

Lido Beach Golf Club

Lido Beach

Natural and Cultural Resources

Parks and Recreation

N

Town Park Lido Beach West

Lido Beach

Natural and Cultural Resources

Parks and Recreation

N

Lido Beach District Park

Lido Beach

Natural and Cultural Resources

Parks and Recreation

N

Lido Beach Town Park

Lido Beach

Natural and Cultural Resources

Parks and Recreation

N

Town Park at Sands

Lido Beach

Natural and Cultural Resources

Parks and Recreation

N

Nickerson Beach

Lido Beach

Natural and Cultural Resources

Parks and Recreation

N

Town Park at Malibu

Lido Beach

Natural and Cultural Resources

Parks and Recreation

N

Town Park at Point Lookout

Point Lookout

Natural and Cultural Resources

Parks and Recreation

N

Town Dept. of Parks and Recreation Facility

Point Lookout

Natural and Cultural Resources

Parks and Recreation

N

Point Lookout Beach District Park

Point Lookout

Natural and Cultural Resources

Parks and Recreation

N

Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve

Point Lookout

Natural and Cultural Resources

Wetlands and Marshes

N

Shellfish Nursery

Point Lookout

Natural and Cultural Resources

Hunting and Fishing Lands

N

Notes:
Bolded assets are assets for socially vulnerable populations.
Shading around one or more asset indicates an asset group.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 25

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-3: Asset Inventory Map

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 26

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Once the list of assets was finalized, detailed information about each asset,
landscape attributes in the vicinity of the asset, and the vulnerability of the
asset to flood damage was collected for the Community Asset Inventory.
Assets were then prioritized based on factors such as importance to the
NYRCR Planning Committee, the probability of being affected by flooding,
and restoration time following a storm event.

input from the public on areas with the highest risk of flooding, were used to
supplement the Risk Assessment Map.
Risk assessment methods
Risk can be measured by looking at a combination of hazard, exposure, and
vulnerability. One way to compare asset risks is to assign a risk value (or risk
score) to each asset. A risk assessment tool developed by NYS DOS was
used to quantify risk based on hazard, exposure, and vulnerability. Scores
were calculated for each factor (i.e., hazard score, exposure score, and
vulnerability score).
Hazard scores were calculated by evaluating risk from a range of storm
events  from frequent, low-intensity events to infrequent, high-intensity
events. Assets located in an extreme-risk area experience hazards more
frequently and with greater impact than those located in a high- or
moderate-risk area.
Exposure scores were calculated as an expression of the local topographic
and shoreline conditions that tend to increase or decrease the effects of
coastal hazards on assets. Multiple landscape attributes were used to
calculate a total landscape attribute score as follows:

Figure II-4: Camp Anchor, September 2013

URS Corporation

ii. Assessment of risk to assets and systems
The NYS DOS defined risk as extreme, high, or moderate (see Section V.D,
Community asset inventory) and these designations were used to evaluate
the risk to the identified community assets. The Risk Assessment Map (see
Figure II-5) shows that most of the Lido Beach and Point Lookout assets are
in an extreme- or high-risk flooding area. Because these communities are
located on a barrier island, flooding impacts could be from the ocean or the
bay.



Erosion rate ≥1 foot per year or unknown;



Waterline frequently at shore defense or upland vegetation;



Shore defenses absent, not constructed to anticipated conditions, or
deteriorating;



Protective vegetation between asset and flood source absent;



Dunes absent below the base flood elevation (BFE), eroding, little
vegetation; bluff slope unstable, little vegetation; and



Asset on coastal barrier island or filled wetland.

A risk assessment was conducted to determine the potential impact of flood
and erosion hazards on community assets. The results helped guide the
Committee in the selection of proposed strategies and mitigation options to
reduce future risk. Recommendations from the Committee, with extensive

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 27

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-5: Risk Assessment Mapent Map

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 28

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Vulnerability scores are an expression of the capacity of an asset to return to
service after a storm or recovery time. Assets that can quickly recover have a
low vulnerability score. Information used to determine recovery time can be
based on direct observation during a storm event or estimated based on the
amount of damage to individual assets. For this NYRCR Plan, recovery time
and related vulnerability score were estimated based on damages from
Superstorm Sandy and validated by the Committee.
The Risk Assessment Tool calculated a risk score using the formula:
Hazard x Exposure x Vulnerability = Risk
The risk score represents the relative risk of community assets to one
another. The scores can range from 1.5 to 75. Assets with risk scores greater
than 53 are considered at severe risk, assets with scores 24 to 53 are
considered at high risk, assets with scores six to 23 are considered at
moderate risk, and assets with scores lower than six are considered to have
residual risk.

Most of the other assets had high risk scores. These assets had relatively
high flood depths but were either better protected or had shorter
demonstrated recovery times. These assets include housing assets,
additional infrastructure assets, and most of the health and social services
and natural and cultural resources assets.
Systems can also be assigned scores to compare relative risk. The
assessment of risk to systems (primarily infrastructure) highlights the initial
risk assessment results for this asset group.
Section V.D. summarizes the results for infrastructure systems in Lido Beach
and Point Lookout. All stormwater systems and most of the potable water
systems have severe risk scores. This finding is supported by damage to
water and stormwater facilities from Superstorm Sandy.

Risk assessment results
An initial Risk Assessment was completed on the at-risk assets identified
during the asset inventory. Using the Risk Assessment Tool, risk scores were
calculated for each of the assets. Figure II-7 shows the results of the initial
risk assessment of each asset and is color coded for severe, high, and
moderate risk scores. The actual risk scores and calculations for each asset
are listed in Section V.D, “Community asset inventory.”
The total risk scores for Lido Beach and Point Lookout ranged from moderate
to severe risk. Eighteen assets had severe risk scores, more than half (37 of
the total 62 assets) had high risk scores, and seven assets had moderate risk
scores.
Assets with severe risk scores were those at risk of the deepest flooding,
with the least exposure protection, and with the longest demonstrated
recovery time. The assets with severe risk scores are the stormwater
systems and bayfront assets in Point Lookout. All stormwater systems had
individual structures within extreme-risk areas and also high vulnerability to
flooding. Likewise, a range of asset types in the bayfront area of Point
Lookout, including water system assets, economic assets (Figure II-6), and
the Point Lookout Rescue Company, were located in extreme-risk areas and
had high vulnerability.
Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Figure II-6: West Marina, a key economic asset identified by the Committee
and the public, Point Lookout, September 2013

URS Corporation

Page 29

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-7: Asset Assessment Scoring Map

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 30

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Assessment of needs and opportunities
This section describes the resilience and revitalization needs and
opportunities in Lido Beach and Point Lookout that were identified by the
Committee and the Community during Committee meetings in September
and October 2013 and the Public Engagement Event in October 2013. The
identified needs are based on the Community’s observations of Superstorm
Sandy’s impacts on the assets that were expressed during meetings and in
comments posted on the NYRCR website. Opportunities were identified from
information gathered by the Committee including information from the
public, interviews with Town of Hempstead personnel, and plan review and
vetting by the Committee.
The needs and opportunities are locally focused, but mitigating the risk of
damage from future storms to increase resilience requires both local action
and regional coordination.

Community planning and capacity building
Superstorm Sandy highlighted the importance of pre-storm evacuation and
emergency communication between local officials and the Community both
before and after the storm. Recovery from the storm focused the
Community’s attention on issues such as the lack of power and cellular
communication after the storm, the delay in Town recovery operations due
to lengthy permitting processes, and the potential zoning modifications
necessary for increasing resiliency.
Community planning and capacity building needs
Superstorm Sandy had a devastating effect on local services. The
Communities suffered power outages and interruption of cellular phone
services. Residents and visitors need to understand the importance of
evacuation; how to safely evacuate, and that they must evacuate when
directed to do so by the County Executive. Residents that did not obey the
evacuation order and sheltered-in-place were stranded in their homes
without key services (e.g., electricity and cellular communications).

Transportation (NYS DOT).36 The Community is concerned with scour
sustained during Superstorm Sandy.
The Lido–Point Lookout Fire District’s emergency response capabilities are a
vital complement to the municipal emergency response infrastructure. Power
and other utility outage times and flood damage to electrical and
communications equipment at fire stations compromised their ability to
provide vital services and communicate important information to residents in
the days after the storm.
The lack of reliability of the local communications network was not only
inconvenient, but potentially dangerous in the days immediately after
Superstorm Sandy. As the Fire District and other entities tried to
communicate vital information to Community residents, many individuals
were unable to access these communications and instead resorted to
traveling to the Lido–Point Lookout Fire District Lido Beach Station and the
Lido–Point Lookout Fire District Point Lookout Station to obtain information.
Because so many residents were unable to return to their homes
immediately after the storm, and reported difficulty accessing useful
information about recovery activities, the Community expressed a strong
need for systematic method to communicate emergency information to
residents before and after the storm as well as to communicate with other
municipalities, the County, and the State.
Residential recovery efforts have been slowed by the Town of Hempstead
zoning regulations that restrict the allowable distance (30 feet or
approximately 2.5 stories) from the existing grade of the road to the peak of
a roof, which makes elevating a two-story house and remaining in
compliance with zoning nearly impossible. Zoning regulation modifications
are necessary.37
Municipal recovery efforts have stalled during the permitting process with
New York Department of Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC). The
established process for obtaining a permit from the NYS DEC for land-water
interface projects, such as for bulkheads, revetment, or dredging, has been
very time-consuming for the local government. An expedited process should
be created for obtaining permits required by New York State.

A critical component of the evacuation route is the Loop Parkway bridge over
Long Creek. The bridge is susceptible to scour during storm events. In 2011
the bridge was fitted with scour monitors by the New York Department of

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 31

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Community planning and capacity building opportunities
The following opportunities were identified for community planning and
capacity building:




Build upon existing evacuation education and outreach to expand the
scope of the program to include information about flood insurance,
structural elevation, green building practices, and information on
coastal protection.
The Loop Parkway bridge over Long Creek is part of a NYS DOT
project to retrofit the existing scour monitoring system to provide
more accurate reporting on tidal conditions and flow around bridge
footings.38



Long Island Power Authority (LIPA) will improve the resiliency of the
power grid by elevating Sandy-damaged substations, burying
strategic power circuits, and other improvements to how power
moves through the grid. Upgrades will minimize outages and allow
for faster recovery post-event.39



The Energy Park and Town of Hempstead Department of
Conservation and Waterways has the ability to function off the
electrical grid.



The Town of Hempstead has a robust alternative energy program
and has teamed with LIPA to offer “Solar Seminars” for residents to
educate themselves on alternative energy.



Long Beach School District and Nassau County both have reverse911 systems. The Fire District may be able to tie into one of those
systems to communicate information to residents.



As part of the recovery process, the Town of Hempstead Building
Department has eliminated the need to obtain a variance to increase
home foundation height and overall home height to comply with
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood height
guidelines.



The NYS DEC has issued a General Permit for the coastal areas of
Long Island, including reconstruction of shoreline erosion structures
that were functional before Superstorm Sandy, repair or
reconstruction of existing public infrastructure, regrading of eroded

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

dunes, and replacing sand or other material equal to that lost to the
storm at the toe of eroded dunes

Economic development
Lido Beach and Point Lookout have a limited amount of commercial
development, and both communities are built-out, which severely limits
development potential. Through Committee Meetings and Public
Engagement Events, both communities indicated a desire to limit economic
growth and maintain their residential character. The commercial development
along the bay and the small commercial districts were identified by both
communities as important assets.
Economic development needs
Small businesses struggled to rebuild a steady customer base after Sandy
(Figure II-8). There is a need for building a larger customer base, which
could include residents and visitors. It took almost 8 months for the only
grocery store in Point Lookout to reopen after being damaged by Superstorm
Sandy.40

Figure II-8: Commercial development, Point Lookout, September 2013

URS Corporation

Page 32

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

A key component of the Community’s Vision Statement, the waterfront
provides recreation and economic benefits to the communities, but enhanced
and expanded docking space is needed. The East Marina in Point Lookout
supports two commercial fishing boat slips and one commercial dive boat
slip. Point Lookout is considered a secondary maritime center by the Long
Island South Shore Estuary Reserve Council.41 Secondary maritime centers
support primarily local resources, including wholesale and retail fish markets,
packing companies, and seafood restaurants.42 The commercial fishing fleet
that operates out of Point Lookout is one of the largest commercial fishing
fleets in the Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve.43 Superstorm Sandy
caused significant damage to dock structures (Figure II-9) and sank many
watercraft in Reynolds Channel, negatively impacting commercial fishing
operations. Removal of submerged debris and watercraft in Reynolds
Channel is needed to safely allow for travel within the waterway.

Welcome gateways are a form of social branding that can enhance a
sense of community among residents, attract visitors, and create a
sense of place, which aids economic development activities.


The Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve Council maintains a
current list of grant opportunities to improve water quality; create
economic activities; implement green infrastructure projects, and
conduct education and outreach



The Point Lookout Chamber of Commerce is a non-profit
organization whose mission is to promote the business community in
Point Lookout by creating job opportunities through stimulating
industrial and commercial growth. The Chamber of Commerce aids
local businesses by assisting with marking and promotion and
conducting education and outreach.

Housing
Lido Beach and Point Lookout are primarily residential communities
(Figure II-10). Almost every housing unit had some amount of damage
caused by Superstorm Sandy. More than 1,000 total displaced homeowners
in Lido Beach and Point Lookout registered with FEMA’s Disaster Housing
Assistance Program for assistance with housing rental payments. Housing
repairs were paid for by flood insurance payments, loans, and the savings
and earnings of property owners.

Figure II-9: West Marina, Point Lookout, September 2013

URS Corporation

Economic development opportunities
Economic opportunities to improve the economic viability and commercial
opportunities in Lido Beach and Point Lookout are:


Construction of aesthetically pleasing gateways at entry points to
welcome residents and visitors. Point Lookout has one gateway
located on Lido Boulevard at the base of the Loop Parkway.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 33

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Housing opportunities

Figure II-10: Bellmore Avenue, Point Lookout, September 2013



The Town of Hempstead is very proactive in aiding repair and
replacement of residential structures by waiving several building
department fees; extending hours of construction permitted in
neighborhoods; and providing information on licensed electrical and
plumbing contractors.



Building owners and homeowners should be encouraged to seek
opportunities to increase energy efficiencies and sustainability as
buildings and homes are rebuilt.



The three Town of Hempstead owned adult group homes in Lido
Beach have pioneered the use of solar panels for power generation.
Information on the use of solar panels at the homes could provide
information to homeowners in Lido Beach and Point Lookout on the
panel sizes that are appropriate for single-family homes and on how
to secure solar panels to withstand hurricane force wind
(Figure II-11).

URS Corporation

Housing needs
Residents indicated during meetings of the NYRCR Planning Committee in
September 2013 that they are not generally in favor of increasing tourism or
public access to beaches, preferring to keep traffic to a minimum so that
streets remain safe for walking and biking. Moreover, neither Lido Beach nor
Point Lookout is identified in the Nassau County Master Plan as a “target
growth area.”44 Nor is the Community listed in the New York Metropolitan
Transportation Council Plan 2040 – Regional Transportation Plan as a
“desired growth area.”45 There is a need to protect homes from flooding
while maintaining the character of the existing neighborhoods.
Flooding caused power outages throughout Lido Beach and Point Lookout.
Residents were without power for up to 2 weeks after the storm. An
alternative source of electricity or a backup source of power is needed to
avoid similar outages in the future.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Figure II-11: Solar photovoltaic panels on roof
of adult group home, Lido Beach, September 2013

URS Corporation

Page 34

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



The Energy Master Plan of the Town of Hempstead Conservation and
Waterways Division proposes the development of a microgrid that
could provide a limited amount of electric power to homes and
businesses in Point Lookout. 46

Health and social services
Medical services on the Barrier Island were provided by the Long Beach
Medical Center, which was severely damaged by Superstorm Sandy with
floodwater fully inundating the basement level and flooding the first floor
with 4 feet of water.475
The public schools that serve Lido Beach and Point Lookout are operated by
the Long Beach School District: Lido Elementary School / Long Beach Pre-K
Center, Long Beach Middle School, Long Beach High School, and the Nike
Alternative School and Environmental Center (Figure II-12). The school
complex is located in Lido Beach to the north of Lido Boulevard, with access
through the Lido North neighborhood and from Lido Boulevard. The school
district offices are also located along Lido Boulevard. The Community
identified all school buildings as assets.

Emergency response in Lido Beach and Point Lookout is provided by the
Lido–Point Lookout Fire District, which operates out of three facilities: a fire
station in Lido Beach, a fire station in Point Lookout, and the Point Lookout
Rescue Company. The fire stations were identified by the community as
important assets.
Socially vulnerable populations in the NYRCR Community are served by
Camp Anchor and the adult group homes on Seaspray Drive in Lido Beach.
Camp Anchor is a recreational facility that serves Hempstead residents with
special needs (both children and adults). Colloquially known as “the adult
group homes,” three single-family residences are operated by the Association
for the Help of Retarded Children to provide services to a socially vulnerable
population. The residences are utilized by the Children’s Residential Program
to provide services to individuals on the Autism Spectrum with the goals of
helping children become happy, functional adults who feel connected to their
community and are empowered to make choices in as many areas of their
life as possible.48 The three residences serve 25 residents. The Community
identified Camp Anchor and the adult group homes as important assets.
Health and social services needs
The Long Beach Medical Center closed due to damage from Superstorm
Sandy and is now in bankruptcy. Efforts have been initiated by South Nassau
Communities Hospital to purchase facility's real estate and operating assets,
but whether the center will reopen as a hospital remains unclear.49
Consequently, residents must travel at least 10 miles off the barrier island
through a heavily trafficked road corridor to the next-closest hospital, South
Nassau Communities Hospital, which is a hardship for those needing
emergency care. According to the Lido–Point Lookout Fire Department
Commissioner, when the department responds to calls that require
hospitalization for victims, a round trip to the South Nassau or Nassau
University Medical Center takes 2 to 3 hours, as compared to the 5-minute
trip to Long Beach Medical Center.50 If no hospital opens on the barrier
island, the Community has expressed the need for an emergency care center
to be established on-island.

Figure II-12: Long Beach Middle School,
Lido Beach, September 2013

URS Corporation

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Long Beach School District buildings (e.g., Long Beach Elementary / Pre-K
Center, Long Beach Middle School, Long Beach High School, Long Beach
School District offices) were damaged by Superstorm Sandy. Children were
unable to return to their school for several months after the storm. In some

Page 35

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

cases, they were moved to other school locations while post-storm
construction was underway. The School District has made modifications to
protect critical components from flooding and should continue to examine
further opportunities to protect its facilities.
The emergency response facilities in Lido Beach and Point Lookout are older,
ground-level structures and are at risk to flood damage. Flooding inside the
Lido Beach Fire Station reached 4 feet in depth, destroying electrical,
mechanical, and plumbing equipment. The Point Lookout Fire Station
suffered similar damage to its utility systems and equipment, but was not as
heavily damaged as the Lido Beach Fire Station. Although both fire stations
have back-up emergency generators to maintain electrical power during
storm events, Superstorm Sandy destroyed the generators, leaving both fire
stations without power after the storm. The Point Lookout Rescue Company
building is located on the bay and was extensively damaged by Superstorm
Sandy. Currently, the Fire District is operating out of the Lido Beach and
Point Lookout Fire Stations, with the Rescue Squad and its ambulance
sharing space in the Point Lookout Fire Station.51
Adequate services and programming must be available for the socially
vulnerable populations served by the adult group homes and Camp Anchor.
Health and social services opportunities


Medical providers have expressed an interest in opening an urgent
care or emergency care center on the island. Residents from all
communities on the barrier island are working to make their voices
heard to bring emergency medical care back to the Long Beach
Medical Center through public forums; “die-in” protests, and an
online petition to the Governor to reopen the hospital as full-service
facility.54



The Long Beach School District is floodproofing its facilities by
relocating mechanical, electrical, and plumbing equipment to the
second floor or placing equipment in watertight locations below
grade. All of the schools, except the Long Beach High School, have
already installed wind protection measures on windows. The District
has applied for a FEMA grant to replace the weaker High School
windows.53

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs



The Lido-Point Lookout Fire District is currently planning to renovate
the Lido Beach and Point Lookout Fire Stations to improve resiliency
to coastal storms. Installation of wind-resistant roofs and windows,
elevation of structures, wet floodproofing (elevating utilities and
emergency generators above anticipated flood levels and allowing
water to temporarily inundate the building) or temporary flood
barriers could reduce the damage from flooding in the future.



The adult group homes and Camp Anchor were protected during
Superstorm Sandy by the dune system along the oceanfront in Lido
Beach.

Infrastructure
Superstorm Sandy highlighted three main infrastructure needs:
improvements to the stormwater drainage system, the sanitary sewer system
in Lido Beach, and to coastal erosion protection measures in both
communities.
Infrastructure needs
Superstorm Sandy overwhelmed the stormwater system. Residents reported
pockets of standing water throughout Point Lookout and in front of the Lido
Beach Fire Station for up to 5 days after the storm. Clogged storm drains
and pipes limited the effectiveness of existing stormwater sewers (Figure II13). Flooding was exacerbated by water being forced through the open
storm drain outfalls along the bayfront, back into the stormwater system,
and up through catch basins onto neighborhood streets. The stormwater
management system was not designed to meet current and future risk needs
and flooding occurs on key roads like Lido Boulevard, which serves as the
evacuation route prior to and during large storms for Lido Beach, Point
Lookout, and portions of the City of Long Beach. Neighborhood streets
contribute to ponding throughout the Community. Older streets are not
graded to shed runoff to the stormwater system. Ocean Boulevard in Lido
Beach is graded to shed water into the dune system and not onto lateral
streets.

Page 36

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Point Lookout is partially protected from coastal erosion and flooding along
Jones Inlet by a stone revetment. The revetment extends from the southern
tip of Point Lookout, but does not extend to the northern tip of the
community, leaving residences at the eastern end of Bayside Drive
vulnerable to coastal erosion. The revetment was severely damaged by
Superstorm Sandy, hindering its ability to provide protection from flood or
erosion.
Infrastructure opportunities


A stormwater drainage system study that includes mapping of areas
that experience frequent, nuisance flooding from tidal and rain
events may identify ways to repair and retrofit the existing
stormwater drainage system to function better in future storms.



Mechanical modifications to the existing stormwater drainage
system, such as the installation of backflow preventers, may improve
performance.



Residents and business owners may have opportunities to work with
the Town of Hempstead and Nassau County to increase the number
of inspections and the speed of repairs of stormwater drainage
systems along roadways maintained by either governmental entity.



Regrading lateral streets throughout the Community to shed runoff
into the stormwater system could be done in conjunction with
stormwater system improvements.



The City of Long Beach and Bay Park are discussing ways to improve
their wastewater treatment plants, which may provide an
opportunity for Lido Beach and Point Lookout to use their facilities
and support a regional project.



Supporting the potential conversion of the Long Beach Water
Pollution Control Plant to a lift station that transfers sewage to the
Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant is an opportunity to update aging
infrastructure and reduce vulnerability.



Raising bulkheads in coordination with the Town of Hempstead and
City of Long Beach should provide protection against storm surge
and erosion.



Repairing or reconstructing bulkheads should provide protection
against storm surge and erosion along canals and the bayfront.

Figure II-13: Catch basin at Long Beach High School, November 2013

URS Corporation

The sanitary sewer system in Lido Beach was also heavily impacted by
Superstorm Sandy. The Lido Towers and roughly 220 residences in the
western portion of Lido Beach are connected to the City of Long Beach
sewage system. A pump station on Regent Drive pumps sewage to the Long
Beach wastewater treatment plant. Sandy inundated the Regent Drive pump
station, damaging components and rendering the pumps inoperable. Sewer
mains are old and many have deteriorated to the point where sewage has
infiltrated the groundwater.54 Superstorm Sandy stressed and further
damaged sewer pipes. Point Lookout is not on a sanitary sewer system.
Wastewater in Point Lookout is discharged into cesspools and septic tanks.
During Superstorm Sandy, septic tanks in Point Lookout overflowed the
system, releasing sewage into the groundwater and backing up into
residences. Pathogens released into surface and groundwater may pose a
human and environmental health risk.
Lido Beach and Point Lookout are protected by hardened shorelines along
the bayfront and partially along Jones Inlet. Many private homeowners,
business owners, and public facilities along the canals and bayfront have
installed bulkheads for erosion protection and to afford some degree of
protection from high water and waves. The effectiveness of bulkheads in
providing protection from high water is dependent upon continuous system
constructed to a consistent elevation. When bulkheads are overtopped, they
can trap water, which can damage structures located behind the bulkheads.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page 37

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



The revetment or hard protection on the east side of Point Lookout
could be extended to the northeastern tip of the Community to
reduce the potential for erosion and provide flood protection.



The revetment should be repaired to improve flood protection and
erosion control and provide flood protection.

Natural and cultural resources
Natural resources and recreational opportunities are very important to Lido
Beach and Point Lookout, as evidenced by their inclusion in the Vision
Statement developed by the Community. Committee members and residents
identified town parks, marinas, the beaches and dune system, and the marsh
as community assets.

Figure II-14: Remaining sand dune, Point Lookout, September 2013

URS Corporation

Natural and cultural resources needs
Coastal erosion is a significant problem in Lido Beach and Point Lookout.
Littoral drift moves sand from the eastern to the western end of the barrier
island, away from the Community’s beaches. Superstorm Sandy accelerated
erosion, resulting in roughly 294,000 cubic yards of sand lost from the
beaches of the Barrier Island.55
The primary frontal dune of the dual-dune system that provided protection
to Lido Beach was damaged during Hurricane and Irene and destroyed
during Superstorm Sandy from Maple Boulevard to Biarritz Street (Figure II14). The storm surge also opened breaches in the dune system, resulting in
significant flooding from the oceanfront of both communities. Salt marshes
have been largely filled and developed in the NYRCR Community. A 185-acre
salt marsh, the Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve, exists on the north side
of Lido Beach and is protected from development by regulation. Areas of the
marsh that interface with Reynolds Channel suffered some erosion due to
Superstorm Sandy.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Natural and cultural resources opportunities


The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is beginning a coastal risk
management project to conduct beach renourishment in 5-year
intervals over a 50-year period; construct an engineered dune
system along Lido Beach, Point Lookout and the City of Long Beach;
rehabilitate existing groins/jetties; and construct four new
groins/jetties in Point Lookout.56



The Town of Hempstead has initiated a program to increase dune
plantings along the oceanfront to reduce the potential for erosion.



Dune breaches are currently being filled with sand by the Town of
Hempstead. Once a breach is filled, vegetation is planted to provide
stability and erosion resistance.



Residents and business owners may support the Town of
Hempstead’s efforts to work with the New York Department of
Environmental Conservation to permit revitalization of marshlands.



The Town of Hempstead is investigating the changes in marshes,
small islands, and natural protection systems. The study may provide
valuable information about trends and opportunities for protecting
these resources.



The marsh provides protection from flooding by providing open
space that slows and stores floodwater.

Page 38

Section III:
Reconstruction and
resiliency strategies

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies
Strategies and associated actions were developed through NYRCR Planning
Committee Meetings and three Public Engagement Events, an online survey,
an asset inventory, a risk assessment, and a needs and opportunities
analysis for Lido Beach and Point Lookout. A Community Vision was
established by the Planning Committee and through a public engagement
visioning exercise conducted on September 24, 2013, which reflects the
Community’s goals, objectives, and strategies. Metrics such as resiliency,
time frame, and technical feasibility were used to advance the strategies into
a series of capital projects, feasibility studies, policy implementation, and
regional cooperation initiatives for recovering and rebuilding from the
impacts of Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene. These strategies are
intended to make the NYRCR Community more resilient, while mitigating
potential future damage from storm events.

A. Reconstruction and resiliency strategies
Developing reconstruction and resiliency strategies and the projects that will
be used to implement those strategies was a community-driven process.
When the Committee and residents developed a Vision Statement for Lido
Beach and Point Lookout, they were taking the first step toward increasing
resiliency by setting goals: maintain a high quality of life, protect residents
and structures within the community, and protect and respect the natural
features of their community.
The next step toward developing strategies involved the identification by the
Committee and Community of important community assets; the location of
the assets, and the development of a description of the damage inflicted on
the assets by Superstorm Sandy.
Understanding the vulnerabilities of key assets is vital to developing
strategies and projects that will protect and improve the resiliency of the
assets. Based on knowledge gained from the visioning process, data
collected from the community asset inventory, the needs and opportunities
assessment, and the risk assessment, the Committee and Community
identified strategies for consideration in developing the NYRCR Lido
Beach/Point Lookout Plan.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

The Committee, with guidance from the Community, prioritized identified
strategies according to agreed-upon metrics such as time frame, contribution
to asset resiliency, technical feasibility, and community priority. The strategy
descriptions are followed by a brief summary of projects that implement the
strategies for each goal in Tables III-1 though III-3. Projects are categorized
as Proposed and Featured Projects. For the purposes of the NYRCR planning
process:


Proposed Projects are proposed for funding through the community’s
allocation of Community Development Block Grant–Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding; and



Featured Projects are innovative projects where an initial study or
discrete first phase of the project is proposed for CDBG-DR funding
or other identified funding.

Strategy 1: Increase protection from coastal storms
The NYRCR Planning Committee and residents have consistently identified
revetment reconstruction throughout the planning process as top priority.
The eastern border of Point Lookout faces Jones Inlet. Point Lookout is
vulnerable to erosion due to ocean currents and tidal processes. The rock
revetment absorbs the energy from storm surge, reducing flood impacts on
residences, and protects the coast from erosion. However, the revetment
was damaged by Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene and is not providing
complete protection. The revetment does not extend to the northeast corner
of Point Lookout, which is vulnerable to wave impacts and shoreline erosion.
A dune system was present behind the revetment to provide protection from
storm surge, erosion, and subsidence; however, the dune system was destroyed
by Superstorm Sandy.57 Superstorm Sandy contributed to further erosion of the
shoreline in the northeast corner of Point Lookout that is not protected by the
revetment. Shoreline erosion threatens the foundations of housing along Bayside
Drive. If the northeast end of Point Lookout is left unprotected, erosion could
damage foundations and lead to structural collapse of houses.
Dune restoration is a major concern for the Committee and residents, who
realize that the dune provided substantial protection to residences before it
was breached by Superstorm Sandy. Residents are aware of the planned

Page 40

Lido Beach and Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) project to restore the dune, but the
project is in the final stages of planning and residents feel there is an
urgency to the project: the sooner the dune breaches are filled and repaired,
the more growing time the dune plantings will have to create a stronger,
more cohesive dune that will provide better protection.

The Town of Hempstead received sand from a USACE dredging project and
is currently filling the breaches with dredged sand. The Town also purchased
200,000 dune grass plantings. The dune grass will be planted this spring and
will serve to anchor and accumulate sand and create an environment for
other plants to colonize, eventually helping to form a cohesive dune.

Table III-1: Strategy 1 – Proposed Projects
Strategy: Increase protection from coastal storms

Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured
Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Revetment Repair and Reconstruction

Construct sections of rock revetment at northeast end of Point
Lookout for protection of homes, businesses, and recreational
facilities

$3,800,000

Proposed

Yes

Repair Dunes & Construct Dune
Walkovers

Fill breaches and repair dunes to prevent tidal surge from flooding
streets, homes, and businesses; construct walkovers to provide
beach access

$4,600,000

Proposed

Yes

Strategy 2: Improve stormwater drainage

Lookout, and the City of Long Beach as well as the main commercial corridor
for Lido Beach and Point Lookout.

The Community identified the need to improve the stormwater system
infrastructure as one of the most important strategies for achieving resiliency
for residents and businesses in the community.

The Town has installed sand and debris filters in catch basins throughout
Lido Beach and Point Lookout. The filters were cleaned out by a contractor,
under Town supervision, after Superstorm Sandy.58 Filters are generally
cleaned out by the Town when residents report blockage of catch basins.59

The stormwater system was damaged during Superstorm Sandy, which
overwhelmed the system, filling pipes with sand and forcing water back
through the system due to tidal infiltration at the outfalls along the bayfront.
Residents report that system is now so damaged that it is overwhelmed by
minor rain events, causing ponding in neighborhoods and along Lido
Boulevard, which is the evacuation route for residents of Lido Beach, Point

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

The Committee and residents identified known problem spots in the
stormwater system, which are captured in the projects in Table III-2. One of
the major issues identified is the need to conduct an assessment of the
stormwater system to identify specific problems and design a solution to

DRAFT

Page 41

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

resolve those problems. An opportunity exists to conduct such a study as
part of the Superstorm Sandy recovery and resiliency efforts.
Additional stormwater drainage concerns involve the large amount of
impervious surfaces in the parking lots of the Town Parks that line the

beach. There may be opportunities to utilize stormwater management best
practices to improve drainage at the parking lots and decrease the stress on
the stormwater system due to runoff.

Table III-2: Strategy 2 – Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy: Improve stormwater drainage

Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Tidal Backflow Prevention and
Stormwater Treatment

Prevent tidal water from infiltrating low-lying areas at stormwater
outfalls that are partially or fully submerged during high tides and
storms, causing flooding. Reduce contaminants discharged from
outfalls.

$800,000

Proposed

Yes

Drainage Improvements (Phase
3A)

Comprehensive stormwater study to identify improvement areas to
reduce flooding along evacuation routes, primary roadways, lowlying areas, and economic corridors

$5,900,000

Proposed

Yes

$10,000,000

Featured

Yes

$300,000

Featured

Yes

Section 3A (along Lido Boulevard from Maple Boulevard to
Harrogate Street, Lido Beach) will be the first phase of
construction.
Alternate Stormwater
Opportunities

Conduct an analysis of the stormwater management system in the
vicinity of the Town Parks and Nickerson Beach. Design and
construct stormwater management systems at key project
locations in Town Parks based on recommendations of stormwater
management system study.

Encourage Stormwater Capture
during Sidewalk Replacement

Install stormwater management system under sidewalks when
sidewalks are replaced

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 42

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy3: Increase resiliency of critical facilities
Lido Beach and Point Lookout are served by three fire stations (Lido–Point
Lookout Fire District Lido Beach Station, Lido–Point Lookout Fire District
Point Lookout Station, and the Point Lookout Rescue Company), which
provide first response during normal day-to-day operations as well as for
storm events. Keeping the fire stations functional for response during and
recovery after storm events is critical for protecting the lives and safety of all
residents in the community, and the lives and safety of first responders
themselves.
All three fire stations were damaged by flooding caused by Superstorm
Sandy. The Point Lookout Rescue Company, located on the bayfront along
Reynolds Channel (see Figure II-3), was heavily damaged by flooding,
rendering the facility unusable.60 The Rescue Company facility has been

decommissioned by the Fire District and is not in use.61 The Lido Beach and
Point Lookout Fire Stations have been repaired and are operational.
Ultimately, the Fire District would like to reconfigure the Point Lookout Fire
Station to enlarge the truck room to fit an ambulance as well as fire vehicles,
add a second story to the building to contain the communications
equipment; relocate emergency equipment and apparatus above flood
levels; and relocate the emergency electrical generator to the roof.62 The Fire
District would like to demolish and rebuild the Lido Beach Fire Station in the
same location. The new fire station would contain resiliency measures to
protect the building from coastal storms. Until the Fire District is able to
realize its project, the two existing fire stations are still vulnerable to damage
by coastal storms. Increasing the resiliency of the existing fire stations is
needed to ensure the continuation of the critical services (e.g., fighting fires,
emergency medical response) to Lido Beach and Point Lookout.

Table III-3: Strategy 3 – Proposed Project
Strategy: Increase resiliency of critical facilities

Project Name
Critical Facility Resiliency

Short Project Description
Provide resiliency enhancements to fire service buildings and
secure critical facilities with resiliency enhancements and flood
protection

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

$400,000

Proposed

Yes

Page 43

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy 4: Meet communication needs pre-event
Emergency communication is a key need and vital concern for residents.
Although reverse-911 systems have been established by Nassau County, the
Town of Hempstead and the Long Beach School District, these systems do
not provide all residents of Lido Beach and Point Lookout with information
specific to the conditions on the barrier island.

communicate specific conditions of Lido Beach and Point Lookout.
Coordinating a reverse-911 system on the island in the Lido–Point Lookout
Fire District for all residents of Lido Beach and Point Lookout would
communicate actual conditions on the ground to all residents and allow for
dissemination of evacuation orders and other emergency information before
and after an event.

Often, the barrier island is isolated from the larger portion of Long Island
and Nassau County. Local reverse-911 capability is needed on-island to
Table III-4: Strategy 4 – Proposed Project
Strategy: Meet evacuation needs pre-event

Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Develop a Lifeline Safety Plan and establish a program for
providing regular education and outreach about emergency
evacuation; includes development of a reverse-911 system for the
Lido–Point Lookout Fire District

$500,000

Proposed Project

Yes

Project Name
Evacuation Education and
Outreach Program and Lifeline
Safety Plan

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 44

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy 5: Promote evacuation
The primary means of storm protection for residents and visitors to Lido
Beach and Point Lookout is pre-disaster evacuation. Residents of both
communities understand the importance of evacuation; however, not all
residents or visitors followed evacuation orders during Superstorm Sandy. By
failing to evacuate, residents and visitors put themselves at risk and also
endanger first responders who may be called upon to provide fire, rescue, or
medical response during and after a storm event.
Outreach and education are needed to encourage residents and visitors to
evacuate when ordered to do so and inform them how to safely evacuate.
Lido Boulevard is the evacuation route off the barrier island to mainland
Long Island. Residents and visitors need to understand that if they do not
leave when the evacuation order is issued, they may not be able to leave
later because of flooding or debris obstructing Lido Boulevard, bridges, and
secondary roadways.
Another facet of evacuation preparedness planning is ensuring that
evacuation routes and secondary roads to critical facilities and public
transportation are clear, well-lit, and clearly identified.

storm. Electrical power to both Lido Beach and Point Lookout was nonfunctional after the storm. The only facility with power was of the Town of
Hempstead Department of Conservation and Waterways and Town Energy
Park, located in Point Lookout, which is powered by alternative energy
sources. Cellular communication towers and equipment throughout the
communities were damaged by the storm, increasing the isolation of
stranded residents.
The fire stations functioned as information centers where residents could go
to get up-to-date information on conditions within Lido Beach and Point
Lookout and in the other communities on the Barrier Island.
Residents are aware that Town facilities and critical facilities will offer aid
during and after an event to the best of their ability and with the resources
on-hand and provide information on response and recovery efforts. However,
the emphasis should be on evacuation and residents removing themselves
from danger, not on relying on Town facilities that are not designed or
designated as community assistance centers.

Residents who did not obey the evacuation order prior to landfall of
Superstorm Sandy were stranded on the barrier island during and after the
Table III-5: Strategy 5 – Proposed Project
Strategy: Promote evacuation

Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Develop a Lifeline Safety Plan and establish a program for
providing regular education and outreach about emergency
evacuation; includes development of a reverse-911 system for the
Lido–Point Lookout Fire District

$500,000

Proposed Project

Yes

Project Name
Evacuation Education and
Outreach Program and Lifeline
Safety Plan

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 45

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy 6: Increase resiliency of salt marsh to coastal erosion
The Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve is the last salt marsh on the Barrier
Island. The marsh is vulnerable to erosion, particularly during storm events,
and suffered shoreline loss due to Superstorm Sandy. The marsh provides
protection on the bayfront of Lido Beach by maintaining open space for

floodwater storage and conveyance. The marsh also provides significant
habitat for shorebirds and is part of the Atlantic Flyway, a coastal migration
route for shorebirds.

Table III-6: Strategy 6 – Featured Project
Strategy: Increase resiliency of salt marsh to coastal erosion

Project Name
Shoreline and Marsh Restoration
and Open Space Protection

Short Project Description
Provide stabilization of the shoreline of the Lido Beach Passive
Nature Preserve and Tidal Salt Marsh with creation of natural
habitat

Strategy 7: Increase resiliency of power grid
In addition to flooding homes, Superstorm Sandy interrupted the power
supply to Lido Beach and Point Lookout. Residents who did not obey the
evacuation order were stranded in their homes without electricity.
As a result of Sandy, continuity of power supply to residences and faster
restoration of power post-event was a serious concern for the Committee.
Increasing the resiliency of the power supply to residences, businesses, and
facilities in Lido Beach and Point Lookout can be accomplished in many ways.
The Town Energy Park in Point Lookout provides a model for energy
efficiency and resiliency and remained fully functional after Superstorm
Sandy. The Town Energy Park is located at the Town’s Department of
Conservation and Waterways Facility, which also operates on a combination
of solar, wind, and geothermal power.
Residential alternative energy is encouraged and supported by the Town of
Hempstead. The Town has implemented a Residential Energy Star Homes
code that requires new homes to receive a specific rating on the Home
Energy Rating Index, a sliding scale used to evaluate the energy efficiency of

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

$3,200,000

Featured Project

No

a home.63 The Town also offers Solar PV (photovoltaic) and Home Efficiency
Educational Seminars (a joint program with Long Island Power Authority and
Renewable Energy Long Island), expedites the permitting process for
residential solar energy installation, and charges a flat fee for residential
solar power projects.64 Many residents in Lido Beach have made use of the
Town’s alternative energy incentives and solar PV cells are visible on the
roofs of homes throughout Lido Beach, including the adult group homes.
Strategy 8: Support a regional solution for medical services
The NYRCR Planning Committee and residents are concerned about the lack
of medical facilities on the barrier island. The only hospital on the barrier
island was the Long Beach Medical Center, which served all five communities
on the island when in operation. The Long Beach Medical Center was a 162bed facility that provided medical and surgical services and outpatient
programs.65 Floodwaters from Superstorm Sandy inundated basement areas
of the hospital, rendering the electrical, mechanical, and plumbing systems
inoperable.66 The Long Beach Medical Center has been closed since October
2012. Residents seeking urgent medical care need to travel to South Nassau

Page 46

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Communities Hospital in Oceanside, an 8- to 10.7-mile drive for residents of
Lido Beach and Point Lookout: a drive that could be as short as 20 minutes
or as long as 2 hours depending on traffic conditions, as reported by
residents and the Committee.
The Long Beach Medical Center has been closed since Superstorm Sandy and
has filed for bankruptcy.67 South Nassau Communities Hospital plans to use
Federal funding to open an urgent care center at the Medical Center and is
looking into purchasing the Medical Center to repair the facility and restore
its function as a hospital.68
Strategy 9: Provide school children with a safe, supportive, and
familiar environment after a storm
The Committee believes that protecting schools is vital to community
resiliency. Disaster recovery is often an extremely stressful experience for
children. Returning to familiar situations and environments as quickly as
possible during disaster recovery can reduce stress by providing a familiar
safe, supportive environment.
The Long Beach High School is located on the bayfront but is elevated, which
protected the building from flood-related damage. However, some windows
were broken and portions of the roof were damaged by wind. The Long
Beach Elementary School / Pre-K Center, Long Beach Middle School, and
District offices were inundated and damaged by floodwater.
The Long Beach School District has received funding for recovery and
resiliency improvements from Federal agencies and programs such as the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Public Assistance Program. The
School District is in the process of floodproofing school facilities; relocating
mechanical, electrical, and plumbing equipment above flood levels; and
installing wind-protective measures on windows.69

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page 47

Section IV:
Implementation –
Project Profiles

Section IV:
Implementation – Project Profiles
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program has allocated to
the NYRCR Lido Beach/Point Lookout up to $6 million (Lido Beach: $3
million; Point Lookout: $3 million). The funding is provided through the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community
Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program. While
developing projects and actions for inclusion in the NYRCR Plan, Planning
Committees took into account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses (CBAs),
the effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical
assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees also
considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be eligible
for CDBG-DR funding. The projects and actions set forth in the NYRCR Plan
are divided into three categories. The order in which the projects and actions
are listed in the NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the NYRCR
Community’s (Community’s) prioritization of these projects and actions.
Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding through the
Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are projects
and actions that the Planning Committee has identified as important
resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in depth, but has not proposed
for funding through the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations (see Section V) are projects and actions that the Planning
Committee would like to highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed
Projects or Featured Projects. The total cost of Proposed Projects in the
NYRCR Plan exceeds the Community’s CDBG-DR allocation to allow for
flexibility if some Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to
environmental review, HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors.
Implementation of the projects and actions found in the NYRCR Plan are
subject to applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in
the NYRCR Plan does not guarantee that a particular project or action will be
eligible for CDBG‐DR funding or that it will be implemented.
This section provides a complete project profile for each Proposed or
Featured Project identified by the NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee)
and Community. The Proposed and Featured Projects were identified,

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

selected, and advanced as a response to the risks, needs, and opportunities
described in Section II of the NYRCR Lido Beach/Point Lookout Plan.
The Proposed and Featured Projects are some of the implementation
mechanisms for the Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies described in
Section III. These projects represent actions that are recommended by the
Committee to be implemented in the near future to build resiliency and fulfill
other important Community goals.
Projects of regional significance are noted in the project profiles. Regional
significance can mean that a Proposed or Featured Project protects an asset
that is used by several communities (e.g., reduce flooding on an established
evacuation route) or it is the Community’s part that spans several
communities (e.g., a community restores the dunes on their part of a barrier
island).
Initially, the project descriptions consisted of a basic project description that
included a preliminary scope of work, the Recovery Support Function
beneficiaries of the project (i.e., public/private, local/regional), and basic cost
categories. The projects underwent an initial feasibility and funding
evaluation in which various sources of funding for the projects were
explored. The Planning Committee used the input from the Public
Engagement Events, including online surveys, to make decisions about which
projects to select as Proposed or Featured. The results of the Community
Public Engagement Events are documented in more detail in Section V, but
the overall results were generally consistent with the Planning Committee’s
selection of projects.
In addition to providing a detailed description of each project, the profiles
include information on two important elements used by the Committee to
evaluate the value of each project, a cost-benefit analysis and a riskreduction analysis. The benefits were presented with qualitative descriptions
that demonstrate how the projects assist the community in economic,
environmental, and health and social services terms. Before proceeding to
the projects themselves, it is important to understand these two analytical
elements of the project profiles.

Page 49

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Cost-benefit analysis
A CBA is a tool that is used to calculate and compare the benefits and costs
of a project. The CBA provides decision-makers with a framework for
comparing projects (i.e., anticipated cost of implementation versus total
expected benefits) and determining whether the benefits of a particular
project outweigh the costs. The results of the CBA were used in two ways in
the NYRCR planning process: (1) to help the Committee prioritize projects,
and (2) to guide project selection for implementation based on the most
cost-beneficial means for providing resiliency to the assets identified by the
community.
Because the NYRCR Program is a community-driven process, the CBA is
focused on identifying project costs and benefits that clearly relate to the
communities that the Committee represents. Community and Committee
input, informed by a true understanding of local conditions, needs, and
community values, plays a crucial role in the selection of projects for
implementation. The risk reduction benefits are described in terms of how
much a Proposed or Featured Project would lower the vulnerability scores,
described in Section II, of key community assets. The additional benefits of a
project are described in qualitative terms that explain how a project would
bring additional value to the community.

important to the analysis and are therefore addressed qualitatively. Lostopportunity costs include:


Economic loss to residents and local and regional employers as a
result of the inability to work;



Hindrance in the provision of life safety and emergency services,
resulting in repeated inability to access vast areas of the community;
and



Extensive, repetitive damage to personal property (e.g., vehicles,
residences) and public infrastructure resulting from frequent
recurring flooding and future storm events.

Project benefits
The types of benefits considered in the CBA include:


Risk reduction: Extent to which a project reduces the risk of
damage to a community asset from a future storm event (discussed
further below under “Risk reduction analysis”).70



Economic: Project’s potential to help minimize economic costs and
reduce the time it takes for the local economy to rebound from a
storm event and to increase its economic growth. Economic data
include, where applicable, an estimate of permanent jobs
secured/added; relationship to, and/or furtherance of, regional
economic development plan goals; potential for additional economic
activity; and the net effect on local municipal expenditures.71



Health and social services: Qualitative information was provided
on the population benefits of improved access to health and social
service facilities including public safety services and the degree to
which essential health and social service facilities are able to provide
services to a community during a future storm or weather event as a
result of the project.



Environmental protection: Benefits include the protection of
crucial environmental assets or high-priority habitat, threatened and
endangered species, migration, or habitat connectivity; any cleanup
resulting from the project; creation of open space; and green

The costs and benefits used to evaluate projects through the CBA are
explained further below.

Project costs
Project profiles include an estimated cost for implementing the project.
Factors contributing to the lifecycle costs of the project (e.g., operation and
maintenance costs) are described in general terms. The CBA cannot forecast
costs or benefits with complete certainty, but it provides the community with
a practical understanding of the potential estimated costs of project
implementation and the potential benefits that could accrue to the
community with the project in place.
The cost of implementing a project is only one aspect of the justification of
funding the project. Another important variable is the future cost of not
implementing projects. While the lost-opportunity costs of not implementing
a project do not always lend themselves to quantification, they are no less

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 50

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

infrastructure that contributes to flood mitigation and community
resiliency.

The project criteria symbols are:

Risk-reduction analysis
A risk-reduction analysis estimates the extent to which a Proposed or
Featured Project would lower the flood risk to the identified community
critical assets and population. The analysis used information from the risk
assessment described in Section II to determine the risk of an asset before
the project is implemented and then risk reduction is estimated by
determining how much the Proposed or Featured Project would lower the
vulnerability score.

A. Proposed Projects
Proposed Projects are proposed for funding through a community’s allocation
of CDBG-DR funding. The Committee developed and selected the Proposed
Projects based on input from residents during multiple Public Engagement
Events and comments received through the NYRCR Program website. The
locations of the Proposed Projects are depicted on Figure IV-1. The projects
are not ranked.
The Proposed Projects are as follows:


Revetment Repair and Reconstruction;



Tidal Backflow Prevention and Stormwater Treatment;



Drainage Improvements;



Repair Dunes and Construct Dune Walkovers;



Critical Facility Resiliency; and



Evacuation and Education/Outreach Program and Lifeline Safety
Plan.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 51

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure IV-1: Location of Proposed Projects

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 52

Revetment Repair and Reconstruction

Point Lookout

Issue: Storm surge flooding and erosion control
Repair and reconstruction of the revetment along Jones Inlet in Point
Lookout to protect residences in Point Lookout was established as a top
priority for the Committee during the first NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee Meeting in September 2013
(Figure IV-2). The revetment and its landward dune were damaged by
Superstorm Sandy. The storm also accelerated coastal erosion beyond
where the revetment ends at the northeast corner of Point Lookout. Due
to damages sustained during the storm, the revetment is not providing
complete protection. The revetment along Jones Inlet functions as a
barrier that absorbs wave energy, reflects waves, and reduces wave runup during storm events. Until the revetment is repaired, houses along
Mineola Avenue adjacent to the Point Lookout Beach District Park will be
vulnerable to damage from waves and surge generated by coastal storms.
A portion of the revetment should be buried under its landward dune to
help prevent localized scour landward of the revetment. Portions of the
landward dune were destroyed by Superstorm Sandy, rendering the area
landward of the revetment vulnerable to scour.

Figure IV-2: Existing stone revetment, looking north

URS Corporation

The area to the north of the revetment is subject to an ongoing process of
coastal erosion along Jones Inlet, resulting in shoreline retreat, reducing
the distance between the water and structures on Bayside Drive and
increasing the vulnerability of residences and businesses to coastal
erosion. If nothing is done to halt the process of erosion, the foundations
of residences and businesses could be undermined, leading to structural
Cost Estimate

Timeline

$3,800,000

18 to 24 months

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 53

Revetment Repair/Reconstruction
collapse and threatening the life safety of the occupants. The process of
erosion occurring at the northeast end of Point Lookout also causes loss of
open space in the Point Lookout Beach District Park. Eventually, if left
unprotected, erosion along Jones Inlet in the area of the Park will encroach
upon additional residences on Mineola Drive.
A site visit was conducted to assess the condition of the existing revetment
and the unprotected area along the western shore of Jones Inlet. The
existing revetment extends from a stone jetty at the southeast corner of the
island to another groin situated at the southern extreme of the crescent of
beach at the northeast corner. The revetment is in generally good repair,
and faced with larger armor stone in the portion along the southeast corner
to the extension of Beech Street. From Beech Street to the extension of Lido
Boulevard, the revetment is unimproved with a smaller size of facing stone.
From Lido Boulevard to its northern extremity, the revetment is in poor
repair and generally consists of randomly stacked sections of concrete
rubble.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) is implementing coastal
restoration work in communities impacted by Superstorm Sandy. In Point
Lookout, the USACE is proposing to rehabilitate roughly 640 linear feet of the
revetment and improve the groins/jetties.72
This project proposes extending the existing revetment north to the end of
Jones Inlet and west around the tip of Point Lookout along Reynolds Channel
(Figure IV-3, 4). Prior to beginning the design phase of this project, a
hydrogeologic and hydraulic analysis and an existing conditions inspection

should be conducted to understand the processes affecting the area to be
protected by the new revetment section and to help design the new section
of revetment to tie into the existing revetment system. The new revetment
system should be designed to be rock rubble construction to match the
existing revetment system. Construction activities should also include filling
the landward area protected by the new revetment section with sand and
planting grasses or other vegetation to promote soil cohesion and create a
stable land mass. Depending on the design, some new open space could be
created as a result of this project. The project would result in the protection
of residential and commercial structures and the life safety of the occupants
on Bayside Drive, Mineola Avenue, and of the existing open space at the
Point Lookout Beach District Park.
Short description:
Construct section of rock revetment at northeast end of Point Lookout for
protection of homes, businesses, and recreational facilities.
Key project elements (may include, but are not limited to):





Perform a hydrogeologic and hydraulic engineering study;
Inspect the condition of the existing revetment system;
Design and construct rock revetment; and
Fill landward area behind the revetment with sand and plant with
native grasses.

Key project locations

Early action items

Related projects

 Northeast corner of the Barrier Island, Point
Lookout

 Perform a hydrogeologic and hydraulic
engineering study

 USACE Atlantic Coast of Long Island Jones Inlet
to East Rockaway Inlet Long Beach Island, New
York Coastal Storm Risk Management Project

 Conduct an analysis of the existing revetment
system
 Identify regulatory actions (e.g., permitting, land
use, zoning)

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 54

Revetment Repair/Reconstruction
landscaping) that will likely result from continued shoreline erosion
and flooding if this project is not implemented.

Benefits/co-benefits derived from the project




Health, social, and public safety services: This project would
protect existing residential assets from damage by waves, flooding
and shoreline erosion, which may threaten the life safety of
occupants. Economic resiliency: This project may encourage an
increase in recreational economic activity at Point Lookout Beach
District Park and in the commercial district, protecting the existing
ball fields and recreational facilities at the Park. This project could
reduce current expenditures by the Town of Hempstead (Town) to
maintain the current shoreline after erosion events, and allow those
funds to be captured and spent on other important projects and
programs. The project would protect existing businesses along
Bayside Drive, which should provide economic stability and
encourage job retention.
Environmental protection: Existing open space would be
protected – the creation of a vegetated area in the sand fill behind
the revetment could provide habitat for shorebirds. Open space at
the Point Lookout Beach District Park functions as an area of
floodwater conveyance and storage during storm events. Depending
on the design, additional open space may be created as a result of
this project, potentially increasing the area available for floodwater
storage. The revetment face can function to absorb and reduce wave
energy, which may provide additional protection to residences along
Bayside Drive and Mineola Avenue.

Cost-benefit analysis


The total estimated project cost of $3.8 million is an investment that
should yield high returns while reducing government expenditures
for recovery project costs due to future storm events for temporary
shoreline restoration activities.



The economic benefits of this project also include the avoided future
costs from damage to personal property (e.g., buildings and their
contents) and public property (e.g., recreational equipment and

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles



If this project is not built, the Community will likely incur significant,
recurring financial costs because the residential structures along
Bayside Drive and Mineola Avenue that were damaged by flooding
from Superstorm Sandy will continue to be at high risk and the Town
of Hempstead will have to continue to replenish the sand along the
shoreline and fund temporary erosion-control measures there.
Further, if this project is not constructed, future storm flooding and
erosion will eventually threaten houses on Mineola Ave and reduce
open space at the Point Lookout Beach District Park.



With proper maintenance, revetments generally have a long useful
life and provide good return on investment. Benefits would likely
extend for the useful life of the revetment.

Risk-reduction analysis
The repair/reconstruction of the revetment at the northeast end of Point
Lookout should reduce the vulnerability to coastal erosion for 31 housing
units and one commercial structure, protect an estimated population of more
than 100 persons, and protect open space and recreational facilities in the
Point Lookout Beach District Park.73 Structures located along east end of
Bayside Drive and on Mineola Drive are currently vulnerable to flooding and
erosion. These structures are in danger of being flooded and having their
foundations undermined, which could lead to their collapse and serious
injuries to occupants. Shoreline erosion is also reducing open space in the
Point Lookout Beach District Park, shrinking space for recreational activity
and eventually threatening additional residences on Mineola Avenue.
The risk assessment performed for assets in the northeast corner of Point
Lookout estimated that they were at severe to high risk due to vulnerability
to erosion and flooding. If this project is implemented, asset risk is estimated
to be moderate because, although the risk from erosion would be reduced,
the potential for flooding will still exist. However, by protecting and possibly
increasing the open space in Point Lookout Beach District Park, this project
may provide some flood protection to residential structures by functioning as

Page 55

Revetment Repair/Reconstruction
an area of flood conveyance and storage. Additional flood protection may be
provided by the revetment’s ability to absorb and reduce wave energy.

Regulatory requirements
Federal requirements: USACE – Section 404 of Clean Water Act; Section 10
of Rivers and Harbors Act
State requirements: New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation – Excavation and Fill in Navigable Waters; 401 Water Quality
Certification; Tidal Wetlands; Coastal Erosion Management; New York State
Department of State – Coastal Consistency Concurrence

Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead

Figure IV-3: Example of stone revetment construction

Rosanna Arias, FEMA Media Library

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Figure IV-4: Revetment Repair and Reconstruction Project Location

Page 56

Tidal Backflow Prevention and
Stormwater Treatment

Lido Beach & Point Lookout

Issue: Tidal flooding infiltration and pollution
discharge through stormwater outfalls
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee
(Committee) reported numerous problems with the stormwater system in
both Lido Beach and Point Lookout. Alleviating flooding due to stormwater
issues has been a top priority for the Committee since the first Planning
Committee Meeting in September 2013 and was reaffirmed by the
Community during all three Public Engagement Events. The stormwater
system drains to the bay through outfalls located in the Lido North
neighborhood and the Lido East neighborhood in Lido Beach, and the
Town of Hempstead Conservation and Water Facility and Energy Park in
Point Lookout. Outfalls are open and unprotected, and tend to backflow
with water during high tide and elevated tides at the full and new moons.
Tides force water into the outfalls and back through the stormwater
system, resulting in flooding along secondary streets that lead to
evacuation routes and critical facilities.
Floodwaters from Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy were forced
through bayfront storm drain outfalls into the stormwater drainage system
in Lido Beach and Point Lookout, adding to the volume of floodwaters in
the street. The floodwaters hindered access to evacuation routes for
residents and first responders.

Figure IV-5: Example of outfall backflow prevention

URS Corporation

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$800,000

2 to 5 years

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 57

Tidal Backflow Prevention and Stormwater Treatment
the retention of the roughly 2,000 jobs within the project area.74 The
reduction in pollution conveyed to Reynolds Channel that should
result from this project may help to improve water quality, making
Hempstead Bay more attractive to recreational activities and
potentially encouraging an increase in economic activity in existing
commercial marine assets at Point Lookout.

This project includes installing backflow prevention devices on stormwater
outfall pipes (Figure IV-5) and catch basin inserts to improve water quality.
Short description:
Prevent tidal water from infiltrating low-lying areas at stormwater outfalls
that are partially or fully submerged during high tides and storms, causing
flooding; reduce contaminants discharged from outfalls.
Key project elements (may include, but are not limited to):


Install backflow prevention devices at outfalls; and



Install pollution control devices.

Benefits/co-benefits derived from project




Health, social, and public safety services: Residents of Lido
Beach, a population that includes numerous diverse, socially
vulnerable individuals, and first responders would benefit from the
stormwater system protection that this project would provide, which
would help alleviate flooding on emergency routes and secondary
routes that provide access to critical facilities, residences, and
commercial buildings.
Economic resiliency: By reducing flooding on secondary streets
and along evacuation routes, this project may allow for continued
operation of public services and businesses during storm and tidal
events, which in turn could provide economic stability and encourage



Environmental protection: This project may reduce pollution to
Reynolds Channel, Hempstead Bay, and the Lido Beach Passive
Nature Preserve from stormwater runoff. The improvement in the
quality of stormwater discharges into the local watershed may result
in an improvement in the water quality of Hempstead Bay and the
Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve.

Cost-benefit analysis


The stormwater flooding issues that this project addresses require
continual attention from the Town of Hempstead. Implementing this
project would likely reduce ongoing costs incurred due to tidal
backflow into the stormwater system through the stormwater
outfalls for cleanout and repair of damages to the stormwater
system after major storm events.



This project should have a good return on investment as backflow
prevention devices have an expected useful life of 20 to 30 years
with proper maintenance.

Key project locations

Early action items

Related projects

 As indicated on Project Area Map (Figure IV-6)

 Develop an implementation strategy in
coordination with Nassau County and the Town of
Hempstead

 Drainage Improvements

 Coordinate with Nassau County to potentially
capture project funding through the
Environmental Bond Act

 Alternative Stormwater Opportunities
 Encourage Stormwater Capture During Sidewalk
Replacement

 Identify ownership (municipality) of potential
outfall and catch basin locations

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 58

Tidal Backflow Prevention and Stormwater Treatment

Risk-reduction analysis

Regulatory requirements

The installation of tidal backflow prevention devices should increase the
resiliency of the existing stormwater system and reduce vulnerability to
flooding along secondary roads and evacuation routes that provide egress
for roughly 460 housing units;75 the Lido Elementary School / Long Beach
Pre-K Center; the Long Beach Middle School and High School in Lido Beach;
the Town of Hempstead Department of Water Facilities; the Town of
Hempstead Department of Conservation and Waterways Facility; and the
Town Energy Park and the West Marina in Point Lookout. This project also
corresponds to a reduction in flood risk to a population of roughly 2,300
people located in the Lido North and Lido East neighborhoods, schools, and
Town facilities.76

Federal requirements: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers – Section 404 of Clean
Water Act; Section 10 of Rivers and Harbors Act; Coastal Zone Management
Act

The risk assessment performed for assets located in the project area
estimates a severe to high risk due to vulnerability to flooding. If this project
is implemented, asset risk is estimated to be reduced to moderate because,
although this project should reduce risk to flooding, there is still potential for
flooding due to other issues with the stormwater system that could be
addressed in the Drainage Improvements project, and vulnerability to
bayfront flooding of assets located on the water and one the edge of the
tidal marsh.

A multi-jurisdictional committee/consortium consisting of municipalities could
be considered, as well. This form of governance and administration has
proven successful on Long Island, as represented by both the Hempstead
Harbor Protection Committee and Manhasset Bay Protection Committee.
Potential actions of such a multi-jurisdictional committee/consortium might
include being able to appoint a fiduciary to be responsible for grant
management, with the committee/consortium itself being responsible for
project management. The recent New York – Connecticut Sustainable
Communities Consortium, a program funded by a U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development Sustainable Communities Regional Planning
Grant, used this structure and was successful in carrying out the planning
program over a wide geography and across numerous municipal boundaries.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

State requirements: New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation – Excavation and Fill in Navigable Waters; 401 Water Quality
Certification; Tidal Wetlands; Coastal Erosion Management; New York State
Department of State – Coastal Consistency Concurrence

Jurisdiction
Nassau County, Town of Hempstead

Page 59

Tidal Backflow Prevention and Stormwater Treatment

Figure IV-6: Tidal Backflow Prevention and Stormwater Treatment Project Location

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 60

Drainage Improvements

Lido Beach & Point Lookout

Issue: Tidal and stormwater flooding
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee
(Committee) reported numerous problems with the stormwater system in
both Lido Beach and Point Lookout. Alleviating flooding due to stormwater
issues and increasing the resiliency of the stormwater system has been a
top priority for the Committee since the first Planning Committee Meeting
in September 2013 and was reaffirmed by the NYRCR Community
(Community) during all three Public Engagement Events.
A site visit was conducted after a light rain to observe the function of the
stormwater system on November 22, 2013. Ponding was observed in the
area around catch basins in several locations throughout the Community
(see Figures I-9 and II-12). Additional site visits were made on January 7
and January 9, 2014 in Lido Beach and Point Lookout to examine the
existing conditions of Lido Boulevard. The Committee had identified three
areas of continual flooding during storm events. Lido Boulevard from the
Loop Parkway is a concrete pavement roadway, three lanes in each
direction, which extends into the City of Long Beach at Maple Avenue.
Catch basins were observed at the curbs at a uniform distance of
approximately one every 250 feet on both sides of the roadway. The
concrete pavement exhibited areas of wear and spalling of the concrete
and sewer manholes in the travel way and have not settled in relation to
the surrounding pavement. Due to the cold ambient temperatures at the
time of the site visit, there was no precipitation and therefore no flooding
was observed.

The stormwater system in the Community was overwhelmed by the volume of
water due to storm surge and tidal flooding from Hurricane Irene and Superstorm
Sandy. The volume of water caused flooding in secondary streets and along
evacuation routes, rendering them impassable. The extra water forced through
the stormwater system at the outfalls, adding to the existing volume of water in
the streets and causing some stormwater conveyance structures to fill with sand
and others to collapse or break.
This project consists of a comprehensive analysis of the stormwater system, the
construction of stormwater system improvements along the section of Lido
Boulevard from Maple Boulevard east to Harrogate Street (Location 3A). It also
proposes phased improvements (Figure IV-7) to the stormwater system at the six
locations that the Committee and residents identified as the worst areas of
flooding (Figure IV-8). The results of the comprehensive analysis of the
stormwater system would be used as the basis for the design of stormwater
system improvements in Location 3A and subsequent phases of construction.
Implementation of the stormwater improvements at each of the six locations is
phased to allow for flexibility in scheduling construction of system improvements
to coincide with the availability of funding and at the discretion of the applicant.
Location 3A was chosen as the first site for construction during this project
because Lido Boulevard is a major roadway and serves as the primary evacuation
route for Lido Beach and portions of the City of Long Beach.

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$5,900,000

2 to 5 years (Study & Location 3A)

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 61

Adapted from
http://www.engr.psu.edu/phrc/Land%20Development_files/August%2024,%20200
6/Construction%20Details.pdf (right) and
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/flooding/catch_basin_images.shtml

Drainage Improvements

Figure IV-7: Example of potential stormwater system improvements

Short description:
Conduct a comprehensive analysis of the stormwater system to identify
improvement areas and implement phased improvements to reduce flooding
along evacuation routes, secondary roadways, low-lying areas, and economic
corridors beginning with Location 3A: Lido Boulevard section from Maple
Boulevard to Harrogate Street, Lido Beach. Construction of additional phases
of improvements at Locations 3B through 3D (see Project Area Map, Figure
IV-8) is at the discretion of the applicant.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Key project elements (may include, but are not limited to):


Conduct comprehensive analysis of stormwater drainage system to
identify hydrologic capacity;



Inspect existing condition of system;



Identify and clean/clear blockages;



Digitize system and prioritize repairs; and

Page 62

Drainage Improvements


blockage and reduce floodwater obstruction of Lido Boulevard, a
major evacuation route, allowing residents and visitors to Lido Beach
and adjacent areas of the City of Long Beach to safely evacuate and
allowing first responders access to four neighborhoods, the school
complex, and the commercial district of Lido Beach.

Design and construct improvements to the stormwater drainage
system at priority Location 3A, Lido Boulevard section from Maple
Boulevard to Harrogate Street, Lido Beach (see Figure IV-7).

Benefits/co-benefits derived from project


Health, social, and public safety services: This project should
alleviate flooding due to stormwater system overloading and

Key project location

Early action items

Related projects

 Location 3A: Lido Boulevard section from Maple
Boulevard to Harrogate Street, Lido Beach

 Identify regulatory actions (e.g., permitting,
land use, zoning)

 Tidal Backflow Prevention and Stormwater
Treatment

Key project locations (additional phases of work)

 Determine ownership and maintenance
agreements

 Alternative Stormwater Opportunities

 Location 3B: Lido Boulevard from Prescott Street to
750 Lido Boulevard, Lido Beach (proposed phase)
 Location 3C: Lido Boulevard from Parkside Drive to
Mineola Avenue, Point Lookout (proposed phase)
 Location 3D: Ocean Boulevard from Allevard Street to
Harrogate Street, Lido Beach (proposed phase)

 Conduct a comprehensive analysis of the
stormwater drainage system on roadways
owned by Nassau County and the Town of
Hempstead

 Encourage Stormwater Capture During Sidewalk
Replacement

 Location 3E: Regent Drive, Lido North neighborhood,
Lido Beach (proposed phase)
 Location 3F: Lido North neighborhood, Lido Beach
(proposed phase)


Economic resiliency: This project would help reduce flooding
along Lido Boulevard, the major thoroughfare of the NYRCR
Community and an evacuation route. Specifically, the first phase of
this project would affect the area along Lido Boulevard from Maple
Drive to Harrogate Street, an area that encompasses the entrance to
several neighborhoods, the Lido Beach–Point Lookout Fire District
Lido Beach Fire Station, the entrance to the school complex, and the
commercial district in Lido Beach. By reducing flooding in the vicinity
of these important economic assets, storm events should cause less
disruption in the lives of the individuals living and working in the

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

area and less disruption in service/business hours in the commercial
district, which in turn could encourage economic stability and job
retention. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the project area is
the locus of 1,200 to 1,900 jobs.77


Environmental protection: New catch basins with inserts should
capture some pollution from stormwater runoff, which would likely
improve the water quality of the local watershed. Without the catch
basins, untreated stormwater would otherwise discharge to
Hempstead Bay and Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve.

Page 63

Drainage Improvements

Cost-benefit analysis


The total estimated project cost of $5.9 million for the stormwater
system analysis and construction of improvements in Location 3A is
an investment that would yield high returns while reducing
government expenditures for future storm events.



The cost of the comprehensive stormwater system analysis is
included in the cost to construct improvements in Location 3A,
allowing for economies of scale in the cost of subsequent phases,
which only need include the cost to construct stormwater system
improvements and design.





The stormwater flooding issues that this project addresses at
Location 3A require continual attention from the Town of
Hempstead. Implementing this project would likely reduce ongoing
costs incurred for repair or replacement of damaged pipes and other
system components, and cleanout of catch basins after minor
rainstorms and major storm events. Construction of additional
phases of this project would improve more areas of the stormwater
system, increasing the cost benefits due to losses avoided (e.g., the
economic benefit of avoiding future costs from damage).
Stormwater system improvements generally have a long useful life
with proper maintenance. Benefits should extend to the end of the
useful life of the system components.

Risk-reduction analysis
This project for the stormwater system analysis and construction of
improvements in Location 3A should increase the resiliency of the existing
stormwater system and reduce vulnerability to flooding along evacuation
routes and secondary roads that provide egress to more than 700 housing
units in Lido Beach neighborhoods.78 These roads also provide access to the
Lido Elementary School / Long Beach Pre-K Center, the Long Beach Middle
School, and the Long Beach High School in Lido Beach, and represent the
primary evacuation route for a portion of the population of the City of Long
Beach. This project also corresponds to a reduction in flood risk to a

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

population of more than 2,000 people located in the Lido Beach, the City of
Long Beach, schools, and Town facilities.79
The risk assessment performed for assets located in the project area estimated
assets to have severe to high risk due to vulnerability to flooding. If this project
is implemented, asset risk should be reduced to moderate because, although
this project does reduce risk due to flooding, there is still the potential for
flooding due to the vulnerability of bayfront assets on the water.

Regulatory requirements
Federal requirements: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers – Section 404 of Clean
Water Act; Section 10 of Rivers and Harbors Act; Coastal Zone Management
Act
State requirements: New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (DEC) – Excavation and Fill in Navigable Waters; 401 Water
Quality Certification; Tidal Wetlands; Coastal Erosion Management; New York
State Department of State – Coastal Consistency Concurrence

Jurisdiction
Nassau County, Town of Hempstead
A multi-jurisdictional committee/consortium consisting of municipalities could
be considered, as well. This form of governance and administration has
proven successful on Long Island, as represented by both the Hempstead
Harbor Protection Committee and Manhasset Bay Protection Committee.
Potential actions of such a multi-jurisdictional committee/consortium might
include being able to appoint a fiduciary to be responsible for grant
management, with the committee/consortium itself being responsible for
project management. The recent New York – Connecticut Sustainable
Communities Consortium, a program funded by a U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development Sustainable Communities Regional Planning
Grant, used this structure and was successful in carrying out the planning
program over a wide geography and across numerous municipal boundaries.

Page 64

Drainage Improvements

Figure IV-8: Drainage Improvements Project Location

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 65

Repair Dunes and Construct
Dune Walkovers

Lido Beach & Point Lookout

Issue: Storm breaches and coastal protection
The importance of the maintaining a complete dune system with no
breaks or gaps was established as a top priority for the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee (Committee)
during the first Planning Committee Meeting in September 2013. The dune
system on the oceanfront of the Lido Beach and Point Lookout provided
protection from storm surge to residences, businesses, and public facilities
during Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy. However, when the storm
breached the dunes, flooding occurred and damaged residential
structures. During a site visit to the dunes in September 2013, Town of
Hempstead employees were observed installing protective fencing on the
seaward side of the dunes at Lido Beach West Town Park and replanting
bare areas. In March 2014, the Town of Hempstead began filling dune
breaches with sand, provided by a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
dredging of Jones Inlet, and planting grasses to stabilize the infill areas.
The USACE has planned improvements to the dunes along the Atlantic
Coast of Long Beach Island from Jones Inlet to Rockaway Inlet. Planned
improvements include nourishment and construction of a dune,
rehabilitation of existing groins and construction of new groins, and beach
renourishment.80 The work is phased with the final phase being the
portion of this project that will include dune and berm reconstruction and
construction of 11 dune pedestrian and seven vehicle crossovers to
provide beach access. The project will be completed in 39 months.81 The
Committee is aware of ongoing the Town of Hempstead and future USACE

Figure IV-9: Example of existing accessible dune walkover, September 2013

URS Corporation

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$4,600,000

2 to 3 years

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 66

Repair Dunes and Construct Dune Walkovers
projects involving dune improvement. The Committee also recognizes that
time is a key factor in dune establishment and is concerned that ongoing
projects might not be extensive enough to create a cohesive dune system.
This project, repairing the dunes and constructing dune walkovers (Figure
IV-9), involves filling the areas of the dunes that were breached by
Superstorm Sandy. The intent would be to create a monolithic dune system
to protect the oceanfront areas of the Community from storm surge (Figure
IV-10).
Filling dune breaks includes placing sand; installing fencing on the seaward
side to trap sand and stabilize bare surfaces; and planting vegetation to
provide additional stability, promote dune growth through sand
accumulation, and create habitat for shorebirds and other wildlife. In
addition to dune repair, this project includes constructing accessible
walkovers to provide access to the beach to residents and visitors. Because
of the protection provided by a complete dune system, the Committee felt it
would be prudent to repair the dunes as soon as possible, rather than wait
until 2016 when the USACE dune construction is scheduled to occur.
Short description:
Fill breaches and repair dunes to prevent storm surge from flooding streets,
homes, public facilities, and businesses and construct walkovers to provide
beach access.



Align design of dune reconstruction and walkovers with USACE
Atlantic Coast of Long Island Jones Inlet to East Rockaway Inlet
Long Beach Island, New York Coastal Storm Risk Management
Project (February 2014);82



Design and construct dune improvements; and



Design and construct accessible dune walkovers.

Benefits/co-benefits derived from project


Health, social, and public safety services: The project would
protect more than 1,800 residents; roughly 1,100 housing units,
critical facilities, and public facilities; and socially vulnerable
populations at Camp Anchor and the three adult group homes on
Seaspray Drive in Lido Beach by restoring the dune system, which
can provide protection from flooding due to storm surge.83



Economic resiliency: This project would help retain full-time and
seasonal jobs by protecting the businesses in the residential district
of Lido Beach and the facilities at the Town parks and Nickerson
Beach, which equate to more than 2,000 jobs.84

Key project elements (may include, but are not limited to):


Inspect condition of dunes to identify locations of breaks and areas
requiring repair;

Key project locations

Early action items

Related projects

 Dune system along oceanfront of Lido Beach
and Point Lookout (see Figure IV-10)

 Conduct an analysis of existing conditions

 USACE Atlantic Coast of Long Island Jones Inlet
to East Rockaway Inlet Long Beach Island, New
York Coastal Storm Risk Management Project

 Coordinate with Town of Hempstead and USACE
 Identify regulatory actions (e.g., permitting, land
use, zoning)

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

 Town of Hempstead Beach Renourishment
Project

Page 67

Repair Dunes and Construct Dune Walkovers


Environmental protection: The dune system is a major natural
resource for the Community. Dune restoration would ensure the
continued health of this resource, which provides protection from
storm surge and a nesting habitat for shorebirds. Restoration of
dune breaches and construction of walkovers should provide
protection for shorebird habitat by creating a natural area that is
unbroken and undisturbed by pedestrians. The walkovers would also
allow continued access to the beaches.

Cost-benefit analysis


The total estimated project cost of $4.6 million is an investment that
would yield high returns while reducing government expenditures for
future storm events.



The economic benefits of this project also include the avoided future
costs from damage to personal property (e.g., buildings and their
contents) and public property (e.g., recreational equipment and
landscaping) that may result from future storms if this project is not
implemented.



Protection of Community assets should reduce recovery costs after a
storm event.



Once reconstructed, the dunes would be self-sustaining and would
need only light maintenance such as replacing dune fencing or
replanting areas where initial plantings do not thrive. The walkovers
would have an expected useful life of 10 years if constructed of
wood and maintained, and 40 years if constructed of recycled plastic
lumber and maintained.

would protect businesses; public facilities; the town parks in Lido Beach,
Point Lookout, and Nickerson Beach; Camp Anchor; and the adult group
homes in Lido Beach.
This project should reduce the vulnerability of the socially vulnerable
population at the adult group homes on Seaspray Drive and Camp
Anchor to flooding and storm surge.
The risk assessment performed for assets located in the project area
estimated assets as having severe to high risk due to vulnerability to
flooding. If this project is implemented, asset risk should be reduced to
moderate because, although this project does reduce risk due to flooding
and storm surge, there is still the potential for flooding if the dune is
overtopped or breached.

Regulatory requirements
Federal requirements: USACE – Section 404 of Clean Water Act; Section 10
of Rivers and Harbors Act
State requirements: New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation – Excavation and Fill in Navigable Waters; 401 Water Quality
Certification; Tidal Wetlands; Coastal Erosion Management; New York State
Department of State – Coastal Consistency Concurrence

Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead

Risk-reduction analysis
The Federal Emergency Management Agency observed that wide, high
dune systems provided significant protection from Superstorm Sandy’s
storm surge.85 By filling breaches to create an unbroken dune system,
this project should provide protection from storm surge to residents in
the Lido West neighborhood, the Lido Towers, the Lido Dunes
neighborhood, the Lido Townhouses, and residents of Point Lookout. It

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 68

Repair Dunes and Construct Dune Walkovers

Figure IV-10: Repair Dunes and Construct Dune Walkovers Project Location

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 69

Critical Facility Resiliency

Lido Beach and Point Lookout

Issue: Storm-related flooding at critical facilities
Resiliency of emergency services was a concern for the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Community (Community). The only
first responder in the Community is the Lido–Point Lookout Fire District,
which has three facilities. The Lido Beach fire station is located on Lido
Boulevard at 72 Regent Drive (Figure IV-11). Two fire stations are located
in Point Lookout: the Point Lookout fire station on 102 Lido Boulevard,
which is also the headquarters of the Fire District (Figure IV-12), and the
Point Lookout Rescue Company on 18 Bayside Drive, which is located on
Reynolds Channel (Figure IV-13).
All three facilities were damaged by flood during Superstorm Sandy. The
Lido Beach Fire Station and the Point Lookout Fire Station were inundated
by 4 feet of water, damaging backup electrical generators and other
electrical, mechanical, and plumbing equipment. Flooding also severely
damaged the Point Lookout Rescue Company, rendering the building
uninhabitable. The storm also hindered operations at all three fire stations
in the Community. During the first site visit to the Community in
September 2013, the Lido Beach Fire Station and the Point Lookout Fire
Station had been repaired and were fully functional. The Rescue Squad
and its equipment and vehicles have relocated into the two remaining fire
stations.

Figure IV-11: Lido–Point Lookout Fire District, Lido Beach Station

URS Corporation

Figure IV-12: Lido–Point Lookout Fire District, Point Lookout Station

URS Corporation

Figure IV-13: Point Lookout Volunteer Fire Company

URS Corporation

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$400,000

18 to 24 months

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 70

Critical Facility Resiliency
The Lido–Point Lookout Fire District is seeking to renovate its two remaining
functioning facilities to increase resiliency and operational capability, and the
provision and installation of elevated emergency generators is the highest
need (Figure IV-14). This project involves the electrical generators and may
also include elevating electrical, mechanical and plumbing system
components, and critical information technology equipment as resiliency
upgrades to protect electrical systems and to enable the equipment to
function throughout a severe storm. Additional retrofits to increase resiliency
to damage by coastal storms include, but are not limited to: adding manually
installed floodshields at the pedestrian and vehicle bay doorways of all three
fire stations; sealing the lower building walls to prevent water infiltration;
and retrofitting roofs, windows, and doors to provide protection from high
winds.



Relocate interior and exterior mechanical, electrical, and plumbing
equipment above the BFE, and



Consider additional elements that may include, but are not limited
to:

˗

Install brackets and gaskets for flood shields at pedestrian and
vehicle bay doors and metal flood shields;

˗

Install roof coverings rated for wind speeds of 90 miles per hour
or greater;

˗

Install single-glazed impact-resistant windows; and

˗

Install hurricane-proof vehicle bay doors.



Health, social, and public safety services: Increasing the
resiliency of critical facilities would allow first responders to provide
Community-wide support throughout both Lido Beach and Point
Lookout during and after a storm event to the general population
and to the socially vulnerable population at the adult group homes
on Seaspray Drive and Camp Anchor. This project should provide
protection to the entire population of Lido Beach and Point Lookout,
a total of more than 4,116 people.86



Economic resiliency: Not applicable



Environmental protection: Not applicable

Provide resiliency enhancements to fire service buildings and secure critical
facilities with resiliency enhancements and flood protection.
Key project elements (may include, but are not limited to):Provide
and install electrical generators above the base flood elevation
(BFE);

Design and construct storm protection for critical facilities;

Benefits/co-benefits derived from project

Short description:



˗

Key project locations

Early action items

Related projects

 Lido Point Lookout Fire District, Lido Beach
Station, 72 Regent Drive, Lido Beach

 Conduct an assessment of the existing fire
stations for vulnerability to flooding

 Evacuation Education/Outreach Program and
Lifeline Safety Plan

 Lido Point Lookout Fire District, Point Lookout
Station, 102 Lido Boulevard, Point Lookout

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 71

Critical Facility Resiliency

Cost-benefit analysis
The economic benefits of this project include the avoided future costs from
damage to fire stations (e.g., buildings and their contents) and public
property that may result from future storms if this project is not
implemented.

Risk-reduction analysis
The Lido–Point Lookout Fire District Stations in Lido Beach and Point
Lookout, and the Point Lookout Rescue Company, are the only first
responders in the Community. The project would protect these three critical
facilities from wind and flood during storm events, to allow for their
continued operation post-event, and would protect the personnel at the
stations.

The risk assessment performed for the fire stations estimated severe risk for
the Point Lookout Rescue Company, which is located along Reynolds
Channel, and high risk for the two stations on Lido Boulevard, due to
vulnerability to flooding. If this project is implemented, asset risk is
estimated to be reduced to moderate because, although this project does
reduce risk due to flooding, all three fire stations are still vulnerable to
flooding from storm events that exceed the level of protection provided by
the flood shields.

Regulatory requirements
Local requirements: Town of Hempstead Building Zone Ordinance

Jurisdiction
Lido–Point Lookout Fire District

By enhancing the resiliency of the fire stations, this project should reduce the
risk to the population of both communities by allowing for continued
operation before and after storm events and faster recovery after storm
events.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 72

Critical Facility Resiliency

72

18

Figure IV-14: Critical Facility Resiliency Project Location

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 73

Evacuation Education/Outreach
Program and Lifeline Safety Plan

Lido Beach & Point Lookout

Issue: Life safety
Located on a barrier island, residents of Lido Beach and Point Lookout
often experience isolation after storm events. Superstorm Sandy flooded
Lido Boulevard and secondary roads, rendering them impassable for
extended periods; cellular communication was rendered non-functional,
leaving residents with no contact off-island; and utility service was
disrupted and not restored until 2 weeks after the storm. Despite the issue
of an evacuation order, not all residents evacuated before the onset of the
storm even when ordered to do so. Lido Boulevard is the major
evacuation route for Lido Beach, Point Lookout, and portions of the City of
Long Beach (Figure IV-15).
Reverse-911 systems exist at the town and county levels and for the Long
Beach School District to provide information to residents. However, the
systems do not provide all residents of Lido Beach and Point Lookout with
information on the conditions on the barrier island. A reverse-911 system
is needed on-island in the Lido–Point Lookout Fire District to provide
information for all residents of Lido Beach and Point Lookout, not just
those with children attending Long Beach District schools. The reverse911 system could be used to communicate actual conditions on the
ground to residents of Lido Beach and Point Lookout, who are remotely
located from County facilities.

This project, the Evacuation Education/Outreach Program and Lifeline
Safety Plan, involves comprehensive emergency planning measures to
increase the effectiveness of evacuation by improving conditions along
evacuation routes, creating a Lifeline Safety Plan to establish procedures
for coordinating resources related to evacuation, educating residents on
the importance of evacuating when told to do so and how to evacuate
safely, promoting the New York State Citizen Preparedness Corps Program,
and establishing a reverse-911 system through the Lido–Point Lookout Fire
District for the residents of Lido Beach and Point Lookout who are
sometimes isolated from the larger portion of Long Island and Nassau
County during storm events.
Short description:
Develop a Lifeline Safety Plan and establish a program for providing
regular education and outreach about emergency evacuation.
Key project elements (may include, but are not limited to):


Develop a Lifeline Safety Plan that includes:
˗

Identification of lifeline roads;

˗

Identification of post-event priority debris removal on lifeline
roads;

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$500,000

2 to 5 years

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 74

Evacuation Education/Outreach Program and Lifeline Safety Plan
˗

Identification of post-event priority power restoration on lifeline
roads;

˗

Development of a Memorandum of Agreement with cellular
phone service providers to provide post-event operational cellphone tower coverage;

˗

Assessment of need for, locations of, and installation of solarpowered street lights at key intersections/roadways;

˗

Creation of uniform lifeline signage;

˗

Identification of roadways that need to be raised to prevent
blockages from flooding obstructions during evacuation; and

˗

Identification and development of connections to public
transportation along lifeline roads.

Benefits/co-benefits derived from project


Health, social, and public safety services: This project should
improve the access of all residents to emergency/evacuation
information, provide public education and outreach on how to safely
evacuate and the evacuation routes, and through the
implementation of a reverse-911 system, convey information before
and after a storm event. A reverse-911 system could provide an
enhanced ability to communicate emergency information to socially
vulnerable populations to allow residents extra time for selfevacuation or assisted evacuation. This project also promotes the
New York State Citizen Preparedness Corps Program, through which
training is provided to residents to give them the tools and resources
they need to prepare, respond, and recover from any type of
disaster.87



Prioritize a phased implementation plan for the Lifeline Safety Plan;



Economic resiliency: Not applicable



Develop and implement an education and outreach program to
educate residents and visitors on the importance of evacuation and
how to evacuate safely, and provide information on flood mitigation
and green infrastructure; and



Environmental protection: Not applicable



Conduct outreach to promote the New York State Citizen
Preparedness Corps Program.

Key project locations:

Early action items:

Related projects:

 Community-wide



Identify local lifeline roads leading to critical
facilities and regional evacuation routes





Establish a reverse-911 system through the
Lido–Point Lookout Fire District and coordinate
with Nassau County and the City of Long Beach



Identify the existing Memorandum of
Agreement with other emergency responders
on Long Beach Island and Nassau County

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Critical Facility Resiliency

Page 75

Evacuation Education/Outreach Program and Lifeline Safety Plan

Cost-benefit analysis


This project could help reduce pre-event emergency costs by
improving the efficiency of the evacuation process.



This project may also reduce recovery costs post-event if outreach
successfully convinces residents to evacuate prior to a storm and by
promoting training so that residents are better prepared and more
self-sufficient and less reliant on Town resources post-event.

Risk-reduction analysis
This project would reduce the risk to the communities of Lido Beach and
Point Lookout before and after a storm event by providing accurate
emergency information, clear evacuation routes, clear connections to
evacuation routes, emergency lighting at key intersections, and
connections to transportation along lifeline roads. This project would also
reduce risk to the neighboring community of Long Beach, whose citizens
also use Lido Boulevard as an evacuation route.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

By improving access and identification of lifeline roads / evacuation
routes and implementing a reverse-911 system for Lido Beach and Point
Lookout, this project would reduce risk to all populations including
visitors as well as residents and socially vulnerable populations.
The education and outreach aspect of this project, particularly the
promotion of the New York State Citizen Preparedness Corps Program,
could help residents to achieve a greater degree of personal resiliency to
disasters and also reinforces the need for evacuation as the primary
means of storm protection.

Regulatory requirements
Not applicable

Jurisdiction
Nassau County, Town of Hempstead

Page 76

Evacuation Education/Outreach Program and Lifeline Safety Plan

Figure IV-15: Evacuation Education/Outreach Program and Lifeline Safety Plan Project Location

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 77

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Featured Projects
Featured Projects are innovative projects in which an initial study or discrete
first phase of a project is proposed for CDBG-DR or other identified funding,
or regulatory reforms or other programs that do not involve capital
expenditures. The Committee developed and selected three Featured
Projects based on input from residents during multiple Public Engagement
Events and comments received through the NYRCR Program website. The
order of the projects is random and no preference should be inferred on the
part of the Community. The locations of the featured projects are depicted in
Figure IV-16.
The Featured Projects are as follows:


Alternative Stormwater Opportunities;



Shoreline and Marsh Restoration and Open Space Protection; and



Encourage Stormwater Capture During Sidewalk Replacement.

The project criteria symbols are:

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 78

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure IV-16: Locations of Featured Projects

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 79

Alternative Stormwater Opportunities

Lido Beach & Point Lookout

Issue: Localized flooding due to stormwater system
capacity issues
In addition to projects whose purpose is to repair and improve the
functionality of the stormwater system in Lido Beach and Point Lookout,
the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee
(Committee) also considered stormwater management best practices to
reduce the volume of water discharged into the stormwater system to
help prevent overloading of the system and reduce on-street flooding. The
best practice selected to help alleviate the strain on the stormwater
system is to capture stormwater runoff from the impermeable surfaces in
the NYRCR Community (Community) to reduce the stress on the
stormwater system by storing stormwater on-site and allowing it to slowly
discharge into the ground, rather than discharge into the stormwater
system.
The largest amount of impermeable surfaces in the Community is the
paved area of parking lots in the Town Parks. Impermeable surfaces are
hard, paved surfaces that block rainfall from infiltrating into the ground,
causing the water to run off the pavement, which can add to the volume
of stormwater, overwhelm stormwater systems, and introduce pollutants
(e.g., gasoline, oil, anti-freeze) into the stormwater system. The
stormwater system in Lido Beach and Point Lookout was overwhelmed
and damaged by floodwaters from Superstorm Sandy. This project,
Alternative Stormwater Opportunities, seeks to reduce the volume of

Figure IV-17: Example of stormwater management system

URS Corporation

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$10,000,000

2 to 5 years

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 80

Alternative Stormwater Opportunities
water that flows into the stormwater system during storm events by
conducting a hydrologic analysis of the stormwater system in the vicinity of
the Town Parks and Nickerson Beach and determining the best practice for
stormwater management of runoff from the parking lots (Figure IV-17). After
determining a best practice, the stormwater management system would be
installed at one or more of the following locations listed under Key Project
Locations and depicted on the Project Area Map (Figure IV-18).
Project work could also involve installing manholes, catch basins, pump
stations, storm sewers, and porous pavement.
Short description:
Conduct an analysis of the stormwater management system in the vicinity of
the Town Parks and Nickerson Beach. Design and construct stormwater
management systems at key project locations in Town Parks based on
recommendations of stormwater management system.
Key project elements (may include, but are not limited to):


Analyze the stormwater system at project location(s) selected for
improvement to identify hydrologic capacity;



Inspect the existing conditions of the stormwater system in each
project area; and



Design and construct stormwater management systems.

Benefits/co-benefits derived from project


Health, social, and public safety services: The adult group
homes are adjacent to the parking lot of the Town Park at Malibu.
The project could decrease the potential for ponding or flooding at
the adult group homes by managing stormwater runoff rather than
discharging into and overloading the stormwater system.



Economic resiliency: The project could allow for a faster recovery
time from storm events, which would allow commercial recreational
areas to resume operations sooner than if the project were not
implemented. Faster commercial recovery encourages economic
stability and could result in the retention of roughly 350 jobs.88



Environmental protection: The stormwater management systems
constructed would likely include a treatment system to filter
contaminants and sediment (e.g., oil, gasoline) from runoff,
discharging cleaner water into the ground.

Key project locations (in no particular order)

Early action items

Related projects

 Location 1A: Lido Beach Town Park

 Determine the ownership and maintenance
agreements at each location

 Tidal Backflow Prevention and Stormwater
Treatment

 Inspect the existing conditions of the stormwater
system in each project area

 Drainage Improvements

 Location 1B: Town Park at Sands
 Location 1C: Nickerson Beach
 Location 1D: Town Park at Malibu
 Location 1E: Point Lookout Town Park

 Conduct a hydrologic analysis of the stormwater
system

 Encourage Stormwater Capture During Sidewalk
Replacement

 Identify regulatory actions

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 81

Alternative Stormwater Opportunities

Cost-benefit analysis


By reducing the burden on the stormwater system, this project
would reduce the costs to the local government for cleaning out
catch basins, repairing the stormwater system, and cleaning up after
localized flooding and storm events like Superstorm Sandy.



Stormwater system improvements generally have a long useful life
with proper maintenance. Benefits should extend to the end of the
useful life of the system components.

Risk-reduction analysis
Implementing this project could reduce the risk that the existing
stormwater system will be overwhelmed during storm events and could
reduce the risk of flooding at the adult group homes and the Lido
Townhouse neighborhood because this project would manage runoff
from the large, impervious areas of the parking lots at the Town Parks
and Nickerson Beach.

Regulatory requirements
Federal requirements: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers – Section 404 of Clean
Water Act; Section 10 of Rivers and Harbors Act; Coastal Zone Management
Act
State requirements: New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation – Excavation and Fill in Navigable Waters; 401 Water Quality
Certification; Tidal Wetlands; Coastal Erosion Management; New York State
Department of State – Coastal Consistency Concurrence

Jurisdiction
Nassau County (Nickerson Beach), Town of Hempstead

Assets located in the project area were estimated to have high to
moderate risk due to vulnerability to flooding. If this project is
implemented, asset risk is estimated to be reduced to moderate for all
parks because, although this project should reduce risk to flooding due
to stormwater system overload, there is still the potential for flooding to
occur to facilities at the parks from the ocean if the dune is overtopped
or breached.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 82

Alternative Stormwater Opportunities

Figure IV-18: Alternative Stormwater Opportunities Project Location

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 83

Shoreline and Marsh Restoration
and Open Space Protection
Issue: Shoreline erosion
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction Community highly values its
natural resources and views them as important assets that contribute to a
high quality of life. The Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve (the Preserve)
is the last remaining salt marsh on the Barrier Island. The salt marsh is an
essential element of the South Shore’s ecosystem. The marsh is also part
of the Atlantic Flyway and is inhabited by several species of waterfowl at
different times of the year, depending on migration patterns. Maintaining
the current acreage of the Preserve is important because the marsh
provides open space for floodwater storage and conveyance, as well as a
significant habitat for shorebirds. The marsh shoreline is vulnerable to
erosion, particularly during storm events, and suffered shoreline loss due
to Superstorm Sandy.
This project seeks to create a living shoreline to strengthen and stabilize
the marsh shoreline from the West Marina in Point Lookout to the Lido
Beach Golf Course in Lido Beach (see Figure IV-19).
Methods to strengthen and stabilize the marsh may include, but are not
limited to:


Installation of hard, hybrid structures (e.g., fiber logs);



Installation of oyster bags in front of the fiber logs to protect
against wave attenuation;



Seeding fiber logs with shellfish cultch to prevent the erosion;

Lido Beach



Planting marsh grasses on and behind the logs to encourage soil
retention and accumulation behind the logs, and



Seeding the oyster bags with oyster cultch to provide filtration and
improve water quality.

Short description:
Provide stabilization of the shoreline of the Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve
and Tidal Salt Marsh through the creation of a natural habitat.
Key project elements:


Conduct a marsh revitalization study to identify and assess the best
method and materials for shoreline stabilization; and



Design and construct recommended environmental enhancements in
early spring to maximize growing season of the cultch and plantings.

Benefits/co-benefits derived from project


Health, social, and public safety services: Not applicable.



Economic resiliency: Not applicable.



Environmental protection: This project would protect the shoreline
of the Preserve from erosion caused by events like Superstorm Sandy.
If the oyster bags and oyster cultch are used to provide protection
from wave attenuation, a secondary effect of this project would be to
filter

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$3,200,000

18 to 24 months

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 84

Shoreline and Marsh Restoration and Open Space Protection
contaminants from the surrounding waters. Existing open space could be
expanded by this project, depending on how successfully the marsh
shoreline fills in behind the fiber logs if that type of protection is utilized in
this project. This project would protect the last salt marsh on the Barrier
Island.

shorebird habitat and important part of the South Shore ecosystem of Long
Island.
The open space of the marsh provides conveyance and storage of floodwater
and can reduce impacts due to flooding in populated areas.

Regulatory requirements

Cost-benefit analysis
Hardening the marsh edge using natural methods would be a self-sustaining
method of erosion control. Maintenance would only be needed if the
plantings do not take and need replacement. Therefore, this project should
reduce local government expenditures for ongoing marsh-edge maintenance
activities such as reseeding shellfish cultch and replanting bare spots with
new plantings.

Federal requirements: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers – Section 404 of Clean
Water Act; Section 10 of Rivers and Harbors Act
State requirements: New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation – Excavation and Fill in Navigable Waters; 401 Water Quality
Certification; Tidal Wetlands; Coastal Erosion Management; New York State
Department of State – Coastal Consistency Concurrence

Risk-reduction analysis

Jurisdiction

This project would reduce the risk of erosion to the Lido Beach Passive
Nature Preserve, the last salt marsh on the Barrier Island, a significant

Town of Hempstead

Key project locations

Early action items

Related projects

 Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve

 Conduct a marsh revitalization study to assess
environmental enhancements

 None

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 85

Shoreline and Marsh Restoration and Open Space Protection

Figure IV-19: Shoreline and Marsh Restoration and Open Space Protection Project Location

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 86

Encourage Stormwater Capture
during Sidewalk Replacement

Lido Beach & Point Lookout

Issue: Localized flooding due to limited stormwater
system capacity
In addition to projects whose purpose is to repair and improve the
functionality of the stormwater system in Lido Beach and Point Lookout,
the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning Committee
also considered stormwater management best practices to reduce the
volume of water discharged into the stormwater system to help prevent
overloading of the system and reduce on-street flooding. The best practice
selected to help alleviate the strain on the stormwater system is to
capture stormwater runoff from the impermeable surfaces in the NYRCR
Community (Community) to reduce the stress on the stormwater system
by storing stormwater on-site and allowing it to slowly discharge into the
ground, rather than discharging it into the stormwater system. Similar to
paved road and parking lots surfaces, sidewalks are another example of
impermeable surfaces located throughout in the Community. Impermeable
surfaces are hard, paved surfaces that block rainfall from infiltrating into
the ground and causing the water to run off the pavement, which can add
to the volume of stormwater, overwhelm stormwater systems, and
introduce pollutants (e.g., gasoline, oil, anti-freeze) into the stormwater
system. The stormwater system in Lido Beach and Point Lookout was
overwhelmed and damaged by floodwaters from Superstorm Sandy.
This project seeks to reduce the volume of water that flows into the
stormwater system by capturing and retaining runoff from sidewalks
throughout Lido Beach and Point Lookout. Prior to beginning sidewalk

Figure IV-20: Example of stormwater management system best practice underneath
sidewalk

New York Rising Best Practices Workshop, 12/5/2013

Cost Estimate

Timeline

$300,000

1 year, ongoing

Estimated cost to replace one section of sidewalk and install a stormwater
management system for an area of 1,320 feet in length by 4 feet in width.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 87

Encourage Stormwater Capture During Sidewalk Replacement

replacement, a study should be performed to identify the most effective best
practice for stormwater management. As sections of sidewalk are replaced
during routine life-cycle maintenance, this project would encourage the
replacement of existing impervious surfaces with porous paving and the
installation of a stormwater management system beneath the sidewalks
(Figure IV-20). The porous paving would allow stormwater to percolate down
to a collecting area, where it can be filtered and slowly discharge into the
ground, rather than run off into the existing stormwater system.
Short description:
Install a stormwater management system under sidewalks when they are
replaced to allow stormwater runoff to be captured and stored until it
infiltrates into the ground.
Key project elements (may include, but are not limited to):

slowly infiltrate into the ground. The stormwater management
system would filter contaminants (e.g., oil, gasoline) and sediment
from rainwater.

Cost-benefit analysis


Hydrologic study would be used to determine the most cost-effective
stormwater management system utilized during sidewalk
replacement.



The project would leverage sidewalk replacements to decrease the
burden to the stormwater system and thereby decrease the costs of
maintaining and repairing the system.



Stormwater management systems generally have a long useful life
with proper maintenance.



Conduct a study to determine most effective stormwater
management system;

Risk-reduction analysis



Install a stormwater management system; and



Use porous pavement when replacing sidewalks.

This project would reduce impacts to the stormwater system by capturing
rainwater and slowly discharging the water into the system.

Regulatory requirements

Benefits/co-benefits derived from project

Local requirements: Town of Hempstead Building Zone Ordinance



Health, social, and public safety services: Not applicable



Economic resiliency: Not applicable

Jurisdiction



Environmental protection: This project would capture and collect
stormwater, filtering out contaminants and allowing rainwater to

Town of Hempstead

Key project locations

Early action items

Related projects

 Community-wide



 Tidal Backflow Prevention and Stormwater
Treatment

Conduct a study to determine most effective
stormwater management system

 Drainage Improvements
 Alternative Stormwater Options

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Page 88

Section V:
Additional materials

Section V:
Additional materials
The additional materials in Section V consist of Additional Resiliency
Recommendations (Section A), a list of all of the projects that are included in
the Lido Beach and Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Plan (NYRCR Plan) (Section B), a description of the public
engagement process that was part of the development of the NYRCR Plan
(Section C), information about the NYRCR Community (Community) assets
that were identified by the NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee)
(Section D), endnotes (Section E), and glossary (Section F).

A. Additional resiliency recommendations

projects are important to the Committee and many of them have contributed
to the resiliency of the barrier island.
The Additional Resiliency Recommendations are identified in Table V-1 and
are categorized by strategy, project name, project description, responsible
party, and association with regional projects. The responsible party or parties
have not been identified.
Including these projects in the NYRCR Plan will help the Committee
implement these projects in the future.

An Additional Resiliency Recommendation is a resiliency project or action
that is not categorized as a Proposed or Featured Project but a project the
NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) would like to highlight. These

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 91

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Establish a program for bulkhead repair/replacement for residents

$125,000

Yes

Residential Structure Height Restriction Zoning
Amendment

Amend zoning ordinance restricting height of residential structures to
allow for elevation of existing residences to at least 2 feet above the
base flood elevation (BFE)

$125,000

No

Increase resiliency of power grid

Residential Alternative Energy Installation
Encouragement Program

Establish a program to encourage residents to install alternative energy
to provide power to their residences; includes education and outreach
component

$125,000

Yes

Increase resiliency of power grid

Expand Alternative Power Generation and Storage
at Town of Hempstead Department of
Conservation & Waterways / Energy Park

Increase sources for alternative energy generation, add energy
storage, install smart meters, and upgrade electrical grid components

$2,000,000
to
$5,000,000

Yes

Increase resiliency of power grid

Microgrid Pilot Project in Point Lookout

Install microgrid in Point Lookout to increase Community resiliency

$5,000,000
to
$10,000,000

Yes

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Flood Protection at Lido Beach Golf Club

Close gap in bulkhead system and tie to existing bulkhead system at
Harbor Drive

$2,000,000

Yes

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Gateway Creation and Community Enhancement

Create welcome gateways in two location in Lido Beach and one
location in Point Lookout

$100,000

No

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Debris Removal from Reynolds Channel

Remove watercraft in Channel submerged by Superstorm Sandy

$2,000,000
to
$5,000,000

Yes

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Utilities Elevation at Adult Group Homes, Seaspray
Drive, Lido Beach

Elevate heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) air handling
units, electrical meters, and other equipment located at ground level to
1 foot above the BFE

$2,000,000

No

Increase resiliency of critical
facilities

Addition and Renovation of Lido–Point Lookout
Fire District Stations at 72 Regent Dr., Lido Beach
and 102 Lido Blvd., Point Lookout

Renovate and expand two fire stations to install flood protection
retrofits and improvements to electrical, mechanical, and plumbing
systems; potential wind retrofits; and to accommodate relocated
equipment and vehicles from the Rescue Squad

$5,000,000
to
$10,000,000

No

Improve stormwater drainage

Convert Ocean Boulevard to Sidewalk, Allevard
Street to Harrogate Street, Lido Beach

Reconstruct Ocean Boulevard from Allevard Street to Harrogate Street
and convert to pedestrian route; regrade and construct sidewalk to
shed runoff into the stormwater system

Less than
$10,000,000

No

Improve stormwater drainage

Regrade Lateral Streets

Regrade secondary and tertiary roadways as part of overall stormwater
reconstruction program throughout the Community

Less than
$10,000,000

No

Promote evacuation

Support NYS DOT Repair of Loop Parkway Bridge

Provide support on as-needed basis for repair of scour at Loop Parkway
bridge over Reynolds Channel

Less than
$10,000,000

Yes

Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Residential Bulkhead Replacement Program

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 92

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Master table of projects
The Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional Resiliency
Recommendations identified during the development of the NYRCR Plan are
listed in Table V-2. The projects are categorized according to strategy,
project name, project description, reconstruction strategies, estimated cost,
and association to regional projects.

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 93

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2: Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Reconstruction and Resiliency
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Project Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Revetment Repair/Reconstruction

Construct sections of rock revetment at northeast end of
Point Lookout for protection of homes, businesses, and
recreational facilities

Proposed Project

$3,800,000

Yes

Improve stormwater drainage

Tidal Backflow Prevention and
Stormwater Treatment

Prevent tidal water from infiltrating low-lying areas at
stormwater outfalls that are partially or fully submerged
during high tides and storms, causing flooding. Reduce
contaminants discharged from outfalls.

Proposed Project

$800,000

Yes

Improve stormwater drainage

Drainage Improvements (Phase 3A)

Comprehensive stormwater study to identify
improvement areas to reduce flooding along evacuation
routes, primary roadways, low-lying areas, and
economic corridors

Proposed Project

$5,900,000

Yes

Section 3A (along Lido Boulevard from Maple Boulevard
to Harrogate Street, Lido Beach) will be the first phase
of construction.
Increase protection from coastal
storms

Repair Dunes & Construct Dune
Walkovers

Fill breaches and repair dunes to prevent tidal surge
from flooding streets, homes, and businesses; construct
walkovers to provide beach access

Proposed Project

$4,600,000

Yes

Increase resiliency of critical
facilities

Critical Facility Resiliency

Provide resiliency enhancement to emergency service
buildings and secure critical facilities with resiliency
enhancements and flood protection

Proposed Project

$400,000

No

Meet communication needs preevent

Evacuation Education and Outreach
Program and Lifeline Safety Plan

Develop a Lifeline Safety Plan and establish a program
for providing regular education and outreach about
emergency evacuation; includes development of a
reverse-911 system for the Lido–Point Lookout Fire
District

Proposed Project

$500,000

Yes

Improve stormwater drainage

Alternative Stormwater Opportunities

Conduct an analysis of the stormwater management
system in the vicinity of the Town Parks and Nickerson
Beach. Design and construct stormwater management
systems at key project locations in Town Parks based on
recommendations of stormwater management system
study.

Featured Project

$10,000,000

Yes

Increase resiliency of salt marsh to
coastal erosion

Shoreline and Marsh Restoration and
Open Space Protection

Provide stabilization of the shoreline of the Lido Beach
Passive Nature Preserve and Tidal Salt Marsh with
creation of natural habitat

Featured Project

$3,200,000

No

Improve stormwater drainage

Encourage Stormwater Capture during
Sidewalk Replacement

Install stormwater management system under sidewalks
when sidewalks are replaced

Featured Project

$300,000

Yes

Promote evacuation

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 94

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 (Continued)
Reconstruction and Resiliency
Strategy

Project Name

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Short Description

Project Category

Residential Bulkhead Replacement
Program

Establish a program for bulkhead repair/replacement for
residents

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$125,000

Yes

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Residential Structure Height Restriction
Zoning Amendment

Amend zoning ordinance restricting height of residential
structures to allow for elevation of existing residences to
at least 2 feet above the base flood elevation (BFE)

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$125,000

No

Increase resiliency of power grid

Residential Alternative Energy Installation
Encouragement Program

Establish a program to encourage residents to install
alternative energy to provide power to their residences;
includes education and outreach component

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$125,000K

Yes

Increase resiliency of power grid

Expand Alternative Power Generation and
Storage at Town of Hempstead
Department of Conservation &
Waterways / Energy Park

Increase sources for alternative energy generation, add
energy storage, install smart meters, and upgrade
electrical grid components

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$2,000,000 to
$5,000,000

Yes

Increase resiliency of power grid

Microgrid Pilot Project in Point Lookout

Install microgrid in Point Lookout to increase Community
resiliency

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$5,000,000 to
$10,000,000

Yes

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Flood Protection at Lido Beach Golf Club

Close gap in bulkhead system and tie to existing
bulkhead system at Harbor Drive

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$2,000,000

Yes

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Gateway Creation and Community
Enhancement

Create welcome gateways in two location in Lido Beach
and one location in Point Lookout

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$100,000

No

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Debris Removal from Reynolds Channel

Remove watercraft in Channel submerged by
Superstorm Sandy

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$2,000,000 to
$5,000,000

Yes

Increase protection from coastal
storms

Utilities Elevation at Adult Group Homes,
Seaspray Drive, Lido Beach

Elevate heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)
air handling units, electrical meters, and other
equipment located at ground level to 1 foot above the
BFE

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$2,000,000

No

Increase resiliency of critical
facilities

Addition and Renovation of Lido–Point
Lookout Fire District Stations at 72
Regent Dr., Lido Beach and 102 Lido
Blvd., Point Lookout

Renovate and expand two fire stations to install flood
protection retrofits and improvements to electrical,
mechanical, and plumbing systems; potential wind
retrofits; and to accommodate relocated equipment and
vehicles from the Rescue Squad

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

Less than
$10,000,000

No

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 95

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 (Continued)
Reconstruction and Resiliency
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Project Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Improve stormwater drainage

Convert Ocean Boulevard to Sidewalk,
Allevard Street to Harrogate Street, Lido
Beach

Reconstruct Ocean Boulevard from Allevard Street to
Harrogate Street and convert to pedestrian route;
regrade and construct sidewalk to shed runoff into the
stormwater system

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

Less than
$10,000,000

No

Improve stormwater drainage

Regrade Lateral Streets

Regrade secondary and tertiary roadways as part of
overall stormwater reconstruction program throughout
the Community

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

Less than
$10,000,000

No

Promote evacuation

Support NYS DOT Repair of Loop
Parkway Bridge

Provide support on as-needed basis for repair of scour
at Loop Parkway bridge over Reynolds Channel

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

Less than
$10,000,000

Yes

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 96

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

C. Public engagement process
To ensure the success of the NYRCR Plan, a public engagement strategy was
developed and implemented. The communities of Lido Beach and Point
Lookout were provided extensive opportunities for collaboration in three
Public Engagement Events between October 2013 and February 2014.

Community priorities for assets, strategies, and projects. In general, each
meeting had a specific goal related to the NYRCR planning process.
Committee meeting goals included:


Asset identification;



Existing conditions of Community assets;

NYRCR Planning Committee process



Superstorm Sandy damage to Community assets;

The Committee held 11 meetings between September 18, 2013, and March
27, 2014. The Committee considered local issues, opportunities and
communication strategies, and offered the public opportunities to provide
comments at the conclusion of each Planning Committee Meeting.



Development of a Community Vision Statement;



Development of resiliency strategies;



Ongoing or proposed projects in the Town of Hempstead;

Meetings open with introductions and a review of an agenda that has been
vetted by the State and the Committee prior to the meeting. All meetings are
open to the public (see Figure V-1).



Project development;



Project selection and prioritization; and



Format and information to be presented at each Public Engagement
Event.

The Committee participated in interactive exercises to develop the
Community Vision Statement and identified Community assets and
vulnerabilities through a mapping exercise. Information presented to the
Committee for review consisted of presentations, the Conceptual Plan,
project spreadsheets, and materials produced for the Public Engagement
Events.
Public Engagement Events
The Public Engagement Events were designed to solicit feedback from the
Community on the NYRCR planning process and deliverables, and conducting
outreach through a variety of media and methods.
Figure V-1: Committee Meeting
on September 24, 2013

URS Corporation

At the first Planning Committee Meeting, a presentation was given that
reviewed the NYRCR Plan process, key elements and goals, along with the
methods for developing a Community vision and conducting outreach.
Meetings were used as a platform to communicate information and

Section V: Additional Materials

Meeting notices for Public Engagement Events were posted as follows:


Website: http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr/community/lido-beachand-point-lookout



Newsday (local community newspaper)



Twitter: @NYStormRecovery



Facebook: NYStormRecovery

Page 97

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Emails sent to participants who attended public meetings and
residents who provided their email address through the website



Lawn signs posted in key locations throughout Lido Beach and Point
Lookout

Information, door hangers, and flyers were distributed in Lido Beach and
Point Lookout and provided in hard copy and electronically to Committee
Members, for additional distribution among their residential neighborhoods.
Flyers and electronic notices were distributed to the businesses and religious
organizations in the both communities.

First Public Engagement Event
The first Public Engagement Event was held on October 15, 2013, at the
Town of Hempstead Parks and Recreation Building in Lido Beach and had
approximately 44 attendees (Figure V-2). The Public Engagement Event was
designed to provide an overview of the NYRCR Program, while engaging
Community members in a small group forum discussion about a Community
vision, Community assets, vulnerabilities, and strategies for becoming more
resilient. NYRCR Planning Committee Co-Chairs opened the meeting with
welcoming remarks and an overview of the process to date. The State gave
a short presentation on the NYRCR Program.
During an interactive workshop, the Consultant Team facilitated small group
discussions about planning for resiliency with the attendees. Two Vision
Statements were developed by the public during the meeting.

Section V: Additional Materials

Figure V-2: Public Engagement Meeting
on October 15, 2013

URS Corporation

Second Public Engagement Event
The second Public Engagement Event was held on November 4, 2013, at the
Town of Hempstead Parks and Recreation Building in Lido Beach and had
approximately 45 attendees. A small group discussion format was used to
conduct three interactive sessions to gather information on the effects of
Superstorm Sandy, to rank projects for achieving resiliency and for residents
to select which innovative strategies to pursue. The first activity was a
questionnaire for residents to respond to questions about Superstorm Sandyrelated damages in the communities. The second activity involved ranking
proposed priority projects under strategies previously identified by the
Committee. Strategies and projects were grouped by the six Recovery
Support Functions. The third activity was a questionnaire used by residents
to rank innovative strategies developed by the committee. During the
activities, residents split into small groups that were teamed with a facilitator
to respond to questions and guide residents through the questionnaires. The
public identified locations of flooding events, issues with post-storm
communication due to damaged cellular communications equipment and
spotty coverage, and information about disaster recovery immediately after

Page 98

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Superstorm Sandy. The public also recommended additional strategies for
resolving the recovery issues they identified during the meeting.

Third Public Engagement Event
The third Public Engagement Event was held on February 20, 2014 at the
Bishop Molloy Recreational Center in Point Lookout and had approximately
45 attendees. An Open House Format provided nine project stations that
included project boards and were staffed by the Consultant Team, including
Subject Matter Experts in civil engineering and coastal protection, and
Committee Members to answer questions from the participants.
The meeting opened with brief introductions and an overview of prior Public
Engagement Events and results, including the six priority projects and three
Featured Projects that would be evaluated during the Public Engagement
Event. The public was invited to visit each project board station and use the
“Passport” to provide public comments and rank projects.
The project boards contained pictures, criteria rankings, maps, and prompts
for the public to identify how much they supported a particular priority or
featured project. Participants were handed a Project Evaluation Guide that
was their Passport to the projects. The Passport duplicated the project
boards and provided a questionnaire and comment space to solicit feedback.
Twenty-nine of the Passports were collected at the end of the night and the
information was tallied will be presented to the committee at the 10th
Planning Committee Meeting on March 11, 2014.

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 99

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

D. Community asset inventory
The Community asset inventory provided in Table V-5 consists of assets that
have been affected by coastal hazards and that may be at risk in future
hazard events. Assets whose loss or impairment would compromise essential
cultural, social, economic, or environmental functions of the Community are
also included. The assets were identified by the Committee during Planning
Committee Meetings and from input from the public received at Public
Engagement Events.
Assets are categorized according to asset name, risk area, asset class, if the
asset is a critical facility, the Community value, landscape attributes, and risk
assessment scores. To interpret risk scores, see “Interpreting risk score”
following Table V-5. For a description of risk assessment methods, see
Section II.A.ii, Assessment of risk to assets and systems.

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 100

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-3: Community Asset Inventory
Asset Information

Asset
Drinking Water Well #3
CNG fueling facility for school buses

Landscape Attributes

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion Rate
≥1 foot per
Year or
Unknown

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Risk
Area

Asset Class

High

Risk Assessment

Waterline
Frequently at
Shore Defense
or Upland
Vegetation

Shore Defenses Absent,
Not Constructed
to Anticipated
Conditions, or
Deteriorating

Protective
Vegetation
Between Asset
and Flood
Source Absent

Dunes Absent, Below
BFE, Eroding, Little
Vegetation; Bluff
Slope Unstable,
Little Vegetation

Asset on Coastal
Barrier Island
or Filled Wetland

Landscape
Attribute
Score
("Yes" = +0.5)

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

High

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Lido Beach North Stormwater

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

68

Lido Beach Dunes Stormwater

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

68

Lido Beach South Stormwater

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

68

Lido Beach East Stormwater

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

68

Lido–Point Lookout Fire District Station, Lido Beach

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

Lido Elementary School / Long Beach Pre-K Center

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Long Beach Middle School

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Long Beach High School

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

School District Offices

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

District school bus parking area

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Extreme

Health and Social Services

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

Nike Alternative School
Nike Environmental Center
Camp Anchor

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

5

45

Lido Townhouses

High

Housing

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

Extreme

Housing

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

5

60

High

Housing

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

Lido Towers
Lido Beach North Housing
Lido Beach Dunes Housing

High

Housing

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

Lido Beach South Housing

High

Housing

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

Lido Beach East Housing

High

Housing

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

Marvel Dairy Whip

High

Economic

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

Dunes Delicatessen

High

Economic

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

Lido Beach Synagogue

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

2

21

Lido Beach Golf Club

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

41

Town Park Lido Beach West

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

Lido Beach District Park

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

Lido Beach Town Park

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

Town Park at Sands

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

Nickerson Beach

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

Town Park at Malibu

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

Town Dept. of Water Facility

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

68

Water Tower

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

68

High

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

5

53

Drinking Water Well #1
Drinking Water Well #2

High

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

5

53

Town Energy Park

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54

Point Lookout Commercial District Stormwater

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54

Point Lookout Residential Stormwater

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54

Town of Hempstead Dept. of Conservation and
Waterways District

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54

Town of Hempstead Dept. of Conservation and
Waterways Laboratory

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 101

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-3 (Continued)
Asset Information

Asset

Risk
Area

Landscape Attributes

Asset Class

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion Rate
≥1 foot per
Year or
Unknown

Risk Assessment

Waterline
Frequently at
Shore Defense
or Upland
Vegetation

Shore Defenses Absent,
Not Constructed
to Anticipated
Conditions, or
Deteriorating

Protective
Vegetation
Between Asset
and Flood
Source Absent

Dunes Absent, Below
BFE, Eroding, Little
Vegetation; Bluff
Slope Unstable,
Little Vegetation

Asset on Coastal
Barrier Island
or Filled Wetland

Landscape
Attribute
Score
("Yes" = +0.5)

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Lido–Point Lookout Fire District Station, Point
Lookout

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Point Lookout Volunteer Fire Company

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Ye Olde Firehouse

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

U.S. Post Office

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

3

32

Extreme

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

4

54

Lido–Point Lookout Fire District Training Facility

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Town Public Safety Facility

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Adult Group Homes

High

Health and Social Services

Yes

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

4

36

Point Lookout Housing

High

Housing

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

Point Lookout Rescue Company

Ted's Fishing Station

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

68

Scotty's Marina and Fishing Station and Restaurant

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

68

East Marina

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

68

West Marina

Extreme

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

5

68

Point Lookout Commercial District

High

Economic

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

4

42

Point Lookout Community Church

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

2

21

Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

2

21

Bishop Molloy Recreational Center

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.50

2

21

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

High

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

2

18

Point Lookout Beach District Park

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

2

27

Lido Beach Passive Nature Preserve

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

2

27

Shellfish Nursery

Extreme

Natural and Cultural Resources

No

Low

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

2

27

Town Park at Point Lookout
Town Dept. of Parks and Recreation Facility

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 102

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Interpreting risk score
100-year event
(Hazard score = 3)
5

15

30

45

60

75

4.5

13

27

40.5

54

67.5

4

12

24

36

48

60

10.5

21

31.5

42

52.5

9

18

27

36

45

7.5

15

22.5

30

37.5

6

12

18

24

30

4.5

9

13.5

18

22.5

3

6

9

12

15

1.5

3

4.5

6

7.5

1

2

3

4

5

3.5

Exposure

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

Vulnerability

Risk
Category

100-year Event
Risk Score

500-year Event
Risk Score

>53

>70

High

24 – 53

32 – 70

Moderate

6 – 23

8 –31

Residual

<6

<8

Severe

Section V: Additional Materials

Comment
Risk scores in this category occur only if one of the two factors, exposure or vulnerability, is rated 5, and the other is 4 or higher; this could represent that the asset is
in a dangerous situation. Both exposure and vulnerability should be reduced, if possible. Consider relocation a priority option for these assets.
Risk scores in this category are indicative of conditions that could lead to significant negative outcomes from a storm. Using the risk scoring system, a total of 24 (or 32
for the 500-year event) can only be achieved if the vulnerability is 4 and exposure is 2, or vice versa. A vulnerability of 4 indicates the likely loss of service of an asset
for an extended period of time. For many assets this may be unacceptable. Actions should be taken to reduce vulnerability, such as elevating or floodproofing the asset,
to help avoid a long-term loss of function. A score of 4 for exposure indicates most of the local landscape attributes that help reduce storm damages are absent. Actions
to restore landscape attributes may be appropriate. All other risk scores higher than 24 (or 32 for the 500-year event) indicate either the exposure or the vulnerability,
or both, are higher than the conditions discussed above, lending more weight to the need to take actions that reduce risk. Relocation may be necessary in the future if
other means of adaptation or management actions are not effective.
Risk scores in this category pose moderate to serious consequences, but adaptation may be of lower priority due to one factor, exposure or vulnerability, remaining
relatively low. Use a combination of measures to reduce exposure and/or vulnerability.
Risk scores in this category occur when both exposure and vulnerability are relatively low. This situation suggests floods would pose minor or infrequent consequences.
However, a vulnerability score of 3 may not be acceptable for critical facilities or high community value assets, because the community cannot afford to be without
these services, event on an infrequent basis. Note that risk is never completely eliminated. Some residual risk still remains even after management measures have been
implemented. Monitor conditions and adapt as necessary.

Page 103

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

E. Endnotes
1.

U.S. Census Bureau, Table 3: Land Area, Population, and Density, 1990,
4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.census.gov/population/www/censusdata/files/places/36ny
.txt>.

2.

“American Fact Finder,” U.S. Census Bureau, 2007-2011, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productvie
w.xhtml?pid=ACS_11_5YR_DP04>.

3.

Ibid.

4.

“Affordable Housing,” U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development,
28 Oct. 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/comm_pla
nning/affordablehousing/>.

5.

“Lido History,” Lido Beach Civic Association, Undated, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.lidodunes.org/sandbar_community.php>.

6.

“Lido Beach,” City Data, 2013, 4 Apr. 2014 <http://www.citydata.com/housing/houses-Lido-Beach-New-York.html>.

7.

“2010 Population Finder,” U.S. Census Bureau, 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.census.gov/popfinder/>.

8.

“American Fact Finder,” U.S. Census Bureau, 2007-2011, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productvie
w.xhtml?pid=ACS_11_5YR_DP04>.

9.

Ibid.

10. “Affordable Housing,” U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development,
28 Oct. 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/comm_pla
nning/affordablehousing/>.

Section V: Additional Materials

11. “Point Lookout,” City Data, 2013, 4 Apr. 2014 <http://www.citydata.com/housing/houses-Point-Lookout-New-York.html>.
12. “NY District Coastal Storm Risk Reduction Projects,” U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, 2014, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nan.usace.army.mil/About/Hurricane_Sandy/CoastalStorm
RiskReductionProjectsandStudies.aspx>.
13. “Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Irene (AL092011) 21-28 August
2011,” National Hurricane Center, 14 Dec. 2011, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL092011_Irene.pdf>.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid.
16. Jeff Benkoe, “Long Island pounded by Irene, but residents feel lucky,”
28 Aug. 2011, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/08/28/us-storm-irene-longislandidUSTRE77R2FG20110828>.
17. “Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Sandy (AL182012) 22-29 October
2012,” National Hurricane Center, 12 Feb. 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Sandy.pdf>.
18. “Deaths Associated with Hurricane Sandy, October – November 2012.”
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 24 May 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6220a1.htm>.
19. “Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Sandy (AL182012) 22-29 October
2012,” National Hurricane Center, 12 Feb. 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Sandy.pdf>.
20. “State of New York Action Plan for Community Development Block Grant
Program Disaster Recovery,” State of New York, April 2013. Prepared by
the New York Homes and Community Renewal Office of Community
Renewal. Federal Register Docket No. FR-5696-N-01.

Page 104

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

21. “Post-Landfall Loss Estimates for Superstorm Sandy,” EQECAT, 1 Nov.
2012, 4 Apr. 2014 <http://www.eqecat.com/catwatch/post-landfall-lossestimates-superstorm-sandy-released-2012-11-01/>.

31. “Sustainable Strategies for Long Island,” Long Island Regional Planning
Council, 2010, 4 Apr. 2014 <http://www.lirpc.org/3.2010-1202_LI2035StrategiesReport.pdf>.

22. “Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Sandy (AL182012) 22-29 October
2012,” National Hurricane Center, 12 Feb. 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Sandy.pdf>.

32. “Strong Island – The Story of a Region’s Recovery and Resurgence,”
Long Island Federation of Labor, 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://longislandfed.org/sites/longislandfed.org/files/li-2013-pr.pdf>.

23. Ibid.

33. “Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan,” Cleaner
Greener Communities, 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nyserda.ny.gov/Statewide-Initiatives/Cleaner-GreenerCommunities/Creating-Regional-Sustainability-Plans/Regional-PlanningTeams.aspx>.

24. “Hurricane Sandy Storm Recovery,” Point Lookout Chamber of
Commerce, updated 14 Mar. 2014, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.pointlookoutcommerce.com/hurricane_sandy.html>.
25. Peter Applebome, “Towers rich in history, await rebirth after storms,”
The New York Times, 12 Nov. 2012.
26. “Hurricane Sandy Storm Recovery,” Point Lookout Chamber of
Commerce, updated 14 Mar. 2014, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.pointlookoutcommerce.com/hurricane_sandy.html>.
27. Ron Masters, Head, Town of Hempstead Department of Conservation
and Waterways, verbal communication, Jan. 2014.
28. “Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Sandy (AL182012) 22-29 October
2012,” National Hurricane Center, 12 Feb. 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Sandy.pdf>.
29. “Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve Comprehensive Management
Plan,” Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve, 2001, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.lisser.us/background-pages/cmp.htm>.
30. “Nassau County Hazard Mitigation Plan,” Nassau County, 2007, 4 Apr.
2014
<http://www.nassaucountyny.gov/agencies/oem/hazmit/hazmitNHMP.h
tml>.

Section V: Additional Materials

34. “NY District Coastal Storm Risk Reduction Projects,” U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, 2014, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nan.usace.army.mil/About/Hurricane_Sandy/CoastalStorm
RiskReductionProjectsandStudies.aspx>.
35. Assets that support socially vulnerable populations provide services for
people with disabilities, low and very-low income populations, the
elderly, young children, homeless and people at risk of becoming
homeless.
36. “Request for Proposals to Implement Scour Monitoring Program in
NYSDOT Region 10,” New York State Department of Transportation, 13
Sept. 2011.
37. “Residence Districts, Section 21: Height,” Town of Hempstead Building
Code, Article IV, 4 Apr. 2014 <http://ecode360.com/14495794>.
38. “Bridge replacements, Long Island,” Governor Andrew M. Cuomo, 7
Jan. 2014, 4 Apr.2014 <http://www.governor.ny.gov/bridgereplacements#longisland>.

Page 105

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

39.

“Governor Cuomo Announces Major Agreement with FEMA to Support
State’s Efforts to Strengthen Long Island’s Power Utility System,”
Governor Andrew M. Cuomo, 21 Feb. 2014. 4 Apr. 2014
<https://www.governor.ny.gov/print/8422>.

40. Amanda Cedrone, “Point Lookout’s only grocery store reopens,”
Newsday, 25 July 2013, 4 Apr. 2014 <http://www.newsday.com/longisland/towns/point-lookout-s-onlygrocery-store-reopens-1.5770749>.
41. “Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve Comprehensive Management
Plan, 2001-2003,” Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve Council,
2001, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.lisser.us/Final_Draft_HTML/Main_page.htm>.
42. “Long Island’s South Shore Bayway: Strategic Implementation and
Marketing Plan Final Report,” Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve
Council and New York Department of State, Division of Coastal
Resources, Apr. 2009, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.lisser.us/bayway/BwySIMPApril09LowRez.pdf>.
43. Ibid.
44. “Nassau County Master Plan Land Use: Target Sustainable Development
to Growth Areas,” Nassau County, 2010, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nassaucountyny.gov/agencies/EconomicDevelopment/Doc
s/PDF/Chapter3LandUse_000.pdf>.
45. “Plan 2040 – Regional Transportation Plan,” New York Metropolitan
Transportation Council, 4 Sept. 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nymtc.org/files/RTP_PLAN_2040_docs/Public%20Review
%20Drafts/Plan%202040%20Full%20Document/Plan%202040%20Mai
n%20Document.pdf>.

Section V: Additional Materials

46. “Energy Master Plan of the Town of Hempstead Conservation and
Waterways Division,” Town of Hempstead Project Energy, undated, 4
Apr. 2014
<http://www1.eere.energy.gov/office_eere/pdfs/schneider_hempstead.
pdf>.
47. “Mitigation Assessment Team Report – Hurricane Sandy in New Jersey
and New York: Building Performance Observations, Recommendations,
and Technical Guidance,” FEMA P-942, Nov. 2013.
48. “Children’s Residential Program,” Brookville Center for Children’s
Services, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.brookvillecenter.org/ChildrensResProgram>.
49. “Long Beach Medical Center goes bust, property to be acquired,” The
Real Deal (New York Real Estate News), 20 Feb. 2014, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://therealdeal.com/blog/2014/02/20/long-beach-medical-centergoes-bust-property-to-be-acquired/>.
50. Anthony Rifilato, “Residents demand reopening of LBMC: hundreds
attend forum to voice concerns, pressure state lawmakers,” Long Island
Herald, 26 Mar. 2014, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://liherald.com/stories/Residents-demand-reopening-ofLBMC,53911?page=1&content_source=>.
51. Conference call with Lido–Point Lookout Fire District Commissioner Andy
Richter, Frank Relf (architect for Fire District), and NYR State personnel,
20 Mar. 2014.
52. Candice Ruud, “Die-in protests Long Beach’s lack of hospital,” Newsday
25 Jan. 2014, 4 Apr. 2014 <http://www.newsday.com/longisland/nassau/die-in-protests-long-beach-s-lack-of-hospital-1.6877171>.

Page 106

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

53. Alison DeNisco, “Schools bounce back from Superstorm Sandy: Twelve
months after Sandy, hard-hit districts are in various stages of recovery,”
District Administration, Oct. 2013, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.districtadministration.com/article/schools-bounce-backsuperstorm-sandy>.
54. “Long Beach Sewage Treatment Plant Alternative Feasibility Study, City
of Long Beach, Nassau County, New York,” Dvirka and Bartilucci
Consulting Engineers, Report produced for City of Long Beach, Final
Draft, Oct. 2009.
55. “NY District Coastal Storm Risk Reduction Projects,” U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, 2014, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nan.usace.army.mil/About/Hurricane_Sandy/CoastalStorm
RiskReductionProjectsandStudies.aspx>.
56. Ibid.
57. Meeting Minutes, NYRCR Program meeting between NY Rising
Personnel, the Town of Hempstead, and consultants. Town of
Hempstead Town Hall, 1 Washington Street, Hempstead, NY, 6 Mar.
2014.
58. Ibid.
59. Ibid.
60. Conference call with Lido–Point Lookout Fire District Commissioner Andy
Richter, Frank Relf (architect for Fire District), and NYR State personnel,
20 Mar. 2014.

64. Ibid.
65. “Mitigation Assessment Team Report: Hurricane Sandy in New Jersey
and New York: Building Performance Observations, Recommendations,
and Technical Guidance,” Federal Emergency Management Agency,
FEMA P-942, Nov. 2013.
66. Ibid.
67. Stephanie Gleason, “Long Beach Medical Files for Bankruptcy After
Sandy Devastation,” Wall Street Journal, 20 Feb. 2014, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://online.wsj.com/article/BT-CO-20140220-712760.html>.
68. Ibid.
69. “City of Long Beach New York Rising Community Reconstruction
Program,” New York Rising Community Reconstruction Program. Report
produced for New York State Department of Planning, Mar. 2014.
70. “NYRCR Program Guidance to Firms, Project Evaluation,” New York
Rising Community Reconstruction Program, 30 Dec. 2013, p. 3.
71. These costs could relate to reduced emergency and recovery
expenditures in the future less implementation costs for the life of the
project.
72. “NY District Coastal Storm Risk Reduction Projects,” U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, 2014, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nan.usace.army.mil/About/Hurricane_Sandy/CoastalStorm
RiskReductionProjectsandStudies.aspx>.

62. Ibid.

73. “2010 Census Block Data: Point Lookout CDP, NY,” U.S. Census Bureau.
Based on information developed by the U.S. Department of Commerce
Economics and Statistics Administration.

63. “Cleaner, Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan,” AECOM,
Inc., May 2013. Report prepared for Cleaner Greener Consortium of
Long Island, Town of North Hempstead, Lead Municipality.

74. “2010 Census Block Data: Lido Beach CDP, Point Lookout CDP, NY,”
U.S. Census Bureau. Based on information developed by the U.S.
Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics Administration.

61. Ibid.

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 107

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

75. Ibid.
76. Ibid.
77. “OnTheMap, Lido Beach CDP, NY Area Profile Analysis in 2011 by
Primary Jobs,” U.S. Census Bureau, 19 Mar. 2014
<http://onthemap.ces.census.gov/>. Based on information from the
U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies.
78. “2010 Census Block Data: Lido Beach CDP, NY,” U.S. Census Bureau.
Based on information developed by the U.S. Department of Commerce
Economics and Statistics Administration.
79. Ibid.
80. “NY District Coastal Storm Risk Reduction Projects,” U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, 2014, 4 Apr. 2014
<http://www.nan.usace.army.mil/About/Hurricane_Sandy/CoastalStorm
RiskReductionProjectsandStudies.aspx>.
81. Ibid.
82. Ibid.

84. “OnTheMap, Lido Beach CDP, NY Area Profile Analysis in 2011 by
Primary Jobs,” U.S. Census Bureau, 19 Mar. 2014
<http://onthemap.ces.census.gov/>. Based on information from the
U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies.
85. “Mitigation Assessment Team Report: Hurricane Sandy in New Jersey
and New York: Building Performance Observations, Recommendations,
and Technical Guidance,” Federal Emergency Management Agency,
FEMA P-942, Nov. 2013.
86. “2010 Census Block Data: Lido Beach CDP, Point Lookout CDP, NY,”
U.S. Census Bureau. Based on information developed by the U.S.
Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics Administration.
87. New York State Citizen Preparedness Corps, 20 Mar. 2014
<http://www.nyprepare.gov/aware-prepare/nysprepare/>.
88. “OnTheMap, Lido Beach CDP, NY Area Profile Analysis in 2011 by
Primary Jobs,” U.S. Census Bureau, 19 Mar. 2014
<http://onthemap.ces.census.gov/>. Based on information from the
U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies.

83. “2010 Census Block Data: Lido Beach CDP, Point Lookout CDP, NY,”
U.S. Census Bureau. Based on information developed by the U.S.
Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics Administration.

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 108

Lido Beach/Point Lookout NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

F. Glossary
BFE

base flood elevation

CBA

cost-benefit analysis

CDBG-DR

Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery

CNG

compressed natural gas

DHAP

Disaster Housing Assistance Program

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency

HUD

Department of Housing and Urban Development

HVAC

heating, ventilation, and air conditioning

LIPA

Long Island Power Authority

NYS

New York State

NYS DEC

New York State Department of Environmental Conservation

NYS DOS

New York State Department of State

NYS DOT

New York State Department of Transportation

USACE

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 109

www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr

