Long Beach
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

March 2014

Members of the NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee:


Joel Crystal, Co-Chair



John McNally, Co-Chair



Karen Adamo



Helen Dorado Alessi



John Bendo



Michael Kerr



Steve Kohut



Crystal Lake



Larry Moriarty



Sean Pastuch



Mary Ellen Polina

City of Long Beach Liaisons:


Patti Bourne



Jim LaCarrubba



Scott Mandel



Megan Porter



Michael Robinson



Jack Schnirman

This document was developed by the NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Long Beach Planning Committee as part of the NYRCR Program
within the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is
supported by NYS Homes and Community Renewal, NYS Department of
State, and NYS Department of Transportation.
The document was prepared by the following consulting firms:
URS Corporation
The LiRo Group
Sustainable Long Island
Planning4Places, LLC
AIM Development
Two Twelve

Cover photographs of the Boardwalk with damage from Superstorm Sandy
(left – from the NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee) and the rebuilt
Boardwalk (right – from Sustainable Long Island).

Foreword
Introduction
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in August 2011, the State
of New York experienced three extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the lives of
New Yorkers and their communities. These tragic disasters signaled that New
Yorkers are living in a new reality defined by rising sea levels and extreme
weather events that will occur with increased frequency and power. They
also signaled that we need to rebuild our communities in a way that will
mitigate against future risks and build increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo led the charge
to develop an innovative, community-driven planning program on a scale
unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program empowers the State’s most impacted
communities with the technical expertise needed to develop thorough and
implementable reconstruction plans to build physically, socially, and
economically resilient and sustainable communities.
Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo in April of 2013, is a
more than $650 million planning and implementation process established to
provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities severely
damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy.
Drawing on lessons learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program
is a unique combination of bottom-up community participation and Stateprovided technical expertise. This powerful combination recognizes not only
that community members are best positioned to assess the needs and
opportunities of the places where they live and work, but also that decisions
are best made when they are grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by
the latest innovative solutions.
One hundred and two storm-affected localities across the State were
originally designated to participate in the NYRCR Program. The State has
allocated each locality between $3 million and $25 million to implement
eligible projects identified in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for these projects
is provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

Foreword

(HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
program.1
Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising one or more of the 102
localities, were created and led by a NYRCR Planning Committee composed
of local residents, business owners, and civic leaders. Members of the
Planning Committees were identified in consultation with established local
leaders, community organizations, and in some cases municipalities. The
NYRCR Program sets a new standard for community participation in recovery
and resiliency planning, with community members leading the planning
process. Across the State, more than 500 New Yorkers represent their
communities by serving on Planning Committees. More than 400 Planning
Committee Meetings have been held, during which Planning Committee
members worked with the State’s NYRCR Program team to develop
community reconstruction plans and identify opportunities to make their
communities more resilient. All meetings were open to the public. An
additional 125-plus Public Engagement Events attracted thousands of
community members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR planning
process and proposals. The NYRCR Program’s outreach has included
communities that are traditionally underrepresented, such as immigrant
populations and students. All planning materials are posted on the NYRCR
Program’s website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several
ways for community members and the public to submit feedback on
materials in progress.
Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were supported by
staff from the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR), planners from
New York State (NYS) Department of State (DOS) and NYS Department of
Transportation (DOT), and consultants from world-class planning firms that
specialize in engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green infrastructure, and
more.
With the January 2014 announcement of the NYRCR Program’s expansion to
include 22 new localities, the program comprises over 2.7 million New

1

Five of the 102 localities in the program—Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and
Montgomery Counties—are not funded through the CDBG-DR program.

Page i

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent to 14% of
the overall State population and 12% of the State’s overall geography.
The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR Plan. Governor Cuomo
has allocated over $650 million of funding to the program for implementing
projects identified in the NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Communities are also eligible
for additional funds through the program’s NY Rising to the Top Competition,
which evaluates NYRCR Communities across eight categories, including best
use of technology in the planning process, best approach to resilient
economic growth, and best use of green infrastructure to bolster resilience.
The winning NYRCR Community in each category will be allocated an
additional $3 million of implementation funding. The NYRCR Program is also
working with both private and public institutions to identify existing funding
sources and create new funding opportunities where none existed before.
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated with State and Federal
agencies to help guide the development of feasible projects. The program
has leveraged the Regional Economic Development Council’s State Agency
Review Teams (SARTs), comprised of representatives from dozens of State
agencies and authorities, for feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR
Communities. The SARTs review projects with an eye toward regulatory and
permitting needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources.
The NYRCR Program is continuing to work with the SARTs to streamline the
permitting process and ensure shovels are in the ground as quickly as
possible.
On the pages that follow, you will see the results of months of thoughtful,
diligent work by the NYRCR Planning Committee, passionately committed to
realizing brighter, more resilient futures for their Community.
The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more resilient
community. Each NYRCR Planning Committee began the planning process by
defining the scope of its planning area, assessing storm damage, and
identifying critical issues. Next, the Planning Committee inventoried critical
assets in the community and assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On the
basis of this work, the Planning Committee described recovery and resiliency
needs and identified opportunities. The Planning Committee then developed
a series of comprehensive reconstruction and resiliency strategies, and
identified projects and implementation actions to help fulfill those strategies.
Foreword

The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan are divided into three
categories. The order in which the projects and actions are listed in this
NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the NYRCR Community’s
prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects
proposed for funding through a NYRCR Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR
funding. Featured Projects are projects and actions that the Planning
Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and has
analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through the NYRCR
Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are projects and actions
that the Planning Committee would like to highlight and that are not
categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects. The Proposed
Projects and Featured Projects found in this NYRCR Plan were voted for
inclusion by official voting members of the Planning Committee. Those voting
members with conflicts of interest recused themselves from voting on any
affected projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics Handbook and Code of
Conduct.
NYRCR Long Beach is eligible for up to $25 million in CDBG-DR
implementation funds.
While developing projects for inclusion in this NYRCR Plan, the Planning
Committee took into account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the
effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical
assets, feasibility, and community support. The Planning Committee also
considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be eligible
for CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented with this source of
Federal funding must fall into a Federally-designated eligible activity
category, fulfill a national objective (meeting an urgent need, removing
slums and blight, or benefiting low to moderate income individuals), and
have a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding is linked. These are
among the factors that the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery will
consider, in consultation with local municipalities and nonprofit organizations,
when determining which projects and actions are best positioned for
implementation.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR
Community’s CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed
Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review, HUD
eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the
projects and actions found in this NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable

Page ii

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan
does not guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for
CDBG‐DR funding or that it will be implemented. The Governor’s Office of
Storm Recovery will actively seek to match projects with funding sources.
In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions outlined
in this NYRCR Plan will become a reality helping New York not only to
rebuild, but also to build back better.

Foreword

Page iii

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

NYRCR Communities2

Find out more at:
http://www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr

2

Note: map includes those NYRCR Communities funded through the CDBG-DR program, including the NYRCR Communities announced in January 2014

Foreword

Page iv

Table of Contents
Executive Summary – NYRCR Long Beach Community

ES-1

A. Overview

ES-1

B. Working together to rebuild stronger, smarter, and safer

ES-4

C. Blueprint for implementation

ES-4

Section I: Community overview

2

A. Geographic scope of the NYRCR Plan

3

B. Description of storm damage

8

Park Avenue/Beech Street Streetscape Drainage Study and
Infrastructure Improvements (Proposed Project)

123

Parking Garage for Emergency Vehicles (Proposed Project)

127

Protection of Wells and Sewer Pump/Lift Stations (Proposed Project)

131

Protection of Public Housing Units (Proposed Project)

135

Protection of Senior Housing Units (Proposed Project)

138

Stormwater Project Phase 2/ Stormwater Force Main Project (Featured
Project)

141

North Shore Protection of Critical Utilities (Featured Project)

143

Canal Gates in the East End (Featured Project)

146

Park Avenue Complete Streets Phase 2 (Featured Project)

149

Bayfront Revitalization Plan (Featured Project)

152
154

C. Critical issues

19

D. Community vision

24

E. Relationship to regional plans

26

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

33

A. Description of community assets and assessment of risk

33

Revolving Loan Fund for Elevating Homes (Featured Project)

B. Assessment of needs and opportunities

55

Section V: Additional materials

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

76

A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations

157

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

99

B. Master table of projects

159

Bulkheading – North Shore (Proposed Project)

103

C. Public engagement process

165

Drainage Improvements (Proposed Project)

107

D. Community asset inventory

176

Critical Facility Resiliency (Proposed Project)

111

E. Endnotes

185

Establish Office of Emergency Management (Proposed Project)

115

F. Glossary

189

Protection of Community Centers (Proposed Project)

119

Table of Contents

157

Page v

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figures
Figure ES-1: NYRCR Long Beach Community Geographic Scope

ES-2

Figure IV-5: Project Location for OEM

118

Figure ES-2: NYRCR Long Beach Vision Statement

ES-4

Figure IV-6: Project Locations for Protection of Community Centers

122

Figure IV-7: Project Locations for Park Avenue/Beech Street
Streetscape Drainage Study and Infrastructure
Improvements

126

Figure I-1: City of Long Beach Regional Area

5

Figure I-2: NYRCR Long Beach Community Geographic Scope

6

Figure I-3: The Long Beach Storm Surge Inundation Depths of
Superstorm Sandy

11

Figure I-4: Hurricane Irene Peak Storm Tide Elevation (NAVD88,
ft)

Figure IV-8: Project Locations for Parking Garage for Emergency
Vehicles

130

15

Figure I-5: Map Showing Impervious Surface Due to Heavy
Development

Figure IV-9: Project Locations for Protection of Wells and Sewer
Pump/Lift Stations

134

21

Figure I-6: Ground Elevations in Long Beach

22

Figure IV-10: Project Locations for Protection of Public Housing
Units

137

Figure I-7: Depth to Groundwater Table

23

Figure I-8: Selected Key Words Used in the Development of the
NYRCR Long Beach Vision Statement

Figure IV-11: Project Locations for Protection of Senior Housing
Units

140

24

Figure I-9: NYRCR Long Beach Vision Statement

24

Figure IV-12: Project Location for North Shore Protection of Critical
Utilities

145

Figure II-1: Community Asset Map

37

Figure IV-13: Project Locations for Canal Gates in the East End

148

Figure II-2: Economic Assets

40

Figure IV-14: Potential Redesign of Kennedy Plaza

151

Figure II-4: Housing Assets

44

Figure II-5: Infrastructure Systems Assets

46

Figure II-6: Natural and Cultural Assets

48

Figure II-7: Socially Vulnerable Populations Assets

50

Figure II-8: Risk Assessment, including Frequent Stormwater
Flooding Areas

52

Figure II-9: Land Use Map

60

Figure II-10: Percentage of Low- and Moderate-Income Families

68

Figure IV-1: Proposed and Featured Project Locations

102

Figure IV-2: Project Locations for Bulkheading – North Shore
(showing goal of protection of entire north shore;
tidal flow shown by arrows)

106

Figure IV-3: Project locations for Drainage Improvements

110

Figure IV-4: Projects Locations for Critical Facility Resiliency

114

Table of Contents

Page vi

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Tables
Table ES-1: Table of Projects
Table I-1: City of Long Beach Demographic Profile

ES-6
4

Table I-2: Reviewed Plans and Studies Relevant to Long Beach

27

Table II-1: New York State Department of State Risk Areas

34

Table II-2: Economic Drivers

39

Table II-3: Land Use

59

Table II-4: Housing Occupancy 5-Year Estimates

65

Table II-5: Units in Structure

66

Table II-6: Affordable Housing Assets

67

Table III-1: Strategy #1 Proposed and Featured Projects

81

Table III-2: Strategy #2 Proposed and Featured Projects

86

Table III-3: Strategy #3 Proposed and Featured Projects

89

Table III-4: Strategy #4 Proposed and Featured Projects

92

Table III-5: Strategy #5 Proposed and Featured Projects

95

Table III-6: Strategy #6 Proposed and Featured Projects

97

Table IV-1: Key to Symbols

101

Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations

158

Table V-2: Master Table of Projects

160

Table V-3: Perceived Effectiveness of Mitigation Strategies

167

Table V-4: Second Public Engagement Event Activity Results

169

Table V-5: Survey Results

171

Table V-6: Community Support by Project

175

Table V-7: Risk Assessment Scores for Critical Assets

176

Table V-8: Community Asset Inventory - Long Beach Assets,
Landscape Attributes, and Risk Assessment Scores

180

Table of Contents

Page vii

Executive Summary – NYRCR Long Beach Community
A. Overview
The City of Long Beach, NY, is located on the Barrier Island on Long Island’s
South Shore in Nassau County and is a 50-minute train ride from New York
City. With approximately 33,275 residents year round and over 55,000 in the
summer, the City shares the barrier island with the Village of Atlantic Beach
and East Atlantic Beach to the west and Lido Beach and Point Lookout to the
east.
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Long Beach Community
was allocated up to $25 million in Community Development Block GrantDisaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding through the NYRCR Program. The
NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) identified the municipal boundary
of the City of Long Beach as the geographic scope of the NYRCR Long Beach
Plan (see Figure ES-1).

Storm impacts
Historically, the City of Long Beach has faced damaging winds, repetitive
flooding, and storm surge. Superstorm Sandy (and to a lesser degree
Hurricane Irene in 2011) brought a tremendous amount of destruction to
Long Beach. Superstorm Sandy made landfall in New York on October 29,
2012, and was the largest storm in New York State’s recorded history.
Superstorm Sandy devastated Long Beach, causing damage to homes,
businesses, and key infrastructure, just as the economy was beginning to
recover from the recession of 2008. The storm hit at a full moon high tide,
with storm surge that rode on top of this extra high tide. The City was
completely inundated by the storm. As water came from the Atlantic Ocean
on one side of the barrier island, it was met by storm inundation from the
bayfront. Residents were without electricity, drinking water, and sewer for
more than two weeks, and approximately nine fires broke out across the City
because of the storm. Many residents lost their vehicles, and City emergency
apparatus and other vehicles were also destroyed.
Damages have been estimated at approximately $200 million for City
facilities and infrastructure, according to the City of Long Beach. In contrast,
the damages from Hurricane Irene to the City of Long Beach were slightly

Executive Summary

more than $2 million. These numbers do not include damages to other
sectors of the City (homes and businesses); total damages to all of Long
Beach from Superstorm Sandy are likely over $1 billion.
According to the United States Geological Survey (USGS), the City of Long
Beach sustained a storm surge of 17.48 feet. Streets were flooded with 3 to
10 feet of water and covered by 4 to 6 feet of sand. The U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers estimates that approximately 294,000 cubic yards of sand was lost
from City beaches as a result of Superstorm Sandy.1 The massive amount of
debris collected after the storm in Long Beach was temporarily staged at
Nickerson Beach in nearby Lido Beach prior to being removed to upstate
landfills by barge.2
Sixty-eight percent of Long Beach’s housing stock sustained heavy or strong
damage related to Superstorm Sandy (10,554 housing units). 3 Heavy
damage is defined as more than 50% damage to the unit and strong
damage is defined as 20% to 50% damage to the unit. In the City, 10,331
housing units were flooded: 1,337 units had greater than 4 feet of flooding,
and 3,908 units had between 1 and 4 feet of flooding.4
The storm damaged much of the City’s infrastructure, including the sewer
and water lines, wells, pump/lift stations, roads, parking lots, electrical
systems, traffic signals, fire hydrants, sidewalks, and curbs. In the City’s
industrial area on the north shore, the Water Purification Plant and storage
tower, Water Pollution Control Plant, electrical substations, and a major gas
pipeline were damaged and required emergency repairs that took several
weeks. The Water Pollution Control Plant was out of service for 7 days and
the Water Purification Plant was shut down for about 2 weeks with periodic
outages during repairs.
In addition, government facilities, bulkheads, dunes, pedestrian walkovers in
the West End and East End, and the historic 2.2-mile Boardwalk, which was
originally constructed in 1907, were also damaged. Beach pass booths and
lifeguard stands were destroyed and the lifeguard headquarters was pulled
out to sea. In total, 54 City-owned facilities (including the Water Purification
Plant, playgrounds, wells, etc.) were damaged.

Page ES-1

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure ES-1: NYRCR Long Beach Community Geographic Scope
Executive Summary

Page ES-2

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Facing the reality of the storm’s devastation, Long Beachers did what they
always do. They came together. At first light following the storm, residents
were already checking in on neighbors, helping each other dig out cars and
begin the weighty process of discarding all of their flood-drenched worldly
possessions. Residents who were dealing with their own damaged homes
and businesses found the time to help others—removing sand, debris,
cooking on portable grills to provide meals, and going door to door to check
on neighbors. Within hours, local establishments, that were devastated
themselves, had morphed into gathering places, food pantries, and donation
centers. Within days, well organized groups of local volunteers were helping
to gut and muck out homes for anyone who needed it. The Ice Arena, the
Martin Luther King, Jr. (MLK) Center, and other community gathering spaces
became ad hoc places to receive needed information, hot meals, clothing,
and supplies.

Rebuilt Boardwalk

Source: Sustainable Long Island

Critical issues
Although Long Beach has made tremendous progress in its recovery from
Sandy, it still has a long way to go to regain its pre-storm condition and to
protect against future storms. The City of Long Beach faces several critical
issues, identified during the NYRCR planning process with key input from the
Committee and the public, as it continues to recover from Superstorm Sandy.

Boardwalk destruction by Superstorm Sandy

Source: NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee

One of the key challenges is that almost the entire City is located within the
Federal Emergency Management Agency regulated floodplain, demonstrating
a high degree of flood risk. Stormwater flooding is a frequent hazard as the
City is relatively flat, has a high degree of impervious surface coverage, and
has a high water table. While the oceanfront is being addressed through a
massive U.S. Army Corps of Engineers project, the north shore (bayfront) of
Long Beach has areas that repetitively flood and are not protected with
uniform bulkheading or other similar protective measures.
Key health and social service assets are still in need of mitigation to prevent
future flooding and to ensure that they remain operational during future
hazard events. Some businesses and homeowners continue to struggle
following Superstorm Sandy.

Executive Summary

Page ES-3

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Access to power during and after an emergency was also identified as a
critical Community issue. The City also has emergency operation and
management needs. Designated community assistance centers, where
residents can gather in emergency situations for help, news updates, and
mutual support, are needed.

B. Working together to rebuild stronger,
smarter, and safer
The ultimate vision for Long Beach (shown in Figure #ES-2), which is shared
by the Committee and the Community, is to rebuild and redevelop in a
manner that addresses resiliency, sustainability, and greater prosperity to
ensure Long Beach’s long-term success. This vision entails actions that
protect homes, businesses, and facilities damaged by Superstorm Sandy,
while providing a blueprint for enhanced economic development, recreation,
and community services.

NYRCR Long Beach Vision Statement
Develop a vibrant, resilient, sustainable and green
community that protects and enhances the safety, health,
environment, diversity, culture and economy of current and
future residents and guests of Long Beach.
Figure ES-2: NYRCR Long Beach Vision Statement
Public outreach
The NYRCR Long Beach public engagement process included 12 Planning
Committee Meetings, 3 Public Engagement Events, and online surveys to
provide an understanding of risk to community assets, to obtain feedback on
the NYRCR Long Beach Plan, and to gather additional ideas for strategies,
projects, and actions. Each Planning Committee Meeting was open to the
public, and audience participation was encouraged. The Public Engagement
Events took place at strategic intervals and varied locations, and were
accompanied by online surveys for those not able to attend. The purpose of

Executive Summary

these events was to obtain feedback from the public on the Committee’s
work to date.
The Public Engagement Events were advertised through traditional means
(e.g., mainstream media, flyers, and lawn signs) and social media. The first
Public Engagement Event, held in October 2013, was attended by more than
100 residents. The second Public Engagement Event, held in November
2013, organized participants into facilitated focus groups to further discuss
the strategies that were included in the NYRCR Long Beach Conceptual Plan,
which had been submitted in late October 2013. Over 50 residents attended
this event. The third Public Engagement Event, held in February 2014 and
attended by more than 100 residents, involved a review of the Projects
under consideration for the NYRCR Plan. The event had an open house
format with two short orientations. Project Evaluation Guides were provided
for participants to indicate their input for each project. A fourth Public
Engagement Event for the NYRCR Planning Program will be scheduled for
the late spring of 2014.

C. Blueprint for implementation
Strategies, associated goals, projects, and actions were developed from the
Planning Committee Meetings, the Public Engagement Events, review of the
asset inventory and risk assessment, and response to the needs and
opportunities assessment for Long Beach.
During the development of the NYRCR Plan, the Committee brainstormed
many potential actions and strategies that would help Long Beach become
more protected and resilient in the short term as well as longer-term actions
and strategies to help in revitalization efforts. Because of the enormity of
Superstorm Sandy’s impact on Long Beach, the Committee focused mostly
on resiliency measures needed for protection against storms.
Potential projects and actions were examined for feasibility as Proposed or
Featured Projects in the NYRCR Plan.
The Proposed and Featured Projects include:


Capital projects, such as perimeter structural defenses for coastal
protection and resilient construction;

Page ES-4

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Plan, policies, and programs that increase awareness and
information; and



Market-based methods, such as accruing points for the Community
Rating System (National Flood Insurance Program), to reduce flood
insurance premiums.

The projects in the NYRCR Plan are classified as Proposed Projects, Featured
Projects, and Additional Resiliency Recommendations, which are defined as
follows:


Proposed Projects: Proposed Projects are designed to be fully
funded through the NYRCR Program using the Community’s
allocation of CDBG-DR funding.



Featured Projects: Featured Projects are innovative projects in

which an initial study or discrete first phase of the project is
proposed for CDBG-DR funding or other identified funding, and
regulatory reforms and other programs that do not involve capital
expenditures.


Additional Resiliency Recommendations: Additional Resiliency

Recommendations are projects and actions that the Committee
would like to highlight, would be funded from sources other than
CDBG-DR funding, and are not categorized as Proposed or Featured
Projects.

Projects for NYRCR Long Beach are listed below in Table#ES-1 by strategy
(some of the projects fit multiple strategies and are listed more than once).
The order of appearance is not a reflection of project priority or ranking.

Executive Summary

Page ES-5

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table ES-1: Table of Projects
Strategy

Project Name

Project Category

Bulkheading – North Shore

Proposed Project

Drainage Improvements

Proposed Project

Critical Facility Resiliency

Proposed Project

Park Avenue/Beech Street Streetscape Drainage Study and Infrastructure Improvements

Proposed Project

Parking Garage for Emergency Vehicles

Proposed Project

Protection of Wells and Sewer Pump/Lift Stations

Proposed Project

Park Avenue Complete Streets Phase 2

Featured Project

Stormwater Project Phase 2/Stormwater Force Main Project

Featured Project

North Shore Protection of Critical Utilities

Featured Project

Canal Gates in East End

Featured Project

Critical Facility Resiliency

Proposed Project

Protection of Community Centers

Proposed Project

Protection of Public Housing Units

Proposed Project

Protection of Senior Housing Units

Proposed Project

Strategy #3 – Implement measures to make Long Beach
economic generators more resilient, while also facilitating
enhancement of key commercial areas and the redevelopment of
underutilized areas to stimulate economic growth

Park Avenue/Beech Street Streetscape Drainage Study and Infrastructure Improvements

Proposed Project

Park Avenue Complete Streets Phase 2

Featured Project

Bayfront Revitalization Plan

Featured Project

Strategy #4 – Increase Long Beach’s capacity to facilitate and
foster actions that lead to greater resiliency, emergency
preparedness, and sustainability

Establish an Office of Emergency Management and Hire a Local Disaster Recovery Manager

Proposed Project

Bayfront Revitalization Plan

Featured Project

Strategy #5 – Restore and enhance natural resources for both
resiliency and recreation purposes while also protecting
important cultural resources

Drainage Improvements

Proposed Project

Stormwater Project Phase 2/Stormwater Force Main Project

Featured Project

Strategy #6 – Encourage and facilitate housing resiliency and
sustainability measures while striving to maintain the character
of Long Beach

Protection of Public Housing Units

Proposed Project

Protection of Senior Housing Units

Proposed Project

Revolving Loan Fund for Elevating Homes

Featured Project

Strategy #1 – Employ appropriate techniques to mitigate ocean
and bay storm surge and stormwater flooding to protect Long
Beach’s infrastructure, people, and assets while positioning for
resilient redevelopment

Strategy #2 – Protect critical Long Beach health and social
services assets and increase the capacity to provide needed
emergency and community services before, during, and after
disasters

Executive Summary

Page ES-6

Section I:
Community overview
Photo: Ocean Beach Park in Long Beach

Source: Planning4Places, LLC

Section I:
Community overview
The City of Long Beach, NY, is on a barrier island on Long Island’s South
Shore and a 50-minute train ride from New York City. With approximately
33,275 residents year round and over 55,000 in the summer, Long Beach
has the feel of a seaside getaway and includes a dynamic mixture of longtime residents and tech-savvy relative newcomers. Residents are dedicated
to sustainability and resiliency, interested in the arts and culture, and fitness
oriented (e.g., surfing and jogging/bicycling on the Boardwalk). Long Beach
is a diverse community that attracts young professionals and its economy is
largely dependent on the summer visitor/guest season.
Long Beach has faced significant flooding over the past several years, first
when Hurricane Irene crossed Long Island on August 28, 2011, and more
significantly during Superstorm Sandy. Long Beach was devastated by
Superstorm Sandy in October 2012. During Superstorm Sandy, the entire
City was inundated with water when the ocean met the bay, and all of its
residents and businesses were affected.

The Boardwalk in Long Beach, NY

Source: The LiRo Group

There's an old saying in Long Beach that goes something like, "Once you've
got Long Beach sand in your shoes, you'll always have Long Beach sand in

Section I: Community overview

your shoes." It's a saying that engenders not just the beauty and charm of
the barrier island community, but that of the unique character of the people
who inhabit it. Never has this strong and resilient character been more on
full display than in the days, weeks, and months since Superstorm Sandy
decimated the City.
On October 30, 2012, Long Beach woke up to what could only be described
as a scene of devastation. The Boardwalk was in shambles. Thousands of
water-soaked cars were strewn throughout the City. Entire sections of the
City were buried in more than 6 feet of sand, as the beach side dune system
had collapsed under the weight of Sandy's surge. The power was out.
Sewage systems were down. There was no running water. Cell phones had
no service. Save but a few, nearly every home and business in the City was
impacted.
Facing this reality, Long Beachers did what they always do. They came
together. At first light, residents were already checking in on neighbors,
helping each other dig out cars and begin the weighty process of discarding
all of their flood-drenched worldly possessions. Residents who were dealing
with their own damaged homes and businesses found the time to help
others—removing sand and debris, cooking on portable grills to provide
meals, and going door to door to check on neighbors. Within hours, local
establishments, that were also devastated, had morphed into gathering
places, food pantries, and donation centers. Within days, well-organized
groups of local volunteers were helping to gut and muck out homes for
anyone who needed it. The Ice Arena, the Martin Luther King, Jr. (MLK)
Center, and other community gathering spaces became ad hoc places to
receive needed information, hot meals, clothing, and supplies.
Once cellular service was restored, things really took off. Facebook pages
were formed that helped bring order to the chaos—a single posting would
yield an army of volunteers ready to help. Needs were matched to resources.
Fundraisers were launched. One such fundraiser, spearheaded by a local
restaurant, resulted in a free community Thanksgiving dinner, shared by
hundreds upon hundreds of Long Beachers. Hot meals were delivered to

Page 2

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

elderly residents in high-rises. Residents were bruised, but certainly not
broken. Every day since, they have been working to not just bring Long
Beach back to what it was, but to help make it better than it's ever been.
Residents continued to volunteer—holding holiday toy drives and fundraisers.
Many of these volunteer efforts have launched non-profit organizations
whose mission is to continue to rebuild the City of Long Beach.
The Long Beach community is still in the process of recovering and
rebuilding; this NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Plan, a
resident-driven, bottom-up process, complements these ongoing efforts.
In July 2013, the State of New York launched the NYRCR Program, an
innovative post-disaster planning process. This program will help Long Beach
to create a more resilient City as it continues to recover, rebuild, and protect
vital City assets.
The NYRCR Long Beach Plan:


Assesses the community’s vulnerability to the adverse effects of
future natural disasters and sea-level rise;



Identifies strategies, projects, and actions that will increase the
community’s resilience, provide protection to vulnerable populations,
and promote sound economic development by protecting the
community’s assets (see Section II.A);



Identifies where funds should be used to repair or reconstruct
essential public assets damaged or destroyed by Superstorm Sandy;
and



Assesses the need for economic development.

Long Beach spirit after Superstorm Sandy

Source: NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee

A. Geographic scope of the NYRCR Plan
The NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) identified the municipal
boundary of the City of Long Beach as the geographic scope of the NYRCR
Plan. The maps in Figures I-1 and I-2 show the regional context of the City
on the South Shore of Long Island and geographic scope of the NYRCR Plan,
respectively. This section has three subsections—Community background,
Existing development, and City operations—that provide context and detail
about the community and development within the geographic scope of the
NYRCR Plan.

Section I: Community overview

Page 3

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Community background
The City is in Nassau County, NY, south of Long Island. The City is on Long
Beach Barrier Island, the westernmost of the outer barrier islands off Nassau
County’s South Shore. Reynolds Channel borders the City on the north side
of Long Beach Barrier Island, and the Atlantic Ocean is to the south. The City
is less than 1.0 mile from north to south and approximately 3.5 miles from
east to west and has a total area of approximately 2.0 square miles.

Table I-1: City of Long Beach Demographic Profile
Demographic
Population

The City shares the barrier island with the Village of Atlantic Beach and East
Atlantic Beach to the west and Lido Beach and Point Lookout to the east.
Three drawbridges allow access on and off the barrier island. The Long
Beach Bridge connects the City to the Village of Island Park on the mainland
of Long Island via Long Beach Road/Austin Boulevard, a major evacuation
route for the barrier island. To the west, the Atlantic Beach Bridge connects
the island to Lawrence on the mainland of Long Island, en route to the John
F. Kennedy International Airport and New York City. The Loop Parkway, to
the east along the Lido Beach and Point Lookout borders, connects the island
to Jones Beach, the Meadowbrook Parkway, and southern Long Island.

Race/Ethnicity

The City of Long Beach is one of the oldest communities on Long Island and
was founded in 1880. The first Long Beach Hotel was built then and with the
railroad arriving in 1882, Long Beach continued growing as a resort
community.5 William Reynolds purchased Long Beach in 1907 to create a
planned community and created the area known as Long Beach today by
dredging Reynolds Channel, filling in the area, and constructing many of the
City’s homes, the Boardwalk, the medians and street malls, and the sewer
system.6 The City of Long Beach was incorporated in 1922, allowing greater
control of government services. As a City, Long Beach has more autonomy
than surrounding areas but also more responsibility for its own affairs and,
therefore, must be somewhat self-reliant.

Persons Per Square Mile

During the 1930s and 1940s, the City became more of a year-round
community and during the post-World War II era, the City saw a decline of
guests.7 In the 1970s, many of the old hotels were used as long-term stay
facilities and, subsequently, much of the hotel sites were redeveloped for
luxury market-rate multifamily housing.8 The City is a densely developed city
and had a population of 33,275 in 20109 (see demographic profile provided
in Table I-1).

Section I: Community overview

Number

Percentage

33,275

—

25,123

75.5%

2,130

6.4%

American Indian/Alaskan
Native

100

0.3%

Asian

898

2.7%

0

0.0%

White
African American

Hawaiian, Pacific Islander
Two or more races
Hispanic of any race

765

2.3%

4,597

14.1%

15,023

—

$79,546

—

—

10.0%

Income
Median household Income
Poverty rate (persons)
Housing Units
Number of households

16,450
14,756

Homeownership rate

—
57.6%

Persons per household

2.18

Median home value of
owner-occupied units

$517,000

—

Source: 2010 U.S. Census State and County Quick Facts

Page 4

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-1: City of Long Beach Regional Area

Section I: Community overview

Page 5

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-2: NYRCR Long Beach Community Geographic Scope

Section I: Community overview

Page 6

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Most of Long Beach’s community facilities are in this neighborhood,
as well as concentrations of industrial facilities on the north shore.

Existing development
The City has three general geographic areas, the West End, the Central
District, and the East End, and includes the following neighborhoods: the
West End, Westholme, the Walks, the Central District, North Park, the East
End, the Canals, and the President Streets. The City contains a mixture of
densities, lot sizes, architectural styles, and types of housing. The West End
is the narrowest part of the City. The City includes three main commercial
areas: the central area along W. Park Avenue near City Hall, the West End,
and the East End. The neighborhoods are described in more detail below and
shown in Figure I-2:



East End – The East End neighborhood is east of Long Beach
Boulevard/Monroe Boulevard. It extends to the Canals neighborhood
and the City boundary at Curley Street on the east, the bayfront on
the north, and the oceanfront to the south. One of the City’s
commercial districts is located here on East Park Avenue. The
Boardwalk ends at Neptune Boulevard within the neighborhood.
Higher-density residential buildings are found along East Broadway
and Shore Road.



West End – This neighborhood is west of New York Avenue and
extends to the western border of the City. The West End has many
one-story bungalow homes on small, narrow streets named after
U.S. States. One of the City’s three commercial corridors is along
West Beech Street. Raised dunes at end of the blocks allowed
residents access to the beach via wooden walkovers before
Superstorm Sandy washed the dunes and walkovers away.



Westholme – This neighborhood is bounded by New York Avenue
to the west and Laurelton Boulevard to the east, and skirts around
the West Park Avenue/City Hall commercial area to National
Boulevard. It goes from the bayfront to the oceanfront at the
Boardwalk. The Boardwalk ends at New York Avenue.



Walks – This neighborhood is bounded by West Beech Street to the
south, West Park Avenue to the north, New York Avenue to the west,
and Lindell Boulevard to the east. This neighborhood has bungalows
with very narrow sidewalks between them (each walk is named after
a month).



Central District – This neighborhood is south of Park Avenue and
east of Laurelton Boulevard, and extends to Monroe Boulevard. A
portion of the Boardwalk is in this neighborhood, as are the
undeveloped Foundation Block, the Superblock, and some higher
density residential buildings along East Broadway and Shore Road.

Canals – This neighborhood has four canals that run from the
bayfront through the neighborhood, which is transected by bridges
that run east-west. The neighborhood is bounded by Neptune
Boulevard to the west, East Park Avenue to the south, the City
boundary to the east, and the bay to the north.



President Streets – This neighborhood is located south of East
Walnut Street, north of East Broadway, and between Roosevelt and
Maple Boulevards. The majority of the streets in the neighborhood
are named after former U.S. Presidents.





North Park – This neighborhood is bounded by National Boulevard
to the west, Long Beach Boulevard to the east, the bay to the north,
and the City Hall/West Park Avenue business district to the south.

Section I: Community overview

Residential Apartments near the Boardwalk

Source: Planning4Places, LLC

Page 7

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Central Business District – This area contains mostly businesses,
the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) Station, and government functions
along with two senior housing facilities.

The City is unique on the barrier island in that it has its own police and fire
departments. The Long Beach Fire Department is a combination department
with 165 volunteers and a 25-member career uniformed force.11 Its
headquarters are at City Hall and the other two stations are located at Maple
Boulevard and East Park Avenue, and Indiana Avenue and West Park
Avenue. The fire department provides fire and emergency medical services
protection for the City of Long Beach, the Village of Atlantic Beach, and East
Atlantic Beach Fire Districts.
The Long Beach City School District serves the City of Long Beach, East
Atlantic Beach, Point Lookout, and Lido Beach. The school district has seven
schools serving approximately 4,300 students, including one prekindergarten school, four elementary schools, one middle school, one high
school, as well as an alternative high school and an adult learning center. 12
Three of the elementary schools are in Long Beach: East Elementary School,
Lindell Elementary School, and West Elementary School. Long Beach Middle
School and the Long Beach High School are in Lido Beach. For more
information on the City of Long Beach’s assets, please see Section II:
Description of Community Assets.

The Canals neighborhood

Source: Planning4Places, LLC

City operations – key public assets
The City’s water supply is drawn from the Lloyd Aquifer through eight wells
where it is pumped to the Water Purification Plant on the City’s north shore
for testing and chemical treatment, prior to being conveyed to homes
throughout the City. A water tower helps provide adequate water pressure to
the drinking water system.
The City owns and operates a sewage treatment plant (called the Water
Pollution Control Plant), also located on the north shore near the Water
Purification Plant, which takes in sanitary sewage flow from Long Beach and
Lido Beach. Three wastewater pump stations, located on Park Avenue at
Indiana Avenue, New York Avenue, and Roosevelt Boulevard, serve the
Water Pollution Control Plant. Both the sewage treatment plant, constructed
in 1951,10 and the water tower are aging facilities.

Section I: Community overview

B. Description of storm damage
Historically, the City of Long Beach has faced damaging winds, repetitive
flooding, and storm surge. Superstorm Sandy (and to a lesser degree
Hurricane Irene the year before) brought a tremendous amount of
destruction. This section includes both details on the destruction of
Superstorm Sandy and the City of Long Beach’s actions after the storm
through March 2014. It also includes available information on the impact of
Hurricane Irene, which made landfall in August 2011, on Long Beach.
Superstorm Sandy
Superstorm Sandy struck New York on October 29, 2012, bringing a storm
surge of 9 to 12 feet above normal tide levels from Kings Point on the
western end of Long Island Sound to the Battery on the southern tip of
Manhattan.13 According to the United States Geological Survey (USGS), the
peak storm surge during Superstorm Sandy occurred at the City of Long
Beach where it reached 17.48 feet

Page 8

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Superstorm Sandy is the largest storm in New York’s recorded history to
make landfall. Superstorm Sandy’s effect was devastating, causing
widespread damage to lives, homes, businesses, core infrastructure,
government property, and an economy just beginning to recover from a
financial crisis. Overall, the storm caused 53 fatalities,14 destroyed an
estimated 305,000 homes,15 affected more than 2,000 miles of roads, caused
catastrophic flooding in subways and tunnels, and also damaged major
power transmission systems. 16 Fourteen counties in the State of New York,
including Nassau County, were declared Federal disaster areas.17 Economic
losses in New York as a result of Superstorm Sandy were estimated to be
between $30 and $50 billion, with an estimated $10 to $20 billion in insured
losses.18 New York Governor Andrew M. Cuomo stated that storm damage
would cost New York State nearly $42 billion, with the vast majority of
damage centered on New York City and Long Island.19
Superstorm Sandy devastated Long Beach, causing damage to homes,
businesses, and key infrastructure just as the economy was beginning to
recover from the recession. The City was completely inundated by the storm
(see Figure I-3). Damages were estimated at approximately $200 million for
City facilities and infrastructure according to the City of Long Beach. Total
damages from Superstorm Sandy are likely over $1 billion, including
damages to homes and businesses.
As water came from the Atlantic Ocean on one side of the barrier island, it
was met by storm inundation from the bayfront. Residents were without
electricity, drinking water, and sewer for more than 2 weeks. Many residents
lost their vehicles and many City of Long Beach vehicles were damaged or
destroyed, including 4 lifeguard patrol emergency response vehicles, 4 fire
pumpers, 22 police vehicles, and 6 police motorcycles.
Approximately nine fires broke out across the City because of the storm
(seven in the Canals area). Many residents lost their vehicles and City
emergency apparatus and other vehicles were also destroyed. The City of
Long Beach Fire Department started fighting fires in 4 to 5 feet of water and
could not use their trucks until the water retreated.20 The City of Long Beach
Police Department with assistance from the National Guard, State and
County Police protected the City and instituted a curfew to protect against
looting.21

Section I: Community overview

Streets were flooded with 3 to 10 feet of water and covered by 4 to 6 feet of
sand. It is estimated that approximately 294,000 cubic yards of sand was
lost from City beaches due to Superstorm Sandy.22 The massive amount of
debris collected after the storm in Long Beach was temporarily staged at
Nickerson Beach in Lido Beach prior to being removed to upstate landfills by
barge.23
Sixty-eight (68) % of Long Beach’s housing stock sustained heavy or strong
damage related to Superstorm Sandy (10,554 housing units). 24 Heavy
damage is defined as more than 50% damage to the unit and strong
damage is defined as 20 to 50% damage to the unit. In the City, 8,468
housing units sustained heavy damage.25 Also, 10,331 housing units were
flooded; 1,337 units had greater than 4 feet of flooding; and 3,908 units had
between 1 and 4 feet of flooding.26
Remarkably, there were no fatalities in the City, although 1,000 patients
were treated for storm-related injuries and illnesses at the temporary
hospital set up by the City of Long Beach and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), when the Long Beach Medical Center was
unusable.27 The Long Beach Medical Center was damaged during the storm
and the hospital has been closed since Superstorm Sandy. Approximately
700 employees are no longer employed at the Long Beach Medical Center as
a result of Sandy.28 In February 2014, the hospital filed for Chapter 11
bankruptcy protection.
Three elementary schools of the Long Beach School District that are in the
City of Long Beach (West, East, and Lindell), along with Long Beach Middle
and Lido Elementary in Lido Beach, sustained significant damage. The
schools with less damage hosted the students from the more heavily
damaged ones for long periods during the 2012–2013 school year.
The storm damaged much of the City’s infrastructure, including the sewer
and water lines, wells, pump/lift stations, roads, parking lots, electrical
systems, traffic signals, fire hydrants, sidewalks, and curbs. City officials
worked (and camped out in City Hall), trying to bring City infrastructure back
online while removing massive piles of sand and garbage from City streets.29
In the City’s industrial area on the north shore, the Water Purification Plant
and storage tower, Water Pollution Control Plant, electrical substations, and
a major gas pipeline were damaged and required emergency repairs that
took several weeks. The Water Pollution Control Plant was out of service for

Page 9

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

7 days and the Water Purification Plant was shut down for about 2 weeks
with periodic outages during repairs. Long Beach issued a boil-water advisory
on October 30, 2012, that was rescinded on November 8, 2012. 30



Playgrounds – as an example, the Magnolia Street playground was
severely damaged by Hurricane Irene and subsequently repaired,
only to be destroyed by Sandy;

In addition, government facilities, bulkheads, dunes, pedestrian walkovers in
the West End and East End, and the historic 2.2-mile Boardwalk, which was
originally constructed in 1907, were also damaged. Destruction of the
Boardwalk devastated the City economy. Beach pass booths and lifeguard
stands were also destroyed and the lifeguard headquarters was pulled out to
sea. The lifeguard headquarters had been moved off its foundation during
Hurricane Irene and had only recently been repaired and put in to service. In
total, 54 City-owned facilities (including the Water Purification Plant,
playgrounds, wells, etc.) had estimated damages of $46,741,565 for
demolition, disposal, and reconstruction of these assets.31



Water Purification Plant, wells, and hydrants – damage to
generators, electrical equipment;



Water Pollution Control Plant;



Roosevelt, New York, and Indiana Avenues pump stations; and



Bricks on the historic roadway at 200, 300, and 600 block of West
Penn.

Some of the City facilities that were damaged include (see Figure II-1 for
location of many of these facilities):32


Magnolia Senior Center/Community Center and Long Beach
Recreation Center – damage to classrooms, offices, lobby, cardio
room, locker rooms, indoor pool, pool filtration systems;



Long Beach Ice Arena– damage to floor, ice surface, synthetic turf
and hockey rink, locker rooms, mechanical equipment, lobby;



City Hall Police and Fire Departments, Indian and Maple Fire Stations
– damage to apparatus floors, equipment, staging areas, bathrooms;



Police Auxiliary Building – flood damage to entire first floor;



Animal Shelter – flood damage to entire building and its contents;



Municipal Garage;



LIRR Parking Garage;



Long Beach Sanitation Department (150 West Pine Street);



Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Center – flood damage to the
entire first floor;



West End Community Center – flood damage to entire first floor;

Section I: Community overview

Page 10

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-3: The Long Beach Storm Surge Inundation Depths of Superstorm Sandy

Section I: Community overview

Page 11

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Damage from Superstorm Sandy
in Long Beach’s West End, October 2012

Source: NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee
Damage from Superstorm Sandy in Long Beach, October 2012

Source: Kate Murray, Town of Hempstead Supervisor

Sand removal from Long Beach streets after Superstorm Sandy

Source: NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee

Section I: Community overview

Page 12

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Armour St. in Canal Area looking north from E. Pine St. on
October 29, 2012, at 9 am just before high tide (bayside)

Source: NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee

Damage from Superstorm Sandy
in Long Beach, October 2012

Source: Kate Murray, Town of Hempstead Supervisor
Dune walkovers after dune erosion (dune was 15 feet high
and 20 feet wide) between Neptune Blvd. and Roosevelt Blvd.

Source: NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee

Section I: Community overview

Page 13

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Hurricane Irene
The center of Hurricane Irene crossed Long Island on August 28, 2011, and
also caused flooding to Long Beach, although not to nearly the same extent
as Superstorm Sandy. A National Weather Service report states that a storm
surge of 3 to 6 feet caused hundreds of millions of dollars in property
damage in New York City and Long Island.33 The City of Long Beach
estimates its damage from Irene was $2,117,884.95.
See Figure I-4 for approximate flood inundation extents of Hurricane Irene.
The approximate inundation area was based on storm tide depths reported
at the closest U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) storm tide gauge to the north
shore of Long Beach, which was in Island Park (USGS site 01311143).34
These data were originally in vertical control datum National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29), used to estimate elevation heights, and
were converted a newer datum (North American Vertical Datum of 1988
[NAVD88]) to be consistent with topography data used to estimate flood
extent.
Other storms and hurricanes
Flooding from coastal storms and heavy precipitation is a recurring event in
Long Beach. Stormwater flooding occurs multiple times a year. To illustrate
the repetitive risk from larger coastal storms, the following larger storms that
impacted affect Long Beach are listed for historical context:


1938 Hurricane



1960 Hurricane Donna



1962 Nor’easter



1971 Hurricane Doria



1976 Hurricane Belle



1979 Hurricane Davis



1983 Tropical Storm Dean



1985 Hurricane Gloria



1991 Hurricane Bob



1992 Nor’easter



1996 Hurricane Bertha

Section I: Community overview

Flooding from Hurricane Irene in North Park neighborhood

Source: NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee

Page 14

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-4: Hurricane Irene Peak Storm Tide Elevation (NAVD88, ft)

Section I: Community overview

Page 15

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

(HSLRR) and Environmental Assessment (EA),” which was
undergoing public review through March 31, 2014.36 The Federal
government has committed to paying for the entire expense for this
project. The extensive work undertaken by the USACE was noted by
the Committee and a reason that protection from north shore
flooding became a priority of the NYRCR process.

Actions since Superstorm Sandy
Since Superstorm Sandy, the City has undertaken the actions listed below to
help recover and make the community more resilient following Superstorm
Sandy. In addition, a number of announcements have been made that will
help the City of Long Beach implement its recovery. Below is a synopsis of
actions underway in chronologic order:


The City completed the Boardwalk reconstruction project, which was
funded by FEMA and the State of New York with Community
Development Block Grant–Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funds,
ahead of schedule in October 2013 and held a grand reopening
ceremony on October 25, 2013. Most of the Boardwalk was open by
late July 2013. The reconstruction included a wave break wall
installed beneath the Boardwalk to protect it. The redesign of the
Boardwalk was a result of an extensive community visioning and
public outreach process.



In August 2013, the City completed a Bulkhead study for the north
shore, the Conditions Evaluation of Bulkheads & Outfall Structures in
the City of Long Beach, New York. This study was an exhaustive and
detailed analysis of the entire bulkheading system and identifies
areas that are inadequate. This study will be used to identify the
critical areas in phasing the implementation of the Bulkheading –
North Shore project (see Sections III and IV of this NYRCR Plan).



The City improved three lift stations on Roosevelt Avenue, New York
Avenue, and Indiana Avenue that now have submersible pumps.



The City coordinated with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
on a fully federally funded project for reconstructing the dunes on
the East End and West End. Dune grass planting events took place in
late October and early November 2013. Community residents and
the City of Long Beach volunteered to build back dunes to protect
the City using 3,000 donated and discarded Christmas trees in the
winter of 2013.35 The rebuilding of the 19 dune walkovers was
underway as of March 2014 with a scheduled completion by mid-July
2014. The remaining dunes for the central part of the City in front of
the Boardwalk, beach berms, and rebuilt groins are part of a USACE
plan entitled “Draft Hurricane Sandy Limited Reevaluation Report

Section I: Community overview

Dune planting, Fall 2013

Source: Sustainable Long Island



In November 2013, Governor Cuomo announced that funding in the
amount of approximately $12.9 million would be awarded to Long
Beach to provide more than 6,000 feet of flood barrier protection for
the north shore. This project includes about 2,300 feet of
bulkheading to an elevation of 11 feet for Long Beach’s utility and
industrial area. In addition, several flood barrier options including a
4,400-foot “Dutch dam,” a permanent subgrade flood barrier that
can be deployed to a minimum height of 11 feet during a major
storm, are being considered to protect the utilities. The utility flood

Page 16

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

barrier will be placed along the north side of Park Place, to Long
Beach Boulevard, and West Pine Street to the eastern edge of the
Water Pollution Control Plant, which will meet up with the bulkheads
in the area. This project is out for bid as of March 2014 with work
slated to start later in 2014.


The City received grants in December 2013 from the NYS
Department of State ($75,000) for updating the Local Waterfront
Revitalization Plan and from the NYS Energy Research and
Development Authority (NYSERDA) ($187,500) for the
Comprehensive Plan. The updates of these plans will help increase
the City’s resilience to climate change through incorporation of
energy efficiency and environmentally sustainable practices.



In January 2014, the Long Beach City Council voted to hire a firm to
review its Community Rating System (CRS) program with the goal of
lowering flood insurance premium rates for residents.37



In January 2014, it was announced that litigation had been resolved
surrounding the Superblock. Subsequently, in February 2014, the
Zoning Board of Appeals approved a plan for a mixed-use high-rise
development that has two 15-story apartment towers.38



In February 2014, Governor Cuomo approved a $12 million bond
measure to help the City of Long Beach finance Superstorm Sandyrelated costs that are not eligible for reimbursement.



In March 2014, the City announced that it was conducting a
comprehensive evaluation of its emergency response services,
especially with the former Long Beach Medical Center’s closure and
bankruptcy filing (bankruptcy filing occurred in February 2014).



The City took a pledge to become a Climate Smart Community. The
City understands that flood risk is dynamic and the potential exists
for future events like Sandy. By taking this pledge, the City will
commit to sustainability and resiliency goals such as greenhouse gas
reduction and climate adaptation to address climate change risks like
sea-level rise and increased strength of coastal storms.



In January 2014, it was announced that the City will receive smart
growth technical assistance from Global Green USA which is funded
by the Environmental Protection Agency Smart Growth Building

Section I: Community overview

Blocks for Sustainable Communities Program. This program provides
provide comprehensive recommendations for infrastructure and
policy changes aimed at helping the communities build a future that
is more resource-efficient, livable, healthy, and environmentally
responsible. The program provides rapid, targeted technical
assistance using different tools with proven results.

Breach in Pacific dune looking north, November 10, 2012

Source: NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee



The City Council established a program to provide assistance for
bulkhead replacement on private property. Approximately $500,000
has been set aside for the program. The City will bond the projects
and will be repaid by property owners by adding to the tax bill or
annual vouchers. Due to the high costs of residents’ recovery, there
has not been high participation in the program. As a result, the City
is searching for additional grants to expand the program. This
program will be complemented by the NYRCR Housing Recovery
Program bulkhead replacement program.



The City included $125,000 to install some of the needed backflow
prevention valves on stormwater outfall pipes in its capital budget

Page 17

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

and scheduled the purchase of a sewer cleaning truck to continue
cleaning the storm drain system.


The City received CDBG-DR grant funding to increase the number of
building code officials to assist with post-Sandy residential
reconstruction needs and hired consultants to assist with disaster
case management.



The City initiated construction and redevelopment of Leroy Conyers
Park, which will include new park facilities, equipment, and fencing.
The park should reopen by Memorial Day of 2014. The Recreation
Center, Ice Arena and Magnolia Park were also repaired and rebuilt.



The City developed a $400,000 capital plan for curb rehabilitation
and replacement on the center mall area on Park Avenue.



The City scheduled the purchase of four new sanitation trucks in
October 2013. The acquisition of four new buses and two new
paratransit vehicles was planned.





The City made sewer line improvements that are normally made
when road improvements are taking place. The City will continue
making necessary improvements as road projects are initiated.
The City passed a Complete Streets resolution to improve traffic
congestion, traffic circulation, traffic calming, bicycle routes and
parking, and to reduce vehicle-pedestrian conflicts. Funding was
sought but not received from the U.S. Department of Transportation
Investment Generating Economic Recovery (TIGER) grant and
NYSERDA for the Complete Streets projects.

In addition to the City actions described above, the State in October 2013
also announced that elevation and flood protection would be provided for the
two Long Island Power Authority (LIPA) Long Beach substations, operated by
Public Service Electric and Gas Company (PSEG) power substations. These
substations include: the Park Place substation on Water Street and the Long
Beach substation on Riverside Boulevard). Temporary flood walls have been
constructed around the site during construction while the key pieces of
equipment are being raised or otherwise protected. In addition, LIPA/PSEG is
upgrading electrical service and electrical capacity to the City of Long Beach
from 4 kilovolts to 13.2 kilovolts, including installing a more protected,
storm-resilient system.

Section I: Community overview

Superstorm Sandy caused a 9-foot wall of water to wash over the Bay Park
Sewage Treatment Plant (STP), which knocked out power and dumped more
than 69 million gallons of raw sewage into waterways.39 As Nassau County
worked to repair damages, another 2.8 billion gallons of partially treated
sewage was released into Reynolds Channel.40 In January 2014, it was
announced that Nassau County was working with the Federal government to
assist Long Beach with converting its Water Pollution Control Plant into a
pumping station so that sewage could be moved from there to Bay Park for
treatment and then distributed with other effluent 2 to 3 miles offshore
through an outfall pipe. This project, if funded and implemented, would help
improve water quality in the bay and free up land for redevelopment.
It was announced in January 2014, that the State will receive $810 million in
Federal funds to repair and upgrade the STP.41 The project, which will be
managed by Nassau County, includes:


Building a system of dikes, levees, and movable flood walls around
the entire plant to provide protection against the 500-year storm and
account for anticipated sea-level rise;



Elevating and hardening the Electrical Plant Distribution System and
repairing existing generators to take the plant off temporary power;



Elevating and/or hardening 57 pump stations that serve one million
residents to protect from floods;



Building a larger sewage collection line to accommodate increased
flow levels during storm surges; and



Hardening and replacing the sludge dewatering equipment and
building damaged during Sandy.42

The Long Beach School District is floodproofing its facilities including
securing boilers and electric systems in watertight structures. Some of the
schools have moved the mechanical room from the first to the second floor
or modified classroom space into a raised mechanical room. All of the
schools, except the High School, had already installed wind protection
measures on windows. The District has applied for a FEMA grant to replace
the weaker High School windows.43
Governor Cuomo announced in January 2014 that New York State will fund
the replacement of several bridges. Locally on the South Shore of Long

Page 18

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Island, scour retrofit improvements for large span bridges that will account
for tidal conditions and flow will be undertaken in the following locations:


Loop Parkway over Long Creek;



Meadowbrook Parkway over False Channel, Fundy Channel, and
Sloop Channel (3 bridges);



Robert Moses Parkway over State Boat Channel (northbound and
southbound) and over Fire Island Inlet (3 bridges); and



Southern State Parkway over Hempstead Lake.

In February 2014, Nassau County hosted a training event for the State’s
Citizen Preparedness Corp program, a great resource for communities to help
prepare their citizens for more frequent extreme weather. Citizens will be
trained to help in emergencies (see www.prepare.ny.gov).

C. Critical issues
The City of Long Beach faces several critical issues, identified during the
NYRCR planning process with key input from the Planning Committee and
the public, as it continues to recover from Superstorm Sandy. See Section V
for details on the NYRCR Public Engagement process.
One of the key challenges for the City of Long Beach is the topography of
the barrier island. The City is very flat, with generally slightly higher
elevations near the ocean beaches mostly between 8 and 10 feet above
mean sea level. The land then gradually slopes down toward Reynolds
Channel with grades mostly from 4 to 6 feet above mean sea level. The
barrier island and its topography cause the island to be vulnerable to erosion
and flooding during storm events, in particular along Reynolds Channel and
the Canals during high tide and storm events.
Stormwater is slow to drain during heavy rainfall events. Figures I-5, I-6, and
I-7 provide additional details that show the challenges of reducing the risk
from flooding on a fully developed barrier island. As a result of intense
development, the resulting impervious surfaces reduce ground absorption of
stormwater, which then runs off (Figure I-5). The relative low elevations of
the island allow coastal flooding, especially on the north shore, and reduce
drainage times (Figure I-6). The water table is very close to the surface in

Section I: Community overview

many parts of Long Beach, making subsurface activities, including
stormwater infiltration and retention, a challenge (Figure I-7).
Superstorm Sandy revealed many critical issues for all the areas it impacted,
including Long Beach. Flooding from the ocean was not listed as a critical
issue because of the extensive USACE work on the oceanfront described
earlier in this section. Long Beach is currently redeveloping in many areas
and will look to incorporate resiliency in all redevelopment where
opportunities exist. Implementing this resiliency vision will take time and
Long Beach is positioning itself to rebuild stronger. Specific issues include:


The north shore of Long Beach has areas that repetitively flood even
during moderate coastal storms and rainfall events. The north shore
is not protected with bulkheading or other similar protective
measures. New bulkheading, bulkhead improvement, canal gates,
and other mitigation measures are needed throughout City on the
north shore to protect against future flooding.



Almost the entire City is within the FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area
(SFHA), which indicates the repetitive nature of the flood risk and
requires property owners with federally backed mortgages to
purchase flood insurance. Only scattered small sites in different parts
of the City are not in the SFHA (e.g., the northeast corner of
Laurelton Boulevard and West Market Street is one site).44



Stormwater drainage is a challenge as the topography of the City is
relatively flat and a majority of the City is covered by impervious
surfaces (see Figure I-5). Tidal waters typically rise above
stormwater outfall pipes during high tides. Green infrastructure
techniques are needed to help transform the “grayscape” to
“greenscape.”



Salt water intrusion has been a concern in the freshwater Lloyd
Aquifer. A moratorium was enacted on granting new permits to drill
water from the Lloyd Aquifer in 2010 to ensure that there is a safe
level of withdrawal from the Aquifer45. Enacting stormwater
management measures will help to reduce the volume of stormwater
runoff, control pollution, and encourage groundwater recharge which
protects the drinking water supply.

Page 19

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan





Power was out for more than 2 weeks, which resulted in no street
lighting and unsafe conditions. To address unsafe conditions
resulting from power outages, backup or alternative power lighting
(e.g., solar-powered lighting) is needed.
The City does not have designated community assistance centers for
residents where then can gather in emergency situations for help,
news updates, and mutual support.



The City has an aging Water Pollution Control Plant and water tower
that will need replacement.



The City has emergency operation and management needs,
including needing a secure emergency operations center, a full-time
Local Disaster Recovery Manager/Emergency Management Officer,
emergency communications equipment, and a resiliency officer to
help guide future redevelopment. Any efforts undertaken should be
in close coordination with the Nassau County Office of Emergency
Management (OEM).



Sections of the north shore, the Long Beach Boulevard gateway, and
the Foundation Block remain vacant or underutilized. Sections II and
III of this NYRCR Plan address this issue in more detail.



Additional waterfront-related and water-dependent uses are needed
to capitalize on the City’s oceanfront and bayfront assets.



Some businesses continue to struggle post-Sandy. The City reported
that mercantile licenses, which are required for businesses to
operate in Long Beach, numbered 300 in 2013, which is an
approximately 10% decrease from 2012 (335) and 2011 (336).

Section I: Community overview



Additional housing financial aid and reconstruction assistance are
needed.



The City’s Building Department estimates that approximately 20% of
Long Beach residents impacted by Superstorm Sandy are still
displaced and have not returned to Long Beach as of March 2014.



Balancing resiliency with neighborhood character is a challenge as
some homes are rebuilt and elevated above the FEMA Base Flood
Elevation. The new heights of these homes alter the traditional
streetscape.



Key social service assets are still in need of further mitigation to
prevent future flooding.



Emergency preparedness plans need to be updated to prepare for
future events and coordinated with Nassau County OEM.



The former Long Beach Medical Center, the hospital on the barrier
island, remains closed and filed for bankruptcy protection in February
2014, which means that residents seeking emergency care must
travel off the barrier island to South Nassau Communities Hospital,
Nassau University Medical Center, and other hospitals north of the
barrier island.



Backup power generation sources are needed for many facilities.



Streetscape enhancements and implementation of a Complete
Streets program is needed.

Additional discussion of Long Beach’s needs and opportunities can be found
in Section II.

Page 20

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-5: Map Showing Impervious Surface Due to Heavy Development

Section I: Community overview

Page 21

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-6: Ground Elevations in Long Beach

Section I: Community overview

Page 22

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-7: Depth to Groundwater Table

Section I: Community overview

Page 23

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

In September 2013, using a consensus-based approach, the Planning
Committee selected the key words shown in the word cloud of Figure I-8 to
develop the NYRCR Long Beach Vision Statement.

NYRCR Long Beach Vision Statement
Develop a vibrant, resilient, sustainable and green
community that protects and enhances the safety, health,
environment, diversity, culture and economy of current and
future residents and guests of Long Beach.
Figure I-9: NYRCR Long Beach Vision Statement

Figure I-8: Selected Key Words Used in the Development
of the NYRCR Long Beach Vision Statement

D. Community vision
This section describes both the Committee’s vision statement for the NYRCR
Plan and the City of Long Beach’s overall strategy to rebuild Long Beach
stronger, smarter, and safer.
Long Beach has a long history of active resident participation in community
meetings. More than 500 residents attended the Boardwalk visioning and
redevelopment process meetings after Superstorm Sandy. Since Superstorm
Sandy, residents have been particularly engaged in events related to
recovery. During the NYRCR planning process, the Public Engagement Events
had upwards of 100 people in attendance and members of the public also
came to the Planning Committee meetings and participated in the discussion
of priorities for the future. See Section V for more details on the public
engagement process.

Section I: Community overview

The Vision Statement, shown in Figure I-9, was presented to the public for
input and feedback at the October 10, 2013, Public Engagement Event at the
Long Beach Public Library. The public reviewed the word cloud and vision
statement as both “favorable” and the Vision Statement remained as drafted.
The Vision Statement was subsequently presented in the NYRCR Long Beach
Conceptual Plan (October 2013). More information on the public engagement
process can be found in the Section V of this plan.
Rebuild stronger, smarter, and safer
The ultimate vision for Long Beach, which is shared by the Planning
Committee and the City, is to rebuild and redevelop in a manner that
addresses resiliency, sustainability, and greater prosperity to ensure Long
Beach’s long-term success. This vision entails actions that protect homes,
businesses, and facilities damaged by Sandy while providing a blueprint for
enhanced economic development, recreation, and community services. Long
Beach will use the momentum generated during the Long Beach Sandy
recovery, including the NYRCR process, to continue addressing resiliency into
the future. Long Beach will incorporate resiliency efforts in its redevelopment
and development plans to continue addressing the risk posed by events like
Superstorm Sandy as well as other more frequent coastal and stormwater
flooding. As described in the National Disaster Recovery Framework (NDRF),
recovery efforts should address other areas important to a community’s
vitality, such as economic development, in addition to resiliency.

Page 24

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Overall, NYRCR Long Beach intends to help protect and then revitalize the
Community. Specifically, the Community seeks to:


Increase protection from both coastal and stormwater flooding.



Increase housing resiliency. Long Beach’s most important assets are
its residents. Opportunities remain to increase the resiliency of
existing housing stock while also expanding housing options
including affordable housing.



Protect the north shore and then maximize the potential for land use
by relocating some infrastructure, including the Water Pollution
Control (sewage treatment) Plant, and downsizing the infrastructure
footprint of other utilities in the area. Redevelopment of this area
would take advantage of its bayfront setting and offer additional
recreational opportunities, such as kayaking, to the residents of Long
Beach.



Connect the north shore area from the Recreation Center vicinity to
the central business district along Park Avenue and then to the
beach with more pedestrian and bike options as well as other transit
options. Having other connections from the East and West Ends of
the City and throughout the barrier island via a barrier island-wide
trail system is also a long-term goal. In addition, connecting Long
Beach to surrounding jurisdictions through implementation of
Complete Streets principles, and addressing emergency
ingress/egress routes, is a priority.



Maximize waterfront usage, where possible, in a manner appropriate
to Long Beach’s community while emphasizing recreational and
cultural opportunities. Water-related and water-dependent uses that
enhance the waterfront experience for both residents and guests
through small-scale businesses, such as restaurants and kayak
launches, will support this objective. Enhancing the waterfront will
benefit both Long Beach residents and guests, as well as contribute
to a larger regional identity with neighbors across the bay, such as
the Village of Island Park and Barnum Island, and on the barrier
island. Collectively, maximizing waterfront usage will help Long
Beach connect with neighboring commercial activity centers and vice
versa.

Section I: Community overview



Maximize the use of the land when large-scale redevelopment occurs
in strategic areas. Rebuilding in a better, smarter manner means
utilizing sustainable and resilient approaches. Developments should
be geared toward supporting and accommodating existing residents
and businesses while addressing affordable housing and growing
desirable new businesses. Mixed-use transit-oriented development
(TOD) in the vicinity of the LIRR Long Beach station, Waldbaum’s
Shopping Center, and the City Hall vicinity would expand
opportunities for residents to utilize transit along the LIRR Long
Beach Branch.



Expand Long Beach’s emergency preparedness operations.



Develop dual-purpose facilities such as using community centers as
community assistance centers and parking garages as elevated safe
havens for emergency vehicles.



Address multiple needs at once when replacing or redeveloping
infrastructure, (e.g., combine modifications to underground utilities,
including stormwater and sewer lines, during road construction). For
example, streetscape improvements (including parking and bike
lanes and pedestrian accommodations) can be implemented when
sewer lines are replaced. Implementation of Complete Streets
initiatives and stormwater drainage can be accomplished
simultaneously, which will help ensure that emergency
ingress/egress routes remain open and accessible to residents while
encouraging economic revitalization through improvements to
streetscapes.

As redevelopment occurs, it will be important to consider environmental
justice concerns and simultaneously address affordable housing as increased
economic activity will provide a revenue base to implement resiliency,
sustainability, and affordable housing measures. Rebuilding and
redevelopment opportunities are on the oceanfront, the downtown area, the
bayfront, and along key corridors (connectors):


Oceanfront – The City of Long Beach has a tremendous resource in
its Boardwalk, Ocean Beach Park, and the natural dune system.
Economic development opportunities exist for further enhancement
of this area including the undeveloped Superblock (redevelopment
proposal approved in February 2014) and Foundation Block parcels.

Page 25

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Bayfront – The City has important recreational assets along the
north shore including the Esplanade, municipal fishing pier, municipal
boat launch, Veterans Memorial Park, and the Long Beach Recreation
Center. Currently most of the bayfront has a concentration of
industrial uses, which means much of this area is not as connected
to the center of the City and the beach as it could be. As a
discussion is underway to consolidate industrial uses on the north
shore and transfer sewer treatment to the Bay Park STP, additional
access for pedestrian and bicyclists could be made possible with
redevelopment of the area. In addition, kayak access could also be
installed to take advantage of access to Reynolds Channel.



Central Business District and commercial areas –
Implementing TOD and redevelopment around the LIRR station and
the Waldbaum’s Shopping Center is a possibility for Long Beach. TOD
is a higher-density mixed-use (commercial and residential)
development design where access to mass transit is maximized to
decrease dependency on automobiles. To explore this idea further, a
feasibility study may be needed to evaluate and identify
opportunities for resilient and sustainable mixed-use development
that also includes affordable housing. Parking needs in both the
Central Business District and the West End through structured
parking will also need to be considered.



Connectors – Long Beach has an opportunity to enhance its
commercial corridors along Park Avenue and Beech Street (east to
west) and connecting the City from the bayfront to the beach (north
to south). Given Long Beach’s size and the availability of rail,
bicycling could be a more viable mode of transportation if
infrastructure was designed to better accommodate it. Implementing
Complete Streets principles and creating bicycle and pedestrian
connections throughout the City, and to neighboring communities,
will enhance the area, provide further economic development
possibilities, and expand transportation choices for pedestrians,
bicyclists, and transit riders.

Long Beach first Public Engagement Event, October 10, 2013

Source: NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee

E. Relationship to regional plans
Table I-2 is a review of Long Beach and regional plans that contributed to an
understanding of recurring and remaining needs and opportunities for
historical context. Following the table are brief summaries of regional plans
prepared after Superstorm Sandy that relate to issues and situations facing
Long Beach. The table provides notations on whether the reviewed plans
were developed prior to the recession of 2008 and Superstorm Sandy, as
much has changed since those plans were developed.

This NYRCR Plan is another step in the direction of realizing this vision.
Investments considered today are in line with this larger-scale vision and will
help bring Long Beach closer to rebuilding stronger, smarter, and safer.

Section I: Community overview

Page 26

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table I-2: Reviewed Plans and Studies Relevant to Long Beach
Reviewed Plan/Study

Date

Relevant Information

City of Long Beach Comprehensive Plan: Technical
Memorandum – Existing Conditions Issues and Opportunities
(Draft of Local Waterfront Revitalization Program [LWRP])

May 2005(1)(2)

Community planning/capacity building, economic development,
health and social services, housing, infrastructure, natural and
cultural resources – Plan not adopted

Long Beach Comprehensive Plan

April 2007(1)(2)

Community planning/capacity building, economic development,
health and social services, housing, infrastructure, natural and
cultural resources

Long Beach Comprehensive Plan Environmental Assessment

April 2007(1)(2)

Economic development, health and social services, housing,
infrastructure, natural and cultural resources

Nassau County Hazard Mitigation Plan

2007(1)(2)

Infrastructure

Coastal Protection Study LB – Oceanside Shore Protection
Plan

November 2009

(2)

Community planning/capacity building, infrastructure, natural
and cultural resources

Coastal Protection Study LB – Bayside Flood Protection Plan

November 2009(2)

Community planning/capacity building, infrastructure, natural
and cultural resources

Conditions Evaluation of Bulkheads & Outfall Structures in
the City of Long Beach, New York

August 2013

Infrastructure, natural and cultural resources

Long Beach Environmental Resources (LWRP Draft)

November 2007(1)(2)
(1)(2)

Infrastructure, natural and cultural resources

Long Beach Existing Land and Water Uses (LWRP Draft)

November 2007

Long Beach Brownfield Opportunity Areas Study

February 2009(2)

Community planning/capacity building, economic development,
housing, infrastructure, natural and cultural resources

USACE, Draft Hurricane Sandy Limited Reevaluation Report
(HSLRR) and Environmental Assessment (EA)

March 2014

Infrastructure, natural and cultural resources

USACE LB Jones Inlet to East Rockaway Inlet Hurricane and
Storm Damage Reduction Reevaluation Report and summary
review memo

February 2006 (MSC Approval
Date: January 11, 2008); (Last
Revised November 15, 2012)

Community planning/capacity building, economic development,
housing, infrastructure, natural and cultural resources

USACE Jones Inlet to East Rockaway Inlet Feasibility Report

February 1995(1)(2)

Community planning/capacity building, infrastructure, natural
and cultural resources

USACE, North Atlantic Division. North Atlantic Coast
Comprehensive Study (NACCS): Nassau County Back-bays
Focus Area Analysis

September 20, 2013

Infrastructure, natural and cultural resources

Nassau County Infill Redevelopment Feasibility Report

May 2013

Community planning/capacity building, economic development,
housing, infrastructure

Section I: Community overview

Community planning/capacity building, economic development,
housing

(1)(2)

Page 27

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table I-2: Reviewed Plans and Studies Relevant to Long Beach (Continued)
Reviewed Plan/Study

Date

Relevant Information
Infrastructure

Nassau County Stormwater Runoff Impact Analysis –
Procedures Manual
Long Island’s South Shore Bayway Strategic Implementation
and Marketing Plan

April 2009(2)

Nassau County Drainage Requirements

Natural and cultural resources
Infrastructure

(1)(2)

Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve Comprehensive
Management Plan

April 2001

Long Island Comprehensive Economic Development
Strategy: Supplementary Information

August 2012(2)

Infrastructure

Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan

May 2013

Community planning/capacity building, economic development,
health and social services, housing, infrastructure, natural and
cultural resources

Progress and Promise: The Strategic Economic Development
Plan For Nassau and Suffolk Counties

2012 Update – Building a
Foundation for Long Island’s
Future(2)

Infrastructure

Draft Long Beach Sewage Treatment Plant Alternatives
Feasibility Study

2009(2)

Infrastructure

Long Beach Stormwater Management Plan

2012(2)

Infrastructure

(2)

Infrastructure, natural and cultural resources

Long Beach Capital Improvements Plan

2012

City of Long Beach Zoning Ordinance

2009, with revisions as of
2011(2)

Community planning/capacity building

A New Vision for Long Island’s Economy: The Strategic
Economic Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties

2011(2)

Community planning/capacity building, economic development,
health and social services, housing, infrastructure, natural and
cultural resources

Strong Island: The Story of a Region’s Recovery and
Resurgence: Long Island Regional Economic Development
Council

2013 Update

Community planning/capacity building, economic development,
health and social services, housing, infrastructure, natural and
cultural resources

Infrastructure, community planning/capacity building, economic
development

(1) = Pre-2008 Recession – Important to note because the economic outlook, assumptions, and expectations have changed significantly since this time
(2) = Pre-2012 Sandy – Any information pre-Sandy likely does not anticipate the level of destruction, disruption, and change that has taken place from Superstorm Sandy despite
the knowledge that a significant event could be devastating to the community

Section I: Community overview

Page 28

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Below are highlights from recent key regional plans that address postSuperstorm Sandy conditions relevant to Long Beach:



Strong Island – The story of a region’s recovery and resurgence
The City of Long Beach is within the jurisdiction of the Long Island Regional
Economic Development Council (LIREDC). The LIREDC recently prepared
plans that address critical issues post-Superstorm Sandy, including their 2013
update entitled: Strong Island – The Story of a Region’s Recovery and

Resurgence.

Key regional priorities from the LIREDC report relevant to the NYRCR Long
Beach Plan include (Long Beach actions since the plan’s development are in
italics):


Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant – Consolidation with Long
Beach’s Water Pollution Control Plant is being considered in addition
to other regional connections. The plant has been operating on
temporary measures since its failure during Superstorm Sandy.
Mitigation measures and additional changes, including creating an
ocean outfall to prevent future contamination of Reynolds Channel,
Hempstead Bay, etc., are being discussed. The State has announced

the commitment of $810 million in Federal funds for the
comprehensive rehabilitation and mitigation of the Bay Park STP,
including the construction of a protective 500-year storm barrier
around the plant (which will take into account sea-level rise),
elevating and hardening the Electrical Plant Distribution System,
repairing existing generators, elevating and/or hardening 57 pump
stations that serve the plant, building a larger sewage collection line,
and hardening and replacing sludge dewatering equipment and
building.46



Reynolds Channel Shoreline Stabilization – The regional plan
discusses stabilizing the Reynolds Channel shoreline to provide a
barrier to prevent tidal water from inundating the City. This effort is
considered a priority in order to enable revitalization of the north
shore. As noted in “Actions since Superstorm Sandy,” a project to

install bulkheading along the north shore near the City’s major
utilities will be funded, per an announcement by New York State.

Section I: Community overview

Infrastructure to support additional rental housing –
Historically, rental vacancies have been low on Long Island, and
post-Sandy few rental properties are available. Construction of rental
housing and associated infrastructure (sewer, wastewater treatment
plants, roads, and transit lines) is encouraged. Affordable housing is

an issue that Long Beach will continue to address.

Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan
The Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan from May 2013
also includes a number of goals that are relevant to the NYRCR planning
process. Key regional priorities from this sustainability plan include:


Advancing Superstorm Sandy recovery and rebuilding by providing
incentives for greener and more resilient developments, encouraging
relocation locally outside the floodplain, and encouraging rapid
restoration of the electric grid. Long Beach is considering several
greener and more resilient redevelopment options.



Improving energy efficiency. Long Beach is encouraging solar power



Improving transportation options. Long Beach has applied for
Complete Streets grants to improve transportation.



Increasing the development of green infrastructure to control
flooding and decrease pollution from stormwater runoff. Long Beach

as an alternative energy source.

has applied for grants to implement green infrastructure and improve
stormwater drainage.



Encouraging regional coordination of sustainability planning and its
implementation.

Additionally, the May 2013 plan includes recommended strategies to address
climate change, such as updating comprehensive plans to address sea-level
rise, flooding, and storm surges; updating building codes; adopting
protection and mitigation measures to protect infrastructure; and updating
emergency management plans. Funding was recently approved for an

update to Long Beach’s comprehensive plan. The City is considering
mitigation measures to protect key facilities as part of the NYRCR process.

Page 29

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Many of the recommendations found in this NYRCR Plan align with the
strategies set forth in the previously mentioned regional plans.
Reconstruction and resiliency strategies are detailed in Section III.
Regional Perspectives
In addition to considering the elements from the above plans, mitigating the
risk of damage from future storms to increase resiliency will require regional
as well as local actions. Although Long Beach is an incorporated city in
Nassau County and has many of its own capabilities and authorities, it is still
dependent on other entities, including utility companies (e.g., power and
natural gas) and the LIRR, for services. In some cases, it is also in the City’s
best interest to collaborate with neighboring municipalities and jurisdictions
to develop projects and coordinate resources. Some issues discussed in the
NYRCR Plan cross political jurisdictions and need to be coordinated on a
regional basis. For the NYRCR Long Beach community, the greater region to
consider includes the entire barrier island, Nassau County, as well as greater
Long Island.
Neighboring municipalities and communities on the barrier island include the
Village of Atlantic Beach and the unincorporated areas of East Atlantic Beach,
Lido Beach, and Point Lookout, which are part of the Town of Hempstead.
Coordination with these communities and those across Reynolds Channel
(e.g., Village of Island Park, Barnum Island) may help provide economies of
scale to obtain needed resources for regional projects. Those projects
include:


Larger regional storm barrier projects;



Improving established evacuation routes, transportation connectivity,
a network of TODs, and Complete Streets and stormwater
improvements;



A shoreline improvement district to help deal with common issues,
such as the need for bulkheading designed and built to a uniform
height and for storm protection;



Emergency services; and



Microgrids and potential alternative power generation.

The large-scale USACE Atlantic Coast of Long Island, Jones Inlet to East
Rockaway Inlet, Long Beach Island, NY Hurricane Sandy Limited
Section I: Community overview

Reevaluation Report (HSLRR) for Coastal Storm Risk Management project is
an example of a regional project already in process. Intergovernmental
disaster response agreements with these communities may be beneficial to
all.
Coordination with other communities to promote the development of green
infrastructure including permeable pavement, bioswales, rain gardens, and
gray water reclamation would be beneficial. In addition, the City, the Town
of Hempstead, and Nassau County can coordinate on issues including
sewage treatment, evacuation routes, and restoring marsh and wetland
areas already affected by storms. Recreational opportunities such as bike
trail along the entire barrier island, kayaking in the back bay, and a water
taxi could be explored.
There is also an opportunity to partner regionally to develop and potentially
implement small business revitalization programs to support the recovery of
local businesses so they are able to contribute to the local economy.
Power and natural gas are supplied by substations and a pipeline that is
located (and originated) outside of the Long Beach jurisdiction. Coordination
with National Grid and LIPA/PSEG is necessary to secure backup power
sources and protect transmission and distribution facilities that are still
vulnerable. In addition, the City can work with LIPA/PSEG to install smart
meters on homes and businesses to better monitor energy usage and to
build a smart grid.
The LIRR is a vital link for residents from Long Beach to New York City and
the rest of Long Island. Coordination with the LIRR to ensure that train
service remains operational is important. In addition, there is an opportunity
to protect the Long Beach LIRR Station and its track leading up to Long
Beach. In October 2013, the State announced that contracts have been
awarded to repair and elevate two of the three damaged electrical
substations along the LIRR Long Beach Branch.
Continued coordination with the USACE, NYS Department of Environmental
Conservation, the Town of Hempstead, Nassau County, and the City of Long
Beach will continue for the HSLRR for Coastal Storm Risk Management
project. The $178 million dollar fully federally funded project is scheduled to
begin in fall 2014. This project will maintain and enhance the oceanfront
dunes and beaches, rehabilitate the groins, and install dune walkovers.

Page 30

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Continuing coordination with the Nassau County communities on the
bayfront to develop a plan for resiliency is another important regional
coordination effort underway. The USACE North Atlantic Division evaluated
the back-bays area in the North Atlantic Coast Comprehensive Study
(NACCS): Nassau County Back-bays Focus Area Analysis and determined that
there is additional need for developing feasibility studies to evaluate coastal
storm damage, risk reduction, and flood risk management.47
Communication systems warrant regional coordination as well and could be
coordinated with Nassau County OEM. The City could further discuss
coordination with cell phone carriers on implementing a plan to ensure
uninterrupted service and better response when signals are lost during a
storm or emergency. The potential of developing a regional emergency radio
broadcast or crowdsourcing system to facilitate communication with
residents when telecommunications and traditional media outlets are
unavailable should be explored in discussions with Nassau County Office of
Emergency Management.

Communities gathered together to discuss issues of regional interest and
concern. These issues included coastal protection (both for the bayfront and
the oceanfront), stormwater management, green infrastructure, Complete
Streets, water/wastewater, and microgrid systems. The purpose of the
workshop was to provide an educational context for the NYRCR Communities
to discuss the benefits and applicability of different resilient and protective
measures and provide examples of models that have worked well in other
areas.
In January and February 2014, the State and the Consultant Team
participated in additional meetings and discussions with other Nassau County
NYRCR communities to discuss potential projects of regional significance.
The State and the Consultant Team also met twice with the Nassau County
Office of Emergency Management (OEM). The first meeting was on February
25, 2014, and involved a general discussion about the relevant Emergency
Relief projects for Nassau County OEM to review. The second meeting was
on March 5, 2014, where each project was discussed in detail and decisions
were made on specific formatting and level of responsibility.
The State and the Consultant Team also met with representatives from the
Town of Hempstead (TOH) on February 25, 2014, so TOH could become
familiar with the Long Beach potential project list. While TOH does not have
jurisdiction in the City of Long Beach, it is involved in coastal permitting. TOH
is also interested in how Long Beach potential projects will influence adjacent
TOH areas such as East Atlantic Beach and Lido Beach. A second meeting
occurred on March 6, 2014, with additional dialogue on the potential Long
Beach projects, including ideas and suggestions to make the projects more
feasible.

Long Beach LIRR Station

Source: Sustainable Long Island

On December 5, 2013, representatives from the NYRCR Village of Atlantic
Beach/East Atlantic Beach, City of Long Beach, Lido Beach/Point Lookout,
and Barnum Island/Harbor Isle/Village of Island Park/Oceanside

Section I: Community overview

Later in Sections III and IV, projects of regional significance are identified.
Regional significance can mean that a project protects an asset that is used
by several communities (e.g., reduce flooding on an established evacuation
route) or it is the community’s part in a more global project that spans
several communities (e.g., a community restores the dunes on its part of a
barrier island). In addition, some Long Beach departments, such as the Fire
Department, protect other communities on the barrier island, including the
Atlantic and East Atlantic Beach fire districts. Any actions to protect the Long
Beach Fire Department would take on regional significance.

Page 31

Section II:
Assessment of risk
and needs
Photo: Flooding from Hurricane Irene in North Park

Source: NYRCR Long Beach Planning Committee

Section II:
Assessment of risk and needs
A. Description of community assets and
assessment of risk
Description of community assets
Long Beach is a diverse community on a barrier island, and it has many
resources and assets. Assets, in the context of this planning process, are
individual structures, infrastructure, community facilities, and/or natural
amenities that provide a level of service or offer an opportunity for the
residents and guests of Long Beach. Many of Long Beach’s assets are not
only individual locations but also part of overall systems. Systems include
stormwater drainage, road, sewer, and drinking water, as well as natural
features, including the beach and Reynolds Channel.
New York State Department of State (NYS DOS) risk areas (shown in Figure
II-1 and subsequent asset maps) were developed based on the information
listed in Table II-1. Assets in extreme- or high-risk areas have a greater
chance of flooding and damage compared to assets in moderate-risk areas.
Extreme-risk areas are areas that are prone to coastal erosion and flooding
and are within the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Coastal
V Zones. High-risk areas are subject to flooding from the 100-year storm and
moderate-risk areas are subject to flooding from 500-year storms.
Many, if not all, of Long Beach’s key assets, as identified through the NY
Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program planning process, were
affected by Superstorm Sandy, and to a lesser degree by Hurricane Irene.
Assets identified in the initial NYRCR Planning Committee Meetings and the
first and second Public Engagement Events (in 2013) were included in the
community asset inventory. Assets were grouped by the NYRCR community
asset classes, which include: Economic; Health and Social Services; Housing;
Infrastructure Systems; Natural and Cultural Resources; and Socially
Vulnerable Populations. Some assets, because of their function and service
base, fit more than one class and were listed in both asset class sections. An

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

example would be a senior housing asset that also serves a socially
vulnerable population.
The focus of the asset inventory highlights the critical community assets
that, if impaired by a storm event, would compromise the essential
infrastructure, health and social (including public safety), economic, or
environmental functions of Long Beach. The critical assets that are crucial to
emergency response functions (e.g., police, fire) and basic daily services
(e.g., water, power, communication, wastewater) for the whole community
before, during, and after disaster events were given the highest community
value.
The NYRCR Long Beach community assets are listed below with additional
details provided throughout this section and in the full Community Asset
Inventory in Section V, Additional Materials.


Beachfront area and Boardwalk from New York Avenue to Neptune
Boulevard;



Cell towers;



City Hall and other government facilities;



City library;



Existing bulkheading on the north shore;



Georgia Street and Clark Street Splash Parks;



Hess and Mobil gas stations and Williams/Transco high-pressure gas
pipeline;



Historic structures;



Hotels;



Houses of worship; and



Kennedy Plaza and Veterans Memorial Park.

Page 33

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table II-1: New York State Department of State Risk Areas
Extreme Risk Area

High Risk Area

Moderate Risk Area

 FEMA Coastal V Zones

 FEMA 1% annual (100-year)

 FEMA 0.2% annual (500-year)

 NWS advisory thresholds for

flood risk (FEMA Zone V and
Zone A)
 Areas within 3 feet elevation of
NWS advisory thresholds for
shallow coastal flooding

flood risk
 Areas within 3 feet of elevation of
FEMA 1% annual flood risk (base
flood elevations)
 Area bounded by SLOSH
Category 3 hurricane inundation
zone

shallow coastal flooding
 Areas within 3 feet of elevation of

mean higher high water shoreline
from the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
 Areas prone to erosion

Source: New York State Department of State
FEMA = Federal Emergency Management Agency
NWS = National Weather Service
SLOSH = Sea, Lake, and Overland Surge from Hurricanes

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 34

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Identification of community assets at Planning
Committee Meeting, September 27, 2013,



North shore brownfield/former industrial area and other brownfield
sites for economic redevelopment



Post office



Power supply infrastructure



Reynolds Channel



Sherman Brown basketball courts and tennis and handball courts



Police and fire stations



Schools - West, East, and Lindell Elementary



Senior/affordable housing locations including Pine Town Homes,
Channel Park Homes, and four senior public housing units



Stormwater management systems and other drainage facilities



Three key commercial districts: Park Avenue, the West End, and the
East End



Water Pollution Control (sewage treatment) Plant and pump/lift
stations



Water Purification (water treatment) Plant and wells

Source: URS



Long Beach Boulevard Bridge



Long Beach Boulevard Gateway area



Long Beach Ice Arena, Long Beach Recreation Center, and bayfront
Esplanade



The former Long Beach Medical Center (hospital on the barrier
island)



Long Island Railroad Station



Magnolia, Pacific Street, and Leroy Conyers Playgrounds



Magnolia Senior/Community Center



Major arterial roadways, including Beech, Broadway, and Park



Major undeveloped parcels, such as the Foundation Block and
Superblock (redevelopment proposal approved in February 2014)



Martin Luther King, Jr. (MLK) Community Center

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Figure II-1 identifies the locations of all of Long Beach’s assets, including
both public and private assets. Additional details on the City of Long Beach’s
important assets and accompanying maps are categorized in the following
pages by the NYRCR asset classes. The assets in the Figure II-1 map each
have a specific number that carries through to the maps that are specific to
asset class.

Page 35

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

West Elementary School

Source: The LiRo Group

Evacuation route sign on Park Avenue at National Boulevard

Source: The LiRo Group

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 36

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-1: Community Asset Map

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 37

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Economic critical assets
Economic assets maintain or generate employment and have the potential to
generate additional revenue through future development by attracting
guests. Economic assets consist of neighborhood commercial and downtown
commercial areas, industrial areas, shopping centers, and seasonal visitor
destinations. Most of the small businesses in Long Beach were devastated by
Superstorm Sandy. Protection of both current and future economic assets
will assist in implementing Long Beach’s economic recovery and achieving
greater economic prosperity. Needed protective measures include shoreline
defenses along the ocean and the bay, stormwater management, installation
of flood barriers, and implementation of backup power.
Long Beach’s economic assets include the following commercial districts: the
West End, the Park Avenue commercial area around City Hall and the Long
Island Rail Road (LIRR) Station (including the Waldbaum’s Shopping Center),
East Park Avenue in the East End, and the Long Beach Boulevard gateway
area oriented toward industrial and auto-dependent uses. The Park Avenue
commercial areas and the West Beech Street in the West End are
predominantly made up of small businesses. The LIRR station area in the
Park Avenue commercial area allows residents and businesses easy access to
transit.

opportunities. The LIRR Station area, including City Hall and the Waldbaum’s
Shopping Center, along with the West End, offer areas that could be
transformed by redevelopment. Any redevelopment should factor in
resiliency. Figure II-2 displays Long Beach’s important economic assets.

Waldbaum’s Shopping Center

Source: Planning4Places, LLC

Seasonal destinations, including the Boardwalk, the beach, the recreation
area near the bay, and the bayfront Esplanade, are critical economic drivers
bringing in guests into the NYRCR Community (Community). Related assets
include the Long Beach and Allegria Hotels. Additional key economic drivers
include the former Long Beach Medical Center (which occupies a valuable
site and was a former large employer that has remained closed as of March
2014), the City of Long Beach (a large employer), and the MLK Community
Center, which provides youth and family programming (see Table II-2).
Opportunities for additional economic development include the undeveloped
north shore brownfield site, the Superblock (redevelopment proposal
approved in February 2014), and the Foundation Block. In addition, the
Hebrew Academy of Long Beach (530 W. Broadway) is another parcel along
the Boardwalk that may be for sale by March 2014 as a result of the
relocation of the Academy’s elementary school off the barrier island.48 These
parcels, along with the site of the current Water Pollution Control Plant next
to the Recreation Center area, offer larger-scale redevelopment

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 38

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table II-2: Economic Drivers
Name

Location

Description

Long Beach Boulevard
“Gateway Area”

Long Beach Blvd. between
Reynolds Channel and E. Park Ave.

Retail and service-oriented uses, including drug
stores, fast food, banks, tire/oil/mechanic
shops, gas, and convenience stores. Strip also
has a few vacancies/underutilized lots.

East End Retail/Commercial

E. Park Ave. from Neptune Blvd. to
Roosevelt Blvd.

Residential, doctor-type uses in former homes,
grocery store, small retail, and small restaurant
strip

Park Avenue
Retail/Commercial

W. Park Ave. from Lafayette Blvd.
to Long Beach Blvd. and E. Park
Ave. to Monroe Blvd.

Waldbaum’s Shopping Center, medical/office
uses, gas, mechanic, CVS, small retail and
service uses  some stand-alone some
attached, chain and non-chain restaurants, and
mid-rise residential

West End Retail/Commercial

W. Beech St. from Ohio Ave. to
New York Ave.

Small retail; with some mixed-use residential
on 2nd floor

Allegria Hotel

80 West Broadway

143-room hotel adjacent to the beach and
Boardwalk

Long Beach Hotel

405 East Broadway

126-room hotel near the beach and Boardwalk

Ocean Beach Park &
Boardwalk

New York Ave. to Neptune Blvd.

Beach and 2¼ mile Boardwalk serving multiple
recreation and community uses

Long Beach Ice Arena

150 West Bay Dr.

Skating and hockey arena

Long Beach Recreation Center

660 Magnolia Blvd.

Large multi-purpose recreational center, which
has a fitness center, pool, and other amenities

Former Long Beach Medical
Center

455 East Bay Dr.

The barrier island’s hospital was the largest
employer in the City prior to Superstorm Sandy

MLK Center

615 Riverside Blvd.

Youth and family programming

City Hall/Auxiliary City
Facilities

City Hall – 1 West Chester St. and
other locations

A large employer with seasonal variation for
some departments (such as lifeguards)

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 39

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-2: Economic Assets

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 40

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Health and social services critical assets
Health and social services assets provide vital community services to
residents, especially in emergencies. Ensuring that health and social services
remain available before, during, and after storm events is very important to
protecting the health and safety of Long Beach’s residents. Health and social
service assets house government functions such as the U.S. Post Office, City
Hall, the Department of Public Works, and Police and Fire Department
buildings. After a major storm, critical emergency responder services,
including fire and police protection, must be maintained for public safety.
While repairs were made to the emergency responder facilities, many were
without power and key equipment and vehicles due to the severe damage
caused by Superstorm Sandy. Additional resiliency measures are needed so
the facilities remain operational during a storm and that important
equipment remains usable and accessible.
Health and social services assets also include health facilities such as the
former Long Beach Medical Center, which received significant damage from
Superstorm Sandy and filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in February
2014. Long Beach residents now must depend on emergency transportation
to South Nassau Communities Hospital in Oceanside for emergency care.
Health and social services assets also include schools, day care, and nursing
care facilities.

City Hall and Kennedy Plaza

Source: The LiRo Group

Both public and private schools (including the three public elementary
schools) and the Headstart Facility are vital community assets. Quickly
reopening schools after a disaster is important to maintaining a sense of
normalcy during the difficult rebuilding process. Figure II-3 shows the City
assets for health and social services.

Fire Station #1, 300 Maple Boulevard

Source: The LiRo Group

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 41

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-3: Long Beach Health and Social Services Assets

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 42

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Housing critical assets
Housing assets as identified by the NYRCR planning process include
multifamily dwellings, and affordable and senior housing identified in Figure
II-4. Although all residential structures on Long Beach are assets, the focus
of the NYRCR Plan in regard to housing critical assets is on the City’s multifamily public assets. This type of housing generally serves socially vulnerable
populations that may require more assistance before, during, and after a
storm event. Storm recovery and reconstruction issues relating to individual
homes, including elevation programs, repair, rebuilding, and insurance, are
generally addressed by FEMA and NY Rising Housing Recovery programs.
Nearly all of Long Beach’s housing, including public and senior housing, was
damaged by Superstorm Sandy. For Long Beach residents’ homes and
properties to remain resilient, flood protection, and wind retrofitting must be
implemented, particularly for those housing assets that provide affordable
housing.

Pine Town Homes

Source: The LiRo Group

Affordable housing units managed by the Long Beach Housing Authority
include: the Channel Park Homes (family housing), Sol Scher Apartments
(senior/disabled housing), Michael Valente Apartments (senior/disabled
housing), Sonny Duckman Apartments (senior/disabled housing), and Morton
Cohen Apartments (senior/disabled housing). Pine Town Homes also
provides affordable housing for families and is managed by a private
company. Additional details about affordable housing and senior housing
developments in Long Beach are provided in the Assessment of Needs and
Opportunities subsection found later in this section.

Sonny Duckman Senior Apartments

Source: The LiRo Group

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 43

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-4: Housing Assets

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 44

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Infrastructure systems critical assets
Infrastructure systems represent the critical lifelines in a community that
form the backbone of basic and essential services that serve virtually every
residence, business, non-profit, and government structure. Long Beach’s
infrastructure systems include transportation systems, water supply and
sewage systems, electrical power systems including lighting, and
communication systems. Important infrastructure assets include the LIRR,
the water treatment and Water Pollution Control plants, the wells, pump and
lift stations, the stormwater drainage system, and the LIPA/PSEG electrical
substation and systems. The City’s major arterials serve as evacuation routes
during emergencies. Figure II-5 identifies the City’s infrastructure assets.
Nearly all of the City’s entire infrastructure systems were significantly
damaged by Superstorm Sandy, including its utilities; these included the
water and sewage systems, which are in vulnerable areas on the north
shore. These vital services were out of service for several weeks and
residents were unable to drink the water or flush toilets during these
outages. Other utilities, for instance electrical substations and a major gas
pipeline, were also significantly impacted by Sandy. Additional protective
measures are necessary to ensure that these critical community services are
protected during future hazard events.
The stormwater drainage system is critical to managing runoff from the more
frequent storms and to maintain ingress/egress for emergency vehicles as
well as access to established evacuation routes. This system is aging and
over capacity, not having been originally designed to meet current
conditions, which compounds the difficulty of draining stormwater on a
relatively flat barrier island. Additional protective measures are needed for
Long Beach’s infrastructure systems to be more resilient, such as introducing
retention areas, installing stormwater backflow prevention devices (which
prevent tidal water from entering the stormwater drainage system through
outfall pipes) and stormwater treatment devices (e.g., vortex chambers),
creating barriers around key system components, and elevating equipment.

Pump/lift station at W. Park Avenue and Grand Boulevard

Source: The LiRo Group

Well at Farrell Street and E. Park Avenue

Source: The LiRo Group

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 45

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-5: Infrastructure Systems Assets

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 46

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Natural and cultural resources critical assets
As a barrier island with waterfront access on the bay and the ocean, Long
Beach possesses natural resources that are some of its greatest assets for
both residents and guests. The beach (Ocean Beach Park) and the
Boardwalk, only a 40-minute train ride from Manhattan, are regional
attractions that bring in thousands of people during the summer. The beach
and ocean are the sites of summer family beach-goers; international,
national, and local surfing contests; the annual Polar Bears Super Bowl
Splash, which draws over 5,000 participants and viewers; arts and crafts
shows; and other well-attended events. The Boardwalk was repaired in
October 2013, dunes on the west and east ends of the Boardwalk were
reconstructed, and additional work installing dune walkovers and replacing
groins is forecast to occur soon after the preparation of this Plan.
The north shore of Long Beach is home to the bayfront Esplanade, fishing
pier, and Reynolds Channel. The fishing pier, which is a major recreational
asset used by anglers young and old, was destroyed by Superstorm Sandy.
The north shore, with access to the marshes north of Reynolds Channel
referred to as the back bay, in particular, holds future promise as the water
quality in the bay improves. Future opportunities include consolidating
industrial uses on the north shore to free up land for recreation and
redevelopment and expanding the Esplanade and other recreational
opportunities. Reynolds Channel can be a launching point for boating and
kayaking and is a part of the planned South Shore Blueway Trail, a water
trail in the western bays of the South Shore Estuary Reserve.49 Other future
activities might include water taxis connecting to other waterfront
destinations, such as the Nautical Mile in Freeport.

Leroy Conyers Park

Source: The LiRo Group

Libraries, community centers, and religious institutions are also important
community gathering hubs. Additional cultural attractions include events,
such as the Long Beach International Film Festival, the annual Arts and
Crafts Festival on the Boardwalk, the Kennedy Plaza Fine Arts Show, and the
Salsa in the Plaza. Kennedy Plaza is also home to the Farmers Market on
Wednesdays and Saturdays from May through November. The City also has
a number of historic landmarks that are identified in Figure II-6.

Natural and cultural resources include natural and open space areas,
recreational facilities, parks, playgrounds, splash parks, and historic
landmarks. Further resilient measures can be undertaken to protect
individual locations and ensure that the natural open space system is
protected as a whole.

Long Beach Ice Arena (right) and Veterans Memorial Park (center)

Source: Planning4Places, LLC

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 47

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-6: Natural and Cultural Assets

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 48

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Socially vulnerable populations and their critical assets
The assets in this section are also discussed in other sections of the NYRCR
Plan and are highlighted in this section because they provide important
services for low and very-low income populations, the elderly, disabled, and
young children. Generally, these populations may require more assistance
and time to evacuate and return during major disasters. In addition to assets
being protected, additional services need to be developed to help protect
socially vulnerable populations.
Two important community centers in Long Beach are the Martin Luther King
Center and the Magnolia Senior/Community Center. The Martin Luther King
Center provides youth, family, and adult programming (including job
training) and the Magnolia Senior/Community Center, provides senior
programming. The Magnolia Child Care Center is located at the Magnolia
Senior/Community Center. The Headstart Facility, in addition to public and
senior housing units, and nursing homes are also key assets that provide
important services for the City of Long Beach.

Headstart facility

Source: The LiRo Group

The senior and public housing units, Magnolia Senior/Community Center,
Magnolia Child Care Center, and the Martin Luther King Center were severely
damaged by Superstorm Sandy. The senior housing units, which are
generally high-rise buildings providing subsidized housing for the elderly and
the disabled and the public housing units, which provide subsidized housing
for low-income families, need protection on the lower floors to protect
electrical equipment and boilers for operating the buildings. Some protective
measures, including elevating the boiler off the floor, have occurred in the
Martin Luther King Center but more protective measures are needed. Figure
II-7 indicates vital assets for socially vulnerable populations.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 49

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-7: Socially Vulnerable Populations Assets

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 50

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Assessment of risk to assets and systems
The Risk Assessment Map in Figure II-8 shows that almost the entire City is
in an extreme- or high-risk area for flooding and is subject to 100-year storm
flooding risk with very few areas in the moderate-risk area. It also shows
areas subject to frequent stormwater flooding. The extreme-risk areas are
found along the beach/Boardwalk and Reynolds Channel with concentrations
along the north shore (east and west of Long Beach Boulevard near the
former Long Beach Medical Center and Water Purification Plant,
respectively), in the West End, in the Canals, and in the Superblock and
Foundation Block areas. Because the barrier island would be subject to sealevel rise, flooding during 100-year storm events will occur more often in the
future. This is why evaluating the City’s assets in relation to future risk is
critical.

Long Island Rail Road Bridge leading to Long Beach and across Reynolds Channel

Source: The LiRo Group

A risk assessment has been used to determine the potential impact of
hazards on community assets. This risk assessment was conducted as a
planning-level evaluation and does not constitute an engineering
performance analysis. The risk assessment will help the Committee choose
mitigation methods to reduce future risk. Input from the Planning Committee
and the public on areas with the highest risk of flooding were used to
supplement the Risk Assessment Map in evaluating which assets need to be
protected.
Detailed background information about the asset, landscape attributes in the
vicinity of the asset, and vulnerability of the asset to flood damages was
collected for the Community Asset Inventory. Assets were identified based
on factors such as importance to the Community, probability of being
affected by flooding, and restoration time. Asset background information
includes asset address and geographic coordinates, NYS DOS risk area, asset
class and subcategories, whether the asset represents a critical facility, and
relative Community importance.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 51

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-8: Risk Assessment, including Frequent Stormwater Flooding Areas

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 52

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Understanding risk scores
The risk assessment process starts with calculating a Risk Score based on
the Risk Assessment Tool developed by the NYS DOS. The approach to
calculate risk uses the following formula:
Hazard × Exposure × Vulnerability = Risk
In this equation, the Hazard represents the severity of the hazard event; the
Exposure represents the risk area and local landscape where the asset is
located; and the Vulnerability represents level of impairment or
consequences that assets may experience from a hazard event and reflects
the ability of the asset to resist damage from the hazard. Using data
collected for each asset, the Risk Assessment Tool calculates scores for each
of these three factors for current conditions.

Hazard
The analysis calculated hazard scores by considering typical storm events.
Hazard scores for the risk assessment were calculated for the 100-year
storm (1% annual chance) and the 500-year storm (0.2% annual chance),
although for purposes of this NYRCR Plan, the more frequent 100-year storm
was used for the analysis. In the Risk Assessment Tool, all assets in NYRCR
Long Beach were given an automatic score of 3 based on the 100-year storm
event because of location in the 100-year floodplain (Special Flood Hazard
Area).

Exposure
Exposure was calculated based on local topographic and shoreline conditions
that can affect how an asset will be impacted during a storm event.
Landscape attributes related to exposure include factors related to shoreline
and beach erosion rates, beach width, shore defenses, protective vegetation,
and dune characteristics. Another factor in this analysis was the City’s
location on a coastal barrier island. In other words, direct exposure with
frequent erosion, sparse vegetation, and inadequate shore defenses and
dunes will increase flooding potential. For structural defenses, such as
bulkheads, to work properly, they need to be built above the base flood
elevation (BFE) and be continuously maintained. Wide, high, and vegetated
dunes also help to minimize exposure from wave damage. The exposure

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

score is automatically generated based on the risk area in which the asset is
located and landscape attribute scores.
Hazard: The likelihood and magnitude of future storm events.
Exposure: The moderating effect of topographic and shoreline features.
Vulnerability: The level of impairment or consequences that assets may
experience from a storm event and their ability to resist damage from a
storm.
Source: Guidance for New York Rising Community Reconstruction Plans:
A Planning Toolkit for CR Planning Committees

Vulnerability
Vulnerability represents both the effects that assets may experience from a
storm event and the ability of the asset to return to normal service following
an event. The quicker an asset can recover, the lower the vulnerability score.
Assets that are above the BFE are less vulnerable than assets below the BFE.
Because of the high risk of flooding in Long Beach, all the assets are
vulnerable and almost all were damaged by Superstorm Sandy. To
distinguish between assets that the whole community depends on to
function, especially after a disaster, the assets receiving the highest
vulnerability were those essential to all residents of Long Beach (e.g., water
supply, sewage, emergency responders, such as police and fire). For these
assets, there is little “tolerable” downtime as a fire could rage out of control
and cause additional damage or the sewage system could back up and
contaminate homes and businesses. Therefore, the assets that received the
highest vulnerability scores were generally ones that the whole community
depends on daily or weekly for essential services that may force relocation if
the services are not continually provided. Scores for vulnerability are on a 1
to 5 scale (a score of 1 has insignificant vulnerability to major vulnerability
with a score of 5).

Risk
Risk scores are used to help determine which assets have greater potential
for storm damage. The resulting risk scores were calculated based upon the
above-described formula and can be further categorized into severe, high,
moderate, or residual risk levels. Higher scores denote greater risk levels.
Table V-7 summarizes the Risk Assessment scoring for critical assets

Page 53

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

alphabetically. The NYRCR risk assessment shows that the Long Beach’s
assets are predominately in the high-risk category with two assets in the
severe-risk category (the Fire Station Headquarters and the Water
Purification Plant).

Park and Lido Boulevard in Lido Beach, which are also susceptible to
stormwater flooding.

Assessment of risk to systems
As discussed previously, many of Long Beach’s assets are both individual
locations and part of an overall system. Many of these systems go beyond
Long Beach’s borders and how these systems operate during storm events is
a critical consideration in evaluating the overall risk to the system. Long
Beach system assets are classified as individual assets for evaluation
purposes and are listed in Table V-7.






Major utility systems: Infrastructure assets in the Community
include an electric power substation, the Water Pollution Control
Plant and its sewer pump/lift stations, the Water Purification Plant
and its wells, and a gas pipeline. The power substation, Water
Pollution Control Plant, Water Purification Plant, and gas pipeline are
in a particularly vulnerable location on the bayfront where the
shoreline is not protected. The two plants suffered a high degree of
damage from Superstorm Sandy flooding on the bayfront, as did the
wells and lift stations. Maintaining power to these facilities and
equipment during an emergency is critical to continuity of operation.
The two cellular facilities are key communication links that are
especially needed after a disaster. Providing backup power to street
lights is critical to the Community to reduce unsafe conditions during
power outages. All of Long Beach’s infrastructure systems scored in
the high category of the risk assessment analysis.
Stormwater management: The stormwater management system
suffered damage and disruption from Superstorm Sandy as sand
infiltrated the system and had to be cleared out before the system
was fully functional again.
Established evacuation routes: Primary road systems, including
Park Avenue and Beech Street, serve as established evacuation
routes and are also susceptible to stormwater flooding. These
frequent stormwater flooding areas are shown in Figure II-8 above.
Once out of Long Beach, Park Avenue and Beech Street lead to other
major evacuation routes. Those include Austin Boulevard in Island

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Major utility systems along the north shore

Source: The LiRo Group



Emergency systems: During Superstorm Sandy, the emergency
responder facilities were all damaged, creating many challenges in
responding to the needs in the aftermath of the disaster. The
emergency responder facilities received some of the highest overall
risk scores in the Community.



Health and social services delivery: The former Long Beach
Medical Center was rendered inoperable due to Superstorm Sandy
flooding and social service facilities such as the Martin Luther King,
Jr. Center were out for several months.



Visitor/guest networks: Protection of the natural and cultural
assets is critical to protecting the economic lifeblood and cultural
heritage of the Community. During Superstorm Sandy, the Boardwalk
was severely damaged and had to be reconstructed. In addition,
commercial corridors generally frequented by guests were heavily
damaged during Superstorm Sandy and are also vulnerable to
stormwater inundation.

Page 54

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Coastal ecosystems: The damage to the Water Pollution Control
Plant created the need to bypass the plant and directly discharge
into Reynolds Channel, which adversely impacted water quality in
the bay. In addition, untreated stormwater runoff has a negative
impact on water quality.

B. Assessment of needs and opportunities
This section describes the needs and opportunities identified throughout the
NYRCR planning process. This analysis considers what is needed to help
Long Beach’s assets become more resilient in the future and presents
opportunities for further economic rebuilding and expansion.
The needs and opportunities assessment was developed based on housing
and economic assessments, research, discussions with the Planning
Committee, review of applicable planning documents, input from the Public
Engagement Events, and other public outreach efforts. Planning documents
reviewed for historic context regarding needs and opportunities are found at
the end of Section I in Table I-2.

verbal comments made in the meeting or by comment cards, online surveys,
and in the first two Public Engagement Events held in the fall of 2013.
Additional discussion of the public engagement process can be found in
Section V of this plan. This feedback was useful to the Planning Committee
in considering the Community’s needs and opportunities. It has been
incorporated in the following needs and opportunities assessment
categorized by Recovery Support Function.
There are six Recovery Support Functions established by President Barack
Obama in 2011 through the National Disaster Recovery Framework (NDRF)
and the NYRCR Plan addresses the needs, risks, and opportunities related to
the Recovery Support Functions: Community Planning and Capacity Building,
Economic Development, Health and Social Services, Housing, Infrastructure,
and Natural and Cultural Resources. These functions represent the key
subject areas that drive the well-being and prosperity of the whole
community. As described in the NDRF, these six Recovery Support Functions
are the “coordinating structure for key functional areas of assistance.” The
Needs and Opportunities identified here in Section II were further examined
by the NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) and Consultant Team within
the context of the Recovery Support Functions, as defined by NYRCR
Guidance:

First Public Engagement Event, October 10, 2013

Source: Sustainable Long Island

Public input (as of March 31, 2014) for the Community’s needs and
opportunities was captured during the 12 Planning Committee Meetings via

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 55

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Recovery Support Functions (RSFs)
Community Planning and Capacity Building: This Recovery Support
Function addresses how the community will restore or enhance its ability
to organize, plan, manage, and implement its recovery.
Economic Development: This Recovery Support Function addresses
how the community will restore economic and business activities and
develop new economic opportunities.
Health and Social Services: This Recovery Support Function addresses
how the community will restore and improve essential health and social
services, including for vulnerable populations.
Housing: This Recovery Support Function addresses how the community
will meet the demand for affordable housing (and promotion of affordable
housing), address post-disaster housing needs, and encourage disasterresistant housing for all income groups.
Infrastructure: This Recovery Support Function addresses how the
community will restore, repair, and manage essential infrastructure
services.
Natural and Cultural Resources: This Recovery Support Function
addresses how the community will approach natural and cultural resource
management from a risk reduction and economic development context.
Source: Guidance for New York Rising Community Reconstruction Plans:
A Planning Toolkit for CR Planning Committees

The NYRCR planning process examined key issues in these Recovery Support
Functions to identify actions and projects to help Long Beach recover and
rebuild stronger, smarter, and safer. These functions are organized to
facilitate problem-solving, identify resources, and coordinate with
stakeholder agencies.
Throughout the process, the Consultant Team and Committee were well
integrated with the City of Long Beach officials. The City Manager and
Commissioner of the Department of Public Works briefed the Committee and
the community in both Planning Committee Meetings and Public Engagement
Events on what actions they were taking to rebuild and increase resiliency.
To follow up on discussions from Committee Meetings, the Consultant Team
coordinated with City staff to obtain important materials and information that
helped with the assessment of needs and opportunities.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

The overarching needs identified at the beginning of the NYRCR Long Beach
planning process was the need to protect the City from flooding on both the
oceanfront and bayfront, as well as stormwater flooding. The U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers’ (USACE’s) extensive work on the oceanfront allowed the
Committee to primarily focus on the bayfront and stormwater concerns. The
discussion below reflects short-term, intermediate, and long-term needs and
opportunities for the Community. Actions to address these needs are
discussed in Sections III and IV of this NYRCR Plan. In some cases, there will
likely be unmet needs beyond the scope of the NYRCR Program and this
NYRCR Plan will serve as a blueprint for future action.
Community planning and capacity building
Superstorm Sandy was the largest disaster Long Beach ever experienced.
While the community came together in the aftermath of the storm, it also
revealed additional needs to plan in a long-term, holistic manner that
addresses all aspects of the recovery. Long Beach’s community planning and
capacity building needs and opportunities relate to implementing storm
recovery activities, planning, and building greater internal capacity to
address preparedness, response, and recovery from future storms.
Community planning and capacity building activities under consideration
include emergency preparedness operations and public education regarding
disaster resiliency planning. Tools and techniques for considering energy
efficiency options, addressing future risks such as sea-level rise, and
planning for a sustainable future are also important in implementing Long
Beach’s long-term planning efforts.

Community planning and capacity building needs


A February 2013 community survey identified storm protection as
the primary concern of residents. Since Superstorm Sandy, there has
been renewed support for a dune reconstruction project by the
USACE.



Superstorm Sandy demonstrated the need for designated
neighborhood community centers to act as community assistance
centers for residents in times of crisis.



Given that most of the City is at risk from flooding and high winds, it
would benefit from additional resources for emergency operations
and management. Additional resources can help build on existing

Page 56

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

City efforts so that residents have access to emergency
preparedness information, assets are protected and then positioned
to assist in the disaster operations, and response teams are
established to check on socially vulnerable populations during power
outages.


An estimated 6,723 people in Long Beach speak a language other
than English, primarily Spanish.50 Emergency information should be
available in both in English and Spanish.



Continuous access to communications systems, such as cellular
networks and a community-wide wireless network, are vital for Long
Beach’s residents during emergencies.



Bayfront protection, revitalization, and waterfront usage is an
important community planning issue to help Long Beach rebuild
better and stronger. Some future efforts may require coordination
with the Town of Hempstead, which owns the submerged land in the
channel. The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (DEC) has facilitated a process to expedite certain
types of permits, including extending bulkheads by 18 inches in
place. The City’s ongoing beachfront and bayfront redevelopment
initiatives will benefit from the adoption of a Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program (LWRP) to update the information in the draft
LWRP to reflect post-Sandy and post-recession conditions. In
December 2013, the City announced that it had obtained a grant for
an LWRP update which will provide additional coordination and
potential funding opportunities for the City.



As the City of Long Beach Comprehensive Plan dates from 2007
(prior to Superstorm Sandy and the economic recession), the City
will be undertaking an update to the Plan. The City’s upcoming
update will address green/renewable energy, energy efficiency, sealevel rise, stormwater management, green infrastructure, and
Complete Streets principles.

First Public Engagement Event, October 10, 2013

Source: Sustainable Long Island



Following the Comprehensive Plan update, the zoning ordinance will
be reviewed for consistency with the updated plan (and LWRP
discussed above) and to determine what zoning changes are
needed. Zoning and building codes updates are needed to reflect
current priorities including: design, affordability, accessibility,
sustainability, and mixed-use development.



Design guidelines for addressing neighborhood character are needed
to ensure that as homes are rebuilt above the FEMA BFE, are rebuilt
using resiliency techniques where appropriate, and complement the
surrounding neighborhood/streetscape. The Design Guidelines for
assisting homeowners with elevation and sustainability techniques
will be available in English and Spanish.

Community planning and capacity building opportunities


Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

The post-Sandy reconstruction period continues to offer an
opportunity for increased public involvement in Long Beach. The City
has helped bring the community together through its Boardwalk

Page 57

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

visioning sessions, websites, and the Public Engagement Events as
part of the NYRCR process. During the post-Sandy reconstruction
period, the City has provided residents with multiple opportunities to
learn about recovery and resiliency efforts and offer input. This
process should continue in the future with emergency preparation
and opportunities to make homes and businesses more sustainable
and resilient, including design guidelines for elevating homes.


Multiuse community centers can serve as social hubs and anchors for
economic development and, in times of crisis, as disaster response
centers for response, dissemination of news, and mutual support of
residents. The MLK Center, the Main Library, Long Beach Recreation
Center, and the Ice Arena are well suited for this purpose.



An Office of Emergency Management with needed emergency
equipment should be established to assist in emergency planning,
hazard mitigation, emergency communications, and preparation of a
list of disaster recovery services vendors. Development of
Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with disaster recovery vendors
and coordination with Nassau County OEM also represents potential
opportunities.



The City is a participant in the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) Community Rating System (CRS). CRS provides a reduction in
flood insurance premiums for flood policyholders when a community
accrues enough credit points for approved flood reduction activities.
The City is currently Class 8, which provides a 10% discount in
insurance premiums. For each additional accrual of 500 CRS credit
points, there is an additional 5% discount. In January 2014, the City
announced that it hired a firm to review its CRS program.



A significant number of commuters in Long Beach bike, walk, or ride
the Long Beach Bus to the LIRR train station. There is more potential
for transit-oriented development (TOD) around the LIRR station, as
well as opportunities to enhance pedestrian and bicycle accessibility
and safety.

Economic development
In order to recover economically from Superstorm Sandy, the City is
evaluating business recovery needs while also considering opportunities that

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

will ensure a strong, vibrant economy that can withstand future disasters.
The Long Beach Chamber of Commerce is as an active entity that
encourages new businesses and helps sustain established ones. Superstorm
Sandy not only severely damaged most of the City’s businesses but it also
destroyed the City’s Boardwalk, a huge draw for summer guests that
supports the economy, and severely damaged the facility of its largest
employer, the former Long Beach Medical Center. As part of the
development of this effort, an economic development assessment was
conducted to evaluate the City of Long Beach’s greatest needs. This
assessment looked at the key economic drivers of Long Beach’s economy
and what is needed to invigorate Long Beach’s economy to ensure economic
assets rebuild stronger and more resilient.
Opportunities exist for further development that will build on Long Beach’s
ocean and bayfront assets, including the Boardwalk and bayfront Esplanade,
to further expand water-dependent and water-related uses and provide
additional amenities for residents and guests. The north shore remains
underutilized and the City’s three business districts have opportunities for
expansion. Because Long Beach is a built-out community, additional
development will require redevelopment of existing properties and/or
development of vacant land (e.g., the Superblock), underutilized land, or
brownfield locations. The appropriate uses and scale of development will
need to be carefully evaluated in addition to ensuring that any new
development is built to withstand future hazard events. Any redevelopment
efforts must also consider environmental justice concerns, affordable housing
needs, and adopting resiliency and sustainability techniques.

Economic development trends
Key economic trends for the City are described below.


The number of estimated households in Long Beach was 14,553 in
201251. Between 2000 and 2012, the number of households with
incomes over $150,000 increased by 1,590, which contributed to an
increase of $28,478 in the median income to $85,845 in 2012. 52
However, the number of households in all other income categories,
including low-, moderate-, and middle-income households declined
between 2000 and 2012. This trend can have a number of
implications to the Community, including the unavailability of a labor
force for local small businesses that are rebuilding or expanding, or

Page 58

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

any new start-up businesses or industries that Long Beach may want
to attract.


The City reported that mercantile licenses, which are required for
businesses to operate in Long Beach, numbered 300 in 2013, which
is an approximately 10% decrease from 2012 (335) and 2011 (336).

the City that could best accommodate economic development and
redevelopment.
Table II-3: Land Use
LAND USE

TOTAL SF*

PERCENT
OF TOTAL

Commercial

2,266,379

5.2%

Community Service/Publically Owned

9,377,714

21.6%

Industrial

555,177

1.3%

Recreation And Entertainment

591,407

1.4%

28,748,961

66.1%

Vacant Land

789,632

1.8%

Wildlife Conservation And Public Parks

44,165

.1%

Other

1,120,227

2.6%

Total

43,493,661

100%

Residential

Source: Nassau County GIS January 2013.
*Square footage; data generated by URS based on existing usage. Note that overlapping of
parcel data could result in an over count of total land area.
Park Avenue Commercial District

Source: Sustainable Long Island



Major economic drivers in Long Beach shown in Table II-2 earlier in
this section include recreational areas, the Beach and the Boardwalk,
hotels, retail and commercial strips, and industrial areas.

For additional context on City economic trends and opportunities, Table II-3
shows land use by type and Figure II-9 shows a land use map to georeference the locations of the land use types. Based on maps generated with
data from Nassau County Geographic Information System (GIS), current land
use in Long Beach is primarily residential (66.1%), publically owned land
(21.6%), commercial uses (5.1%), and industrial use (1.3%). Approximately
1.8% is vacant land. The vacant land and industrial uses are the areas within

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 59

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-9: Land Use Map

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 60

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Additional context on economic development trends in Long Beach:


During the 2000 to 2012 period, there was a decrease of 6% in the
total population from 34,462 to 33,356.53 Most of the decline
attributed to a reduction of 22% (1,232) in the population 15 years
and under.54 However, the large decline in individuals under 15 may
indicate that low- and moderate-income households are moving out
of the Community.



Of the 876 establishments in the Community, 637 (73%) had 1 to 4
employees; 118 (13%) had 5 to 9 employees and 68 (8%) had 10 to
19 employees.55 Small businesses are a critical component of the
Long Beach Community and efforts should be made to support small
business development and growth, specifically for businesses in the
highest growth sectors.



There was a major shift in the mode of transportation to work. The
number of individuals walking to work increased significantly from 70
in 2000 to 1,116 in 2012. This change accounts for approximately
6.5% of all work commute trips in 2012 according to the American
Community Survey.56

Economic development needs


A segment of the bayfront area is zoned for industrial use and is
currently underutilized, with several vacant lots, a sewage treatment
plant, and a metering station. The area also includes several
brownfields and one demolished incinerator. Much of the waterfront
is not being utilized to its full potential. Potential transfer of sewage
treatment to the Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) could free
up as much as 5 acres of land for redevelopment. A plan to consider
opportunities for reducing the industrial footprint and planning new
resilient development is needed. The existing brownfield areas need
additional study to determine the level of remediation required.
Installation of protective measures, which is discussed further in the
Infrastructure subsection, is needed prior to redevelopment.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

East Park Avenue in the East End

Source: Sustainable Long Island



Some small businesses continue to struggle during the “off” season
and need financial assistance, mitigation options, and help rebuilding
their customer base; especially as an estimated 20% of the City’s
residents are not yet in their homes. The three main commercial
areas of Long Beach were hit hard, especially restaurants, and they
need help to rebuild and reach their full potential.



Businesses also need to develop continuity of operation plans and
backup power systems.



In the long term, a Complete Streets project in the central business
district could help connect the center part of the City to the beach
and Boardwalk, as well as to the Recreation Center area on the bay.
Ultimately, a network of pedestrian and bicycle networks are needed
to enhance resident and guest access throughout the Community
and the barrier island as a whole.



The Long Beach Boulevard Gateway potential has not been realized
and the Superblock and Foundation Block along the Boardwalk are
underutilized real estate parcels. On January 22, 2014, the Long

Page 61

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Beach City Council voted to settle the Superblock lawsuit. In
February 2014, a large-scale development was approved for the
Superblock.


Inadequate parking capacity in parts of the City could limit
redevelopment and economic development efforts. Also, there is a
need for improved traffic flow.



The City lacks a diversity of uses, including non-food/beverage retail
space and larger office space for innovative businesses.



A significant number of commuters in Long Beach bike, walk, or take
the bus to the train station. There is potential need for TOD around
the LIRR station.

consolidation options for this area and exploring options for resilient
redevelopment. The City will apply for a Phase 2 Brownfield
Opportunities Area Study from New York State’s Brownfield
Opportunities Program to help revitalize properties. Redevelopment
of this area could serve as the catalyst for relocation of other
industrial uses away from the flood-prone bay.


Additional economic development opportunities exist in the other
vacant or underutilized parcels throughout the Community.



Development opportunities should be encouraged along the
Boardwalk area. The second part of the Boardwalk revision process,
scheduled for 2014, and the development of the Superblock are key
opportunities for further development. The second part of the
Boardwalk revision process will explore topics such as expanding
food and retail concessions on the Boardwalk, as well as the need for
adequate public facilities (including restrooms/comfort stations) to
accommodate guests. The Foundation Block is a key parcel next to
the Boardwalk that should be considered for future development.
The Committee identified a possible future land use opportunity with
the announced relocation of the Hebrew Academy of Long Beach at
the end of this planning process.

Long Beach Boulevard

Source: Planning4Places, LLC

Economic development opportunities


Waterfront-related and water-dependent uses would capitalize on
Long Beach’s ocean and bayfront assets. Appropriate recreational
opportunities on the bay (e.g., kayaking, water taxi) could lead to
connections with other waterfront communities, such as Atlantic
Beach, Point Lookout, Island Park, and Freeport.



Opportunities for redevelopment in the bayfront area include the
Long Beach Water Pollution Control Plant site, if the connection to
Bay Park STP occurs, and brownfield sites. The Water Pollution
Control Plant site is adjacent to many of the City’s recreational
facilities and is located by Reynolds Channel. Two studies including
the next phase of the Brownfield Opportunities Area study and a
Bayfront Revitalization Plan will assist in examining industrial

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

The former Long Beach Medical Center

Source: URS

Page 62

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan





Long Beach's unique access to beaches and waterways make it an
ideal outdoor getaway that area people flock to for exercise and
leisure outdoor activity. A network of pedestrian and bicycle
networks connecting the City from the bayfront to the ocean to the
commercial districts and then throughout the barrier island would
further enhance recreational opportunities and encourage economic
development
Efforts should be made to enhance gateways and streetscapes within
the City, including Long Beach Boulevard, the West Park Avenue
commercial corridor, the West Beech Street commercial corridor, and
the East Park Avenue commercial area in the East End. Streetscape
enhancements utilizing Complete Streets principles will enhance the
area. Such improvements include wider sidewalks to facilitate
pedestrian traffic and street retail opportunities. Long Beach
Complete Streets efforts could connect with similar efforts in
neighboring jurisdictions, such as East Atlantic Beach.



The ongoing marketing initiated by the City to potential guests in the
spring of 2013 should continue and expand to help rebuild the
customer base and attract new customers. Marketing efforts to bring
New York City residents to Long Beach for festivals and events
should continue and expand to assist the City’s ongoing initiative of
becoming more of a year-round guest destination. Revenuegenerating events should be brought to the beach and waterfront
areas. A visitor/guest information booth should be set up at the LIRR
station and promotional material should be provided at area airports
for tourists visiting New York.



Assistance should be provided to businesses with developing
emergency preparedness plans/continuity of operation plans and
backup systems so that there is less down time following storm
events.



Opportunities to install more public art work to further highlight Long
Beach’s arts community should be explored.



Additional workforce training and green business training, especially
for the populations that need additional resources and were
particularly hard hit by Superstorm Sandy, should be provided.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs



Business owners should be encouraged to seek opportunities to
increase energy efficiencies and sustainability as businesses are
rebuilt.

Health and social services
One of the critical issues in Long Beach’s recovery is ensuring that essential
health, mental health, and social services are restored. Basic care must be
available, maintained, and protected during and after storm events. In
particular, adequate access to care and services must be available for
vulnerable populations. As of March 2014, the former Long Beach Medical
Center (the barrier island’s hospital) remains closed and access to medical
care continues to be an important concern.

Health and social services needs


The bayfront includes the former Long Beach Medical Center, a
critical community asset that has filed for bankruptcy as of March
2014, because of financial struggles and Superstorm Sandy damage.
Consequently, residents must travel at least 5 miles off the barrier
island through a heavily trafficked road corridor to the next closest
hospital, South Nassau Communities Hospital, which is a hardship for
those needing emergency care. The Long Beach Fire Department
estimates that it takes a 2-hour round trip for an ambulance to
transport a patient to another hospital (compared with 15 minutes
when the Long Beach Medical Center was operational), which strains
available ambulance resources. Although the former Long Beach
Medical Center may be opened in a limited capacity in 2014, full
restoration is required to provide needed medical services.



The Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Center was flooded and then
reopened in early September 2013. Some mitigation measures for
the facility have been completed, such as elevating the boiler, but
more can be done to make it resilient. The Main Library, the Long
Beach Recreation Center, and the Ice Arena also need additional
mitigation measures. To use community centers as community
assistance centers in the early stages of recovery, backup power
generation will be required and electrical equipment must be raised.



Resources are needed to continue relocating emergency generators
to upper floors in key facilities such as emergency responder facilities

Page 63

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

to maintain power and functionality during and immediately after
future storm events.


Superstorm Sandy rendered many emergency responder facilities
inoperable. While emergency responders performed admirably given
the loss of important facilities and equipment, it is clear that
additional resiliency efforts are needed to maintain emergency
response functions in future events. The three fire stations (including
headquarters in City Hall, and the police department in City Hall
need floodproofing and wind retrofit (hardening of openings and
wind retrofitting of roof and walls). These needs include elevation of
electrical equipment, backup generators, and critical IT equipment.



Storage and/or relocation of equipment and apparatus above the
level where flooding typically occurs, is needed so the fire
department can use its equipment during emergency situations.



Long Beach School District buildings were damaged by Superstorm
Sandy and some of the City’s children were unable to return to their
school for months. In some cases, they were moved to other school
locations while post-storm construction was underway. The School
District has made modifications to protect critical components from
flooding and should continue to examine further opportunities to
protect its facilities.



Adequate services and programming must be available for veterans
and disabled and senior residents. Long Beach has over 1,500
veterans, and 2,908 disabled residents, most of whom are seniors. 57
The population aged 65 to 74 is projected to increase 30.8% by
2020.58 Programming and information about services for these
populations should be made available in both English and Spanish.

Health and social services opportunities


Health facilities should identify ways to be more resilient than they
were before Superstorm Sandy.



Community centers should be floodproofed and protected from wind
damage.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs



The police station, the fires stations, and City Hall should be
floodproofed and protected from wind damage to ensure that these
facilities remain operational during emergencies.



Emergency vehicles and fire apparatus need to be elevated during a
flood event to avoid damage. One possibility is to design and
construct a parking garage capable of allowing emergency response
vehicles to be elevated during storm events. Neighborhood
community centers that can serve as community assistance centers
in times of emergency should be established. However, during any
large-scale flooding events, residents and guests should be prepared
to evacuate the barrier island.



Special needs registrations should be established so that socially
vulnerable populations (elderly, disabled, and low-income residents)
can identify themselves and receive needed services during
emergencies, including assistance with evacuation, transportation to
inland hospitals if on a respirator, etc. Coordination with special
needs registration efforts could be coordinated with Nassau County
OEM.



Create response teams to check on and assist populations on a
continuous basis during power outages.



Develop MOUs with food assistance groups (e.g., Island Harvest,
Long Island Cares, Meals on Wheels) to arrange assistance for the
elderly during power outages.



A new Office of Emergency Management should take on the special
needs registration, organizing response teams, establishing MOUs,
and helping to organize the existing community emergency response
groups, such as Neighborhood Emergency Team (NET) and other
similarly purposed groups. The OEM should coordinate with Nassau
County OEM, the State Citizen Preparedness Corp, and the Nassau
County Community Emergency Response Team (CERT).

Housing
Long Beach’s housing, both multi-family high-rise and individual residences,
was devastated by Superstorm Sandy. A housing assessment was conducted
as part of the NYRCR process to assist with the evaluation of the City of Long
Beach’s greatest needs in recovering from Superstorm Sandy. This

Page 64

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

assessment looked at the City’s housing stock and housing conditions,
including housing affordability, vacancy and homeownership rates, and
socio-economic trends that would affect housing. The analysis also looks at
the percentage of Long Beach’s population that has a housing cost burden
(defined as paying more than 30% of household income for housing). This
information provides a context for planning for housing post Sandy. Access
to housing resources and information, especially as related to disaster
planning and evacuation, is particularly challenging for vulnerable
populations (such as the elderly and special needs populations) and will need
to be addressed as the City plans for future hazard events.



Table II-4: Housing Occupancy 5-Year Estimates
HOUSING OCCUPANCY
Total Housing Units
Occupied Housing Units
Vacant Housing Units
Homeowner Vacancy Rate
Rental Vacancy Rate

Housing Trends
Key housing and socioeconomic trends are described below that relate to
housing supply and demand.


According to the American Community Survey, in 2012, the Long
Beach Community had a total of 16,254 housing units. Of those,
57% were owner-occupied and 10.5% were vacant.59 Table II-4
provides additional detail on housing occupancy.

Sol Scher Senior Apartments

Source: The LiRo Group

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Housing units are primarily single-family homes (40%) and multiplestory buildings with 20 or more units (32%). Most housing units
were built between 1940 and 1969 (44.5%).60 A significant
percentage (32.5%) was built in 1939 or earlier. The average home
value in the Community was $505,225 in 2012.61 Table II-5 provides
additional information on Long Beach’s types of housing.

TOTAL
16,254
14,553 (89.53%)
1,701 (10.47%)
1.65%
2.14%

Source: U.S. Census. American Community Survey 2008–2012



According to the American Community Survey 20082012 estimate,
of the 33,275 residents in the Long Beach Community, there are over
1,500 veterans, and 2,908 disabled residents, most of whom are
seniors.62



An estimated 6,723 people in Long Beach speak a language other
than English, primarily Spanish (4,149). Over half of these Spanish
speakers reported that they spoke English “Less than Very Well.”
Other languages spoken are “Other Indo-European Languages”
(1,402), “Asian and Pacific Island Languages” (545), and “Other
Languages” (627).63



The population in the Long Beach Community was 33,275 in 2010
according to the U.S. Census. A significant decline of almost 18% is
projected by 2020 for individuals between 45 and 54 years old, and
a 31% increase is projected by 2020 for individuals 65 to 74 years
old.64



The median household income in Long Beach is $85,845, which is
above the Nassau County median income of $81,300. However, close
to 60% of households have incomes at or below $74,999, including

Page 65

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

2,480 (17% of all households) that have incomes of $24,999 or
less.65
Table II-5: Units in Structure
UNITS IN STRUCTURE
Total Housing Units
1 Unit, Detached
1 Unit, Attached
2 Units
3-4 Units
5-9 Units
10-19 Units
20 or More Units
Mobile Home
Boat, RV, Van, etc.

TOTAL
16,254
6,050
371
2,989
941
229
410
5,247
0
17



The City of Long Beach has its own housing authority that oversees
the administration of several affordable housing programs, including
the Housing Choice Voucher Program (HCVP), which has 389
dedicated vouchers. The Long Beach Housing Authority oversees
several affordable housing properties, which are listed in the table
below. In addition, there are 26 rent-regulated, multiple-unit
buildings (the majority co-ops and condos) in Long Beach, primarily
along East and West Broadway and Shore Road. 69 Table II-6 details
the City’s affordable housing assets.



There are four designated low- and moderate-income (LMI) census
blocks in Long Beach. LMI census blocks are defined by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) as census
blocks where at least 51% of persons are LMI individuals. Figure II10 provides a map of the LMI census blocks and four where at least
51% are LMI families are shaded red or orange.

PERCENTAGE
37.22%
2.28%
18.39%
5.79%
1.41%
2.52%
32.28%
0.0%
0.10%

Source: American Community Survey 2008-2012 5 Year Estimates Table
DP04 Selected Housing Characteristics in the United States
http://factfinder2.census.gov



Of the 8,253 owner-occupied units in the Community, close to 70%
had mortgages in 2012. Approximately half (50%) of owners who
occupy their units and have mortgages have housing costs above
30% of their incomes. (HUD defines individuals or families who pay
over 30% of their income for housing to be cost burdened). Of
owners who do not have mortgages, 28% pay more than 35% of
household income for housing, indicating that these owners also
have a housing cost burden.66



As of 2012 in the Community, there were 6,101 occupied units
paying rent (approximately 43% of the housing units in Long Beach
are occupied by renters). The median rent paid was $1,434.
However, over 58% of units have rents above $1,500 and an
estimated 39% of renters (2,326) have housing costs above 35% of
their incomes.67



As of June 2013, there were close to 8,000 FEMA registrations for
assistance by homeowners in the City of Long Beach with total
damages of over $92 million, including over 1,700 applicants with

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

incomes of less than $30,000. There were also 8,000 FEMA
registrations by renters in Long Beach. Of these, over 3,500 (44%)
had incomes at or below $30,000.68

Channel Park Homes

Source: The LiRo Group

Page 66

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table II-6: Affordable Housing Assets
DEVELOPMENT/ASSET
NAME

DEVELOPMENT
TYPE

ADDRESS

TENURE

TARGET POPULATION

NUMBER OF
UNITS

Pine Town Homes

Section 236/Section 8
Loan Mgmt.

151 E. Pine Street

Rental

Family

130

Channel Park Homes

Housing Authority

500 Centre Street

Rental

Family

108

Sol Scher Apartments

Housing Authority

225 West Park
Avenue

Rental

Low-income seniors and the disabled

71

Michael Valente
Apartments

Housing Authority

415 National
Boulevard

Rental

Low-income seniors and the disabled

65

Sonny Duckman
Apartments

Housing Authority

175 West Broadway

Rental

Low-income seniors and the disabled

65

Morton Cohen
Apartments

Housing Authority

35 East Broadway

Rental

Low-income seniors and the disabled

65

Source: Nassau Urban County Consortium Five Year (2010-2014) Consolidated Plan & Annual Action Report
http://www.nassaucountyny.gov/agencies/EconomicDevelopment/Docs/PDF/Five-YearConsolidatedPlanNarratives_002.pdf

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 67

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-10: Percentage of Low- and Moderate-Income Families

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 68

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Housing needs
Flooding on the oceanfront and bayfront affected almost every home in the
City. Although some homes have been elevated, additional homeowner
financial and reconstruction assistance is needed. Insurance and FEMA
funding are insufficient to cover expenses for rebuilding and elevating
homes, and some residents are struggling to rebuild. In some cases,
rebuilding may be cost-prohibitive to residents who are seeking to return
home. Resiliency requirements that require raising homes will be a particular
challenge for low-income homeowners.

generally from 4 weeks to 7 months, delaying both their recovery
and the City’s. Long Beach residents were primarily housed at the
following locations during Sandy: Nassau Community College,
Levittown Memorial High School, the State University of New York
(SUNY) Old Westbury campus, and Manhasset High School. The
Housing Authority has applied for grants to protect its structures, but
approval of the grants is uncertain.


Additional flood protection is needed for the City’s public housing
units including protective measures for the ground floor areas,
elevation of equipment, providing backup power, and wind protection
of roofs, windows, and building exteriors. Protection of senior
housing units is also needed to ensure that residents can quickly
return to their homes once it is safe to return. Flood protection for
ground floor areas is needed, as well as elevation of equipment,
backup power systems, and demountable barriers. Emergency
preparedness plans based on lessons learned during Superstorm
Sandy should be considered.

Housing opportunities


Identifying and creating access to as many housing-related financial
resources as possible and distributing critical information to the
public is an important goal. On December 15, 2013, the City
participated in a Recovery Workshop sponsored by the Long Beach
Interfaith Clergy Association and supported by Catholic Charities.
Establishing an Office of Emergency Management, which Long Beach
does not currently have, could help with this effort. The creation of a
revolving loan fund that provides low-interest loans for home
elevation would also help accomplish this goal.



Coordination with State and Federal agencies could occur to simplify
the grant application process by having a single application or a
clearinghouse for all government grant programs.



Building owners and homeowners should be encouraged to seek
opportunities to increase energy efficiencies and sustainability as
buildings and homes are rebuilt.



The visual aspect of neighborhoods should be protected and
balanced with the need to elevate homes to reduce flood risk.

Elevation of homes in Long Beach

Source: URS



More resilient rental and affordable housing is needed in the City.
Rehabilitated houses could be used to fill this need.



Where appropriate, additional housing should be evaluated to help
increase the tax base and attract young professionals.





Second-story additions and raised building elevations have altered
the neighborhood scale of the City. For example, new two-story
elevated homes are being built adjacent to one-story bungalow
homes, creating an inconsistent streetscape.
Public and senior housing in Long Beach was significantly impacted
by Superstorm Sandy and is in need of flood protection measures.
Many residents of public housing were displaced by the disaster

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 69

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Elevation of replacement buildings must be done thoughtfully with
an eye toward maintaining the pedestrian-friendly character of the
neighborhood. Homeowners who are considering elevation and
sustainability measures need to be educated on the techniques that
are technically appropriate and that will complement the surrounding
neighborhood. Design guideline documents can help meet this need.


Senior and public housing developments should have flood and wind
protection so residents can return as quickly as possible to their
homes when evacuations are needed.



The City and the Long Beach Housing Authority could coordinate to
identify opportunities to add additional affordable housing.



Additional housing opportunities could be developed to ensure that
Long Beach residents have ample opportunities to return back to the
City.

oceanfront including dune restoration in the fall of 2014. Continuing efforts
include replacing walkovers and rebuilding groins. Due to this progress, the
Planning Committee focused attention on the bayfront (north shore).

Infrastructure needs


The inadequate height and condition of the bulkheads, as well as the
naturally low elevations, on the north shore to protect against
flooding was demonstrated during Superstorm Sandy. Bulkheads
along the bayfront are discontinuous and have variable elevations. In
some areas, the bulkheads are non-existent. New bulkheads,
bulkhead improvements, canal gates, and similar types of protection
measures at a uniform height and designed for storm protection are
needed on the hardened shoreline with the limited open land that is
typical of the City’s north shore. Particular areas of concern along the
length of the north shore are on either side of the Long Beach Bridge
from National Boulevard to Lincoln Boulevard, the West End, and in
the Canals neighborhood.



Although the flood damage from Superstorm Sandy was
tremendous, flooding from stormwater occurs on a much more
frequent basis and impacts several major roads. Stormwater
management issues result from aging infrastructure, the amount of
impervious surface in the City, the lack of topographic relief on the
island, and tidal water entering stormwater outfall pipes. In order to
prevent tidal water from entering stormwater outfall pipes, additional
backflow prevention devices and centrifugal separation chambers are
needed to help improve water quality.



A comprehensive stormwater management study is also needed to
evaluate the whole system and develop cost-effective solutions to
stormwater issues, including use of green infrastructure and
underground storage chambers. Areas subject to the highest level of
repetitive flooding include W. Park Avenue from Virginia Avenue to
Arizona Avenue, E. Chester Street from Neptune Boulevard to Curley
Street, National Boulevard from W. Penn Street to W. Olive Street, E.
Bay Drive from Neptune Boulevard to Lincoln Boulevard, and E. Pine
Street from Park Place to Long Beach Boulevard.

Infrastructure
Superstorm Sandy devastated critical infrastructure, especially along the
north shore, but also along the oceanfront. As described in Section I and
earlier in Section II, key systems, such as water, power and wastewater
were out of service for an extended period of time for such critical systems
to the whole community. In addition, stormwater management assets were
not designed to meet current and future risk needs and flooding occurs on
key roads like Park Avenue and Beech Street that serve as evacuation routes
prior to and during large storms.
Key infrastructure assets must be protected in order to remain operational
before, during, and after future storms. Layers of protection are needed to
avoid interruption for significant lengths of time during a storm event. Critical
infrastructure assets serving the whole community (e.g., water, wastewater,
public safety) have the least amount of tolerable downtime. Providing
redundancies in the system overall, will help mitigate different storm
scenarios and help maintain critical services before, during, and after storm
events. Addressing stormwater management concerns will also allow
residents to evacuate safely.
Superstorm Sandy flooding and storm surge occurred on both the oceanfront
and the bayfront, resulting in almost complete inundation of the City. At the
date of this NYRCR Plan, the USACE will be initiating substantial work on the

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 70

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Existing bulkhead conditions near the former
Long Beach Medical Center



The Long Beach Water Purification Plant was flooded during
Superstorm Sandy, resulting in boil-water advisories for
approximately 1 week. The plant is in need of protection, which it
should receive from the bulkheading and flood barrier project
described above.



Superstorm Sandy destroyed pumps in the wells and sewer lift
stations when salt water went into the pump electrical components
and water seals. Four pump stations and two wells need additional
flood mitigation and elevated backup generators.



Backup power systems located on ground floors in parts of the City
were rendered inoperable by flooding and needed to be elevated or
otherwise protected from flooding.



Critical facilities, utilities, and infrastructure should plan for larger
peak volumes during storms and should be elevated to mitigate
flooding.

Source: The LiRo Group



As a follow-up to the comprehensive study, a force-main stormwater
pumping system is needed to provide greater capacity to discharge
stormwater during flooding and high tides. Additional needs include
converting sand gutter areas to positive drainage, replacing
inadequate and undersized drainage inlet structures, installing
control structures to filter out debris, and increasing stormwater
storage to improve stormwater drainage.



Aging water and sewer lines need to be replaced throughout the
City.



The Long Beach Water Pollution Control (sewage treatment) Plant is
an aging facility that is in need of flood protection and updating. The
sewage treatment plant was flooded and forced off line during
Superstorm Sandy. In November 2013, the Governor announced a
bulkheading and flood barrier project from National Boulevard to the
Long Beach Bridge. Once implemented, this project will provide
protection to much of the City’s key infrastructure along the north
shore. The potential future conversion of the treatment plant to a lift
station would also reduce vulnerability.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Water Purification Plant and North Shore Utilities

Source: URS



Some roads, including established evacuation routes such as Park
Avenue and Beech Street, are susceptible to flooding, even in heavy
rain, which can limit evacuations. Additional drainage and
stormwater management is needed along these roads so they are
passable for emergency vehicles and during mandatory evacuations.



Complete Streets enhancements are needed to address all modes of
transportation infrastructure, including enhancing pedestrian and
bicycle accessibility and safety. Identified areas for the first phase of

Page 71

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

the proposed Complete Streets streetscape enhancements include
Park Avenue in the Central Business District and Beech Street. A
future phase of this project would be for Kennedy Plaza in front of
City Hall which would include a large-scale underground stormwater
storage chamber, rain gardens, and create a multi-purpose public
space.



Stormwater flood mitigation is needed in all of the business districts,
including the Park Avenue and Beech Street corridors, which are also
established evacuation routes. This project should also include
bicycle, pedestrian, streetscape improvements, emergency signage,
and solar powered lighting which will not only enhance resiliency of
these important corridors but also provide opportunities for
economic growth.



Opportunities to develop a plan and seek funding for backup power
and telecommunications systems in local government-owned critical
facilities should be explored.



Periodic inspection of storm drains/outfalls, bulkheads, and backflow
prevention devices is an opportunity to make sure the system
remains fully functional.

Infrastructure opportunities


Due to the devastating flooding from Superstorm Sandy from the
bay, developing a continuous line of perimeter defense along the
north shore using bulkheading and canal gates is one of the
Committee’s priorities.



Continuing the City’s efforts to install backflow prevention devices on
all storm drain outfalls is an opportunity to prevent tidal backflow
into the stormwater system. Installation of centrifugal separation
chambers (e.g., vortex chambers) at strategic points in the
stormwater system can help improve water quality at outfall points
into the bay.



Preparation of a stormwater management feasibility study to address
City-wide stormwater issues with a focus on areas that have
repetitive flooding is a sensible first step to approach stormwater
needs in the City. A byproduct of this study could be to study the
replacement of aging water and sewer lines when stormwater
projects are approved.



Repairs and reconstruction after Superstorm Sandy offer the
opportunity for the City to implement stormwater best management
practices and introduce green infrastructure, such as bioswales,
porous paving, and rain gardens to assist with stormwater
management. Retention areas are being designed as a part of the
Neptune Boulevard road reconstruction, as well as for National
Boulevard and W. Hudson Street.



Components of wells and sewer lift stations that need additional
mitigation should be hardened and elevated. Although submersible
pumps have been installed in the stations to provide some protection
from flooding, barriers around the stations would be beneficial.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Pump/lift station at E. Park Avenue/Maple Boulevard

Source: The LiRo Group



The potential conversion of the Long Beach Water Pollution Control
Plant to a lift station that transfers sewage to the Bay Park STP is an
opportunity to update aging infrastructure and reduce vulnerability.



As discussed in Section I, the City will continue to coordinate with
the USACE on the oceanfront and the bayfront reconnaissance-level
study.

Page 72

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



The USACE has an ongoing dune reconstruction project that will help
provide a storm barrier on the oceanfront. This effort will continue
into the near future with the replacement of dune walkovers and
dunes in front of the Boardwalk. Additional enhancements should
continue to be evaluated.



Opportunities to implement a smart grid infrastructure and relocate
utilities to enhance the resiliency of the power grid could be
explored.



As described in the Economic Development subsection above,
comprehensive planning should include a detailed review of traffic
congestion, traffic circulation, traffic calming, bicycle routes,
pedestrian, and parking needs utilizing Complete Streets principles.



Resources should be sought to conduct an in-depth study of largescale future flood protection measures, such as a storm surge barrier
system.

Natural and cultural resources
During Superstorm Sandy, the Boardwalk and dune system were destroyed.
The barrier island and the surrounding waters as a coastal ecosystem must
be considered. Issues such as improving water quality in Reynolds Channel
are critical to environmental health and future opportunities. Long Beach’s
waterfront assets on both the ocean and the bay are significant and provide
tremendous recreational opportunities for residents and guests. These assets
should be evaluated for additional economic development opportunities. This
subsection provides perspectives on how the overall natural system can be
restored, protected, and used to boost economic development and storm
protection for Long Beach.

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Dune planting, fall 2013

Source: Sustainable Long Island

Natural and cultural resources needs


Recent efforts to replenish beach sand, build a dune and berm
system, and install additional dune plantings should be continued to
make the beachfront area both a more effective storm barrier and a
continual draw for guests. Replacing dune cuts with dune walkovers
will help to make the dunes more effective as protection. Additional
dune plantings will also help to ensure dune stability.



Open space and natural areas, where green infrastructure
techniques can be installed, are needed to reduce stormwater and
improve water quality.



Private properties encroach on the public greenways on the four
canals and access to bulkheads along the canals will need to be
evaluated for bulkhead repairs and improvements.



Excessive nutrients from sewage treatment release and untreated
stormwater outfall have deteriorated the water quality in the vicinity
of the City. The habitat for fish, shellfish, fowl, and animals has

Page 73

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

deteriorated, and shellfishing beds are deteriorated and no longer
viable. The deteriorated water quality limits recreational use of
Reynolds Channel. Improving water quality in Reynolds Channel is
important to protect this natural resource.


The City lacks sufficient artistic and performance space and venues
to provide this type of facility are needed to provide residents
additional cultural opportunities and to increase its draw to guests.



Natural and cultural resources are not being used to their full
potential as economic development generators. These resources are
a tremendous asset that can be further highlighted and promoted to
increase tourism.

community character. The City has applied to be a “Tree City” with
the Arbor Day Foundation and is actively pursuing funding to obtain
additional trees and to create a tree maintenance program.


The promotion of its beaches and waterways for festivals,
competitions, and other events has been an effective way for the
City to drive economic growth.



Partnering with neighboring communities to market and promote
regional natural and cultural attractions is a way to attract additional
guests to Long Beach.

Natural and cultural resources opportunities


Two ways to improve the water quality of Reynolds Channel are the
transfer of Long Beach’s sewage to Bay Park STP and water quality
treatment (e.g., debris separation chambers) of stormwater outfall.
As described in the Economic Development section, the back bay
area and Reynolds Channel are amenities that present an
opportunity to partner with other communities to promote additional
recreational activities, such as a kayak trail.



The possibility of extending the bayfront Esplanade on the north
shore is a way to expand recreational opportunities.



Continued enhancements to the beach and dunes should be
considered once the current efforts to restore walkovers, build dunes
in front of the Boardwalk, and rehabilitate the groins have been
completed.



Long Island has an island-wide goal of attaining 10% open space
buffer.70 Although this goal may be difficult to attain in fully
developed Long Beach, opportunities to incorporate green
infrastructure will help improve Long Beach’s resiliency while
improving the streetscape through additional landscaping.
Incorporating open space in new development or redevelopment
projects for better resiliency should be considered.



Ocean Beach Park

Source: Planning4Places, LLC

The City’s efforts to restore the tree canopy with appropriate species
during post-Sandy restoration should be supported to enhance

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

Page 74

Section III:
Reconstruction and resiliency
strategies
Photo: Kerrigan Street and E. Pine Street

Source: Planning4Places, LLC

Section III:
Reconstruction and resiliency strategies
Strategies, associated goals, projects, and actions were developed from the
Planning Committee Meetings, the Public Engagement Events review of the
asset inventory and risk assessment, and response to the needs and
opportunities assessment for Long Beach. The City of Long Beach was a
supportive partner during the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
process and provided information and assistance needed to first identify
strategies and then develop projects and actions to support and fulfill the
strategies. As described in Section II, the Consultant Team coordinated with
the City many times during the process and also took site visits to evaluate
important community assets.

through multi-objective projects and actions. Each NYRCR Long Beach
reconstruction and resiliency strategy presented below is overarching and
followed by more specific goals to achieve the strategy, and projects and
actions to fulfill the goals. The strategies support the Recovery Support
Functions defined in Section II and some projects address multiple
strategies. All together, the strategies, goals, projects, and actions identified
through the planning process are tailored approaches for a comprehensive
recovery that positions Long Beach for greater future success.
The actions that ultimately became projects were the ones identified by the
Committee that also received the greatest support during the Public
Engagement Events. The Committee also took into consideration recovery
actions already underway (e.g., the City or a Federal agency action) and
looked to areas still in need of attention. For example, the extensive
completed work and committed funding of the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers
(USACE) on the oceanfront allowed the Committee to focus on the bayfront
and stormwater management. See Section I for more detail on the USACE
project.
During the development of the NYRCR Plan, the Committee brainstormed
many potential actions and strategies that would help Long Beach become
more protected and resilient in the short term. Based on community input,
the risk assessment, and the history of frequent flooding, it was determined
that solutions were needed for bayfront protection and stormwater drainage.
The Committee also identified longer-term actions and strategies to help
grow the economy, revitalize Long Beach, and/or enhance its appeal. Due to
the enormity of Sandy’s impact on Long Beach, the Committee focused
mostly on resiliency measures needed for protection against storms.

First Public Engagement Event, October 10, 2013

Source: Sustainable Long Island

Overall, these strategies are part of Long Beach’s larger vision described in
Section I.D. to increase resiliency, sustainability, and prosperity citywide

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

The actions from the NYRCR Long Beach Plan were examined for feasibility
as Proposed or Featured Projects. Some of the projects fit multiple strategies
and are listed more than once to show how they address each one. Metrics
such as cost, time frame, and technical feasibility, were used to evaluate the

Page 76

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

strategies for potential as projects. The Proposed and Featured Projects
include:


Capital projects, such as perimeter structural defenses for coastal
protection and resilient construction;



Feasibility, planning studies, and land use regulations;



Policies and programs that increase awareness and information;



Market-based methods such as accruing points for the Community
Rating System (CRS) (National Flood Insurance [NFIP]) to reduce
flood insurance premiums; and



Conservation, restoration, and enhancement of natural protective
features at a local and regional level.

Other actions not selected as a Proposed Project, Featured Project, or an
Additional Resiliency Recommendation, because they were not formulated as
project at this time, in the development of the NYRCR Plan, are listed in this
section as “Ongoing and Future Actions.” These are important measures and
some are currently being addressed by the City, while others are logical
follow-up items to the projects outlined in the NYRCR Plan.
As projects are implemented, the protected assets and systems will still have
some residual risk, which is typical of resiliency projects. Unless an asset is
demolished and not replaced, it will be at some level of risk, particularly on a
barrier island. The goal of the project is to lower the risk to an acceptable
level in a cost-effective manner. More detail on how the Proposed and
Featured Projects reduce risk is provided in Section IV. The costs are
estimated based on the evolving nature of project development.

Detailed information on Long Beach’s Proposed and Featured Projects,
including projects with cost-benefit analyses, is provided in Section IV.
Proposed Projects are those projects proposed for funding through a
community’s allocation of Community Development Block Grant Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding (up to $25 million for Long Beach).
Featured Projects are innovative projects for which an initial study or discrete
first phase of the project is proposed for CDBG-DR funding or other identified
funding and regulatory reforms and other programs that do not involve
capital expenditures.
Additional details on Proposed and Featured Projects are listed in the tables
following each strategy. The regional significance of projects is noted in
these tables. Regional significance can mean that a Proposed or Featured
Project protects an asset that is used by several communities (e.g., reduce
flooding on an established evacuation route) or it is the community’s part in
a more global project that spans several communities (e.g., a community
restores the dunes on its part of a barrier island). In addition, some Long
Beach departments, including the Fire Department, protect other
communities on the barrier island such as the Atlantic and East Atlantic
Beach fire districts.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations are resiliency projects and actions
the Committee would like to highlight and are not categorized as Proposed
or Featured Projects. These projects are also listed in Section V.

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Page 77

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy #1 – Employ appropriate techniques to mitigate ocean and
bay storm surge and stormwater flooding to protect Long Beach’s
infrastructure, people, and assets while positioning for resilient
redevelopment.
The damage resulting from Superstorm Sandy prompted the Committee, in
close connection with the City of Long Beach, to evaluate the infrastructure
in the City to determine the greatest needs for future storm protection. As
described earlier in the NYRCR Plan, the Committee followed the progress of
the extensive USACE project work on the oceanfront, and focused on two
other vulnerable areas: the bayfront and the stormwater system. The
Committee looked for infrastructure options that would provide a beneficial
level of protection in a cost-effective manner. The Long Beach Infrastructure
reconstruction and resiliency goals to support Strategy #1 are as follows:


Continue bulkheading at a uniform height along the entire north
shore to provide coastal storm protection;



Expand the capacity of the stormwater management system,
including the use of green infrastructure, to reduce stormwater
flooding to safeguard major access routes and established
evacuation routes;



Incorporate resiliency and sustainability into any proposed future
infrastructure rebuilding and modification (also supports Strategy
#3);



Target strategic areas and programs to update infrastructure,
redevelop in a resilient and sustainable manner, and increase
economic growth (also supports Strategy #3);



Implement the Complete Streets Program;



Make system-wide improvements to protect critical facilities and
major utilities from the flooding and high winds of coastal storms;
and



Maximize the dune and/or ocean barrier system along the entire
Long Beach oceanfront.

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Projects
Due to the importance of protecting enhancing the infrastructure to serve
the whole community of Long Beach, the Committee and Consultant Team
met with the City of Long Beach several times during the planning process to
get updates on infrastructure projects and infrastructure needs. The
Proposed Projects selected by the Committee to support Strategy #1 include
the following:
Bulkheading – North Shore, a critical project because Superstorm Sandy
devastated the north shore of Long Beach. The storm showed the
inadequacy of the existing bulkheads to protect from major storms as there
are many areas where the bulkheads are at inconsistent heights or nonexistent. This project will provide phased installation of new bulkheads and
replacement and improvement to existing bulkheads to an overall uniform
height for storm protection on the north shore as required. The overall goal
is a complete and uniform bulkhead running the entire length of the north
shore. Phasing of the project is to be developed for critical areas as
established by August 2013 Conditions Evaluation of Bulkheads & Outfall
Structures in the City of Long Beach, New York study. This study was an
exhaustive and detailed analysis of the entire bulkheading system and
identifies areas that are inadequate. This project will connect north shore
bulkheads with other funded and proposed bulkheading projects to form a
continuous perimeter shoreline defense in Long Beach. The project includes
a study to determine whether canal gates are feasible; if canal gates are
feasible, the amount of bulkheading required for protection would likely be
reduced.
A Featured Project that complements the Bulkheading of the North Shore is
the North Shore Protection of Critical Utilities project which includes
bulkheading along an unprotected part of the shoreline and flood barriers
around the utilities. The storm surge of Superstorm Sandy severely damaged
most major utilities, most of which are on the north shore along an
unprotected shoreline. This project is to provide coordination with the
approved project announced by Governor Cuomo in November 2013 to
develop bulkheading from National Boulevard to the Long Beach Bridge and
also includes flood barriers (e.g., a deployable barrier or Dutch dams) around
major utilities. This project is out for bid as of March 2014, with work slated
to start later in 2014.

Page 78

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Another complementary Featured Project is the Canal Gates in the East
End, which will assess and provide phased installation of moveable canal
gates to mitigate flooding of the canal area. This project would connect with
the current and proposed bulkheading projects.

Force Main Project. This project is a large-scale second-phase stormwater
system improvement that includes a major stormwater conveyance
component, the force main that will require a major investment. See Table
III-1 for project details.
To complement these stormwater efforts, the Committee also selected two
projects that combine infrastructure improvements, including stormwater
drainage improvements, while also helping to meet economic development
goals. The projects, Park Avenue/Beech Street Streetscape Drainage
Study and Infrastructure Improvements, a Proposed Project, and the
Park Avenue Complete Streets Phase 2, a Featured Project. Both Park
Avenue and Beech Street are established evacuation routes and reducing
stormwater will help make these important routes more accessible and
passable. This Proposed Project also includes solar-powered lighting to
respond to power outage issues after Sandy, which created an unsafe
environment with no street lighting.

The Canals neighborhood in the East End

Source: The LiRo Group

To address the serious and repetitive stormwater flooding issue that is part
of Strategy #1, the Committee identified a Proposed Project entitled
Drainage Improvements. Superstorm Sandy caused serious flooding to
major access streets and hindered movement of emergency vehicles. This
project will address areas that are flooded with stormwater at least 10 times
a year, which can be critical when flooding before a major storm like Sandy
blocks access to evacuation routes. The first phase of this project will
improve stormwater drainage in these areas that tie to evacuation routes.
The second phase involves installing backflow prevention valves on
stormwater outfall pipes and installing centrifugal separation chambers in
strategic locations to improve water quality. The backflow prevention valves
will help reduce the flooding of housing units from tidal water entering the
stormwater drainage system.
A second phase of the effort to improve the stormwater system is the
Featured Project entitled Stormwater Project Phase 2/Stormwater

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

A Proposed Project that will help improve community services is the Critical
Facility Resiliency project. This project will protect critical facilities that are
needed to provide essential services before, during, and after a disaster. The
Community also had no pre-established facilities before Superstorm Sandy
that could also serve as a post-evacuation staging center to receive and
distribute important supplies and equipment post-disaster. All postSuperstorm Sandy actions were ad hoc. This project includes the retrofit of
two facilities (the Ice Arena and Recreation Center) to serve as a postdisaster/post-evacuation staging center.
Due to the fact that Superstorm Sandy destroyed pumps for both water
supply and sewage removal, the Committee looked at protection measures
for these vital components of the water supply and sewage systems. Salt
water destroyed the pumps’ electrical components and water seals,
rendering the pumps inoperable. The Protection of Wells and Sewer
Pump/Lift Stations is a Proposed Project to study two methods of
protection of these critical systems.
Long Beach is a flat barrier island that has no significant natural high ground.
Therefore, Superstorm Sandy rendered emergency response vehicles and
apparatus unusable because there was no nearby location where these
vehicles could be relocated above flood levels. To address this issue, the
Committee identified a Proposed Project, Parking Garage for Emergency

Page 79

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Vehicles, which involves constructing a parking garage to store emergency
response vehicles and equipment at a second story level for major storm
use. The garage can also be used as emergency distribution center; three
locations will be considered. Long Beach also has a shortage of parking in its
key commercial areas; the garage can help provide additional parking to help
bring in more customers to these areas. It will also reduce overflow into
neighborhoods.
Three Additional Resiliency Recommendations have been included for
Strategy #1 because all involve technology or an approach that needs
additional study and/or require a significant dollar investment for which
resources are not yet secured. The first one helps address the power
outages after Superstorm Sandy, which created an unsafe environment for
residents, City officials, and emergency responders. The Microgrid for
Select Community Assets is a project that involves using localized power
generation to maintain power to specific assets if the utility grid becomes deenergized in a future storm event.



Develop a public awareness campaign for the City’s current
bulkheading loan program for private property owners.



Coordinate with the USACE to maximize the dune and/or ocean
barrier system along the entire Long Beach oceanfront, including the
Boardwalk.



Continue implementing green infrastructure, such as bioswales in
road medians, porous paving in parking areas, and rain gardens, to
assist with stormwater management.



Coordinate with the National Grid and LIPA/PSEG to secure backup
power sources and protect transmission and distribution facilities
that are still vulnerable. In addition, work with LIPA/PSEG to install
smart meters on homes and businesses to better monitor energy
usage and to build a smart grid.

As described earlier, storm surge that enters the back bay of the Long Beach
Barrier Island causes tremendous damage, as experienced in Superstorm
Sandy. The second Additional Resiliency Recommendation is the Bayside
Flood Gates Feasibility Analysis, which involves conducting a Flood Gates
Feasibility Analysis at existing transportation structures, such as bridges. The
third Additional Resiliency Recommendation addresses the issue that Long
Beach has an outdated Water Pollution Control Plant for treating sewage that
is in a vulnerable area. The outfall of this Plant is in Reynolds Channel. The
project, the Transfer of Sewage Treatment to Bay Park STP, would
transfer sewage treatment to the recently modified Bay Park STP. This
project would benefit multiple communities with frontage on the bay.
Table III-1 at the end of this subsection provides additional detail on the
NYRCR Long Beach’s Proposed and Featured Projects.

Well at Lafayette Blvd and W. Bay Drive

Source: The LiRo Group

Ongoing and future actions


Continue implementing the Complete Streets program and, where
feasible, connect to neighboring communities.



Coordinate with NYRCR Housing Recovery Program to determine
how to package these programs to address as much of the
bulkheading needs as possible.

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies



Expand green energy generation ideas where feasible. The City has
a program to fast track solar permitting and adopted the “Solar
Energy System Fast Track Permit Application.” This effort will be
complemented by the Design Guidelines component of the
OEM/LDRM Proposed Project.

Page 80

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Explore regional coordination with barrier island communities and
communities across Reynolds Channel for a shoreline improvement
district to help deal with common issues, such as the need for
bulkheading, emergency services, microgrids, and potential
alternative power generation.



Coordinate with LIRR to ensure that train service remains
operational. Protect the Long Beach Station and its track leading up
to Long Beach. In October 2013, the State of New York announced
that contracts had been awarded to repair and elevate two of the
three damaged substations along the LIRR’s Long Beach Branch.

Table III-1: Strategy #1 Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy:


Employ appropriate techniques to mitigate ocean and bay storm surge and stormwater flooding to protect Long Beach’s
infrastructure, people, and assets while positioning for resilient redevelopment.

Project Name
Bulkheading – North Shore

Short Project Description
This project will provide phased installation, replacement, and
improvement to existing bulkheads along the north shore as
required for storm protection. The phased approach will be based
on the extensive analysis from the City’s August 2013 Conditions

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

$12,450,000

Proposed Project

Y

$8,350,000

Proposed Project

Y

Evaluation of Bulkheads & Outfall Structures in the City of Long
Beach, New York. This project includes all of the proposed

bulkheading from this report. The project would include a
feasibility study for both potential bulkheading locations and the
use of canal gates (which would likely reduce the need for
bulkheading in the Canals neighborhood).
Drainage Improvements

The first phase of the project includes a comprehensive
stormwater study followed by improvements to stormwater
drainage in the areas that tie to evacuation routes. These areas
include: 1) W. Park Ave. to Virginia Ave. and Arizona Ave.; 2) E.
Chester St. from Neptune Blvd. to Curley St.; 3) National Blvd.
from W. Penn St. to W. Olive St.; 4) E. Bay Dr. from Neptune Blvd.
to Lincoln Blvd.; and 5) E. Pine St. from Park Pl. to Long Beach
Blvd. The second phase involves installing backflow prevention
devices (city needs > 50) on stormwater outfall pipes and installing
debris separation chambers in appropriate locations to improve
water quality.

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Page 81

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-1: Strategy #1 Proposed and Featured Projects (Continued)
Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Critical Facility Resiliency

This project includes the feasibility study and implementation of
flood and wind protection to emergency responder facilities. It
includes elevation of electrical systems, backup generators, and
critical IT equipment so they will function throughout a severe
storm, where needed, at the Central Police/Fire Station as well as
the West End and East End Fire Stations. The project also includes
providing wind protection for the roofs and walls of these critical
buildings. It includes adding protective panels at the doorways of
emergency responder facilities, as well as sealing the lower
building walls to prevent water infiltration, and elevation of
firehouse operations. The project includes creating a resilient OEM
operations center in City Hall. The project also includes protection
of the Recreation Center and the Ice Arena, which would serve as
a post-disaster/post-evacuation staging center after a major storm
event.

$2,387,000

Proposed Project

Y

Park Avenue/Beech Street
Streetscape Drainage Study and
Infrastructure Improvements

This project involves making stormwater retention and
management improvements by installing retention structures, new
drains, and piping; green infrastructure; introducing pervious
landscaping; and increasing the amount of unpaved surfaces. Also
included are bike, pedestrian, and streetscape improvements;
emergency signage; and solar-powered lighting for emergency
resiliency. The project involves two major streets that are the
primary evacuation routes into and out of the community.

$10,652,500

Proposed Project

Y

Parking Garage for Emergency
Vehicles

This project involves constructing a parking garage to store
emergency response vehicles and equipment at a second story
level for major storm use. The garage will also serve as an
emergency distribution center. One potential location is directly
behind City Hall. This location is next to the primary police, fire,
and OEM facilities. Other potential locations are a garage in the
West End of the City or at the Waldbaum’s Shopping Center. The
exact location is to be decided.

$14,705,000

Proposed Project

N

Protection of Wells and Sewer
Pump/Lift Stations

This project will study two methods of protection for these critical
systems. The first is to construct flood barriers around the pump
stations. The second is to raise the pumps and electrical systems
above the flood height. There are four pump stations and two

$2,480,000

Proposed Project

Y

Project Name

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Page 82

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-1: Strategy #1 Proposed and Featured Projects (Continued)
Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

wells. Both methods add backup generators elevated above the
storm level.
Stormwater Project Phase
2/Stormwater Force Main Project

As a continuation of the stormwater project, this project will
improve stormwater drainage across the City through the following
methods: converting areas served by sand gutters to a positive
drainage system, installing pressurized pipes (force main),
replacing inadequate and undersized drainage inlet structures,
installing control structures such as swirl separators to prevent
floatable materials from entering the drainage system, and
increasing stormwater storage through subsurface storage
chambers and bio-retention zones/rain gardens.

$114,830,000

Featured Project

Y

Canal Gates in the East End

Assess and provide phased installation of moveable canal gates to
mitigate flooding of the canal area. This project would connect
with current and proposed bulkheading projects.

$26,400,000

Featured Project

Y

Park Avenue Complete Streets
Phase 2

This project involves the redevelopment of Kennedy Plaza in front
of City Hall to improve the City’s stormwater system by providing
large-scale underground stormwater storage chambers as well as
strategically located green infrastructure, solar lighting for
emergencies, and reconfigured use of the space. The project
would augment the efforts of the Park Avenue Streetscape
Drainage Study and Infrastructure Improvements by helping to
control stormwater in the Park Avenue evacuation route corridor.

$43,740,000

Featured Project

Y

North shore Protection of Critical
Utilities – Bulkheading and Flood
Barriers

Provide coordination with the project announced by Governor
Cuomo in November 2013 to develop bulkheading from National
Boulevard to the Long Beach Bridge. Includes flood barriers (e.g.,
Dutch dams) around major utilities. This project is out for bid as of
March 2014 with work starting later in 2014.

$12,900,000

Featured Project

Y

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Page 83

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy #2 – Protect critical Long Beach health and social services
assets and increase the capacity to provide needed emergency and
community services before, during, and after disasters.

emergency responder facilities (police and fire stations) so they can be
operable after a storm event. This project is described in greater detail in
Strategy #1.

All of Long Beach was flooded after Superstorm Sandy and providers of basic
emergency services were operating with limited functionality due to
damaged facilities and equipment. While the emergency responders
performed admirably, they were functioning in extremely difficult conditions.
In addition, community centers and other facilities were damaged and
unable to function, some for several months, creating additional stress on
the Community. Finally, vulnerable populations were displaced from public
and senior housing, generally about 4 weeks and for some, up to 7 months.
The Committee recognized the need to address these issues with Strategy
#2. Specific goals to support this Strategy include:

A second important Proposed Project is the Protection of Community
Centers. The residents of Long Beach need a protected early recovery
center, which did not exist after Superstorm Sandy, where they can gather
for mutual support and to receive important information. These centers
perform a distinct function from the post-disaster staging centers in the
Critical Facility Resiliency project and would be set up to provide basic
support services including recovery information dissemination and counseling
during the early stages of recovery. While the facilities are not meant to be
fully protected from a storm and therefore will not serve as a shelter, they
are needed to be protected to avoid massive damages so they are available
to serve the Community following a disaster. After Sandy, residents of other
nearby communities gravitated toward community centers such as libraries
for mutual support.



Protect facilities with critical government services, including
emergency responders, to maintain continuity of operations after
major storms;



Repurpose public buildings to create community assistance centers
during and after major storms;



Increase the capacity of the City and local organizations to provide
needed services to the residents of Long Beach, including vulnerable
populations, before, during, and after disasters (supports Strategy
#4);



Enhance the resiliency of key social service facilities and medical and
health care centers; and



Restore and protect schools to allow them to be operable quickly
after storms.

Projects
Protecting the emergency responders and other community facilities was a
priority of the Committee and it developed into several projects to achieve
Strategy #2. First, emergency responder facilities are vitally important as
they protect the public safety of the whole Community and are particularly
needed after a disaster when secondary impacts such as fires break out and
looting can occur. The Committee identified the Critical Facility Resiliency
as a Proposed Project and it involves increasing the resiliency of the

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

The final two Proposed Projects that help fulfill Strategy #2 are the
Protection of Public Housing Units and the Protection of Senior
Housing Units, which will help protect the facilities of vulnerable
populations during and after a disaster. Superstorm Sandy displaced
residents from public housing units for upwards of 7 months, forcing them
into temporary housing (see Section II for locations of the public and senior
housing units). Senior citizens of Long Beach are subject to additional stress
when evacuating in a storm, which occurred during Superstorm Sandy,
because of mobility issues and medical requirements. Both residents of
public and senior housing generally cannot afford to remain away from their
homes for any length of time. These two projects will enhance protection to
two public housing and four senior housing units respectively to allow
residents to return to the housing units more quickly after a storm
evacuation and initial recovery.
Table III-2 at the end of this subsection provides additional detail on the
NYRCR Long Beach’s Proposed and Featured Projects.

Ongoing and future actions


Relocate emergency generators to upper floors, and harden where
necessary, in key facilities, such as schools, healthcare facilities, and

Page 84

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

public buildings, to maintain power and functionality during future
hazard events.


Develop Memoranda of Understanding with food assistance groups
(e.g., Island Harvest, Long Island Cares, Meals on Wheels) to
arrange assistance for the elderly when the power is out. This action
will be part of the OEM project and will be coordinated with Nassau
County OEM.
Develop response teams to check on and assist (vulnerable)
populations on a continuous basis until power is restored. This action
will be part of the OEM project.

MLK Center

Source: The LiRo Group

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Page 85

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-2: Strategy #2 Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy:


Protect critical Long Beach health and social services assets and increase the capacity to provide needed emergency and
community services before, during, and after disasters.

Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Critical Facility
Resiliency

This project includes the feasibility study and implementation of flood and wind
protection to emergency responder facilities. It includes elevation of electrical
systems, backup generators, and critical IT equipment so they will function
throughout a severe storm, where needed, at the Central Police/Fire Station as
well as the West End and East End Fire Stations. The project also includes
providing wind protection for the roofs and walls of these critical buildings. It
includes adding protective panels at the doorways of emergency responder
facilities, as well as sealing the lower building walls to prevent water infiltration,
and elevation of firehouse operations. The project includes creating a resilient
OEM operations center in City Hall. The project also includes protection of the
Recreation Center and the Ice Arena, which would serve as a post-disaster/postevacuation staging center after a major storm event.

$2,387,000

Proposed Project

Y

Protection of
Community Centers

This project involves improving the resiliency of existing community centers to
be used in an emergency. The project involves providing flood protection for the
buildings, raising existing electrical systems, and installing new electrical
generation equipment to have the centers up and running soon after a storm.
The community centers include the Main Library and the Martin Luther King Jr.
Center. The centers would also serve as community assistance centers to assist
residents with basic needs once the storm has passed and residents return to
Long Beach.

$1,335,000

Proposed Project

N

Protection of Public
Housing Units

This project will enhance protection of vulnerable populations through the
retrofit of two public housing units to allow residents to return to the units as
soon as possible after a storm evacuation. The two public housing units are the
Channel Park Homes and Pine Town Homes.

$2,965,000

Proposed Project

N

Protection of Senior
Housing Units

This project will enhance protection of vulnerable populations through the
retrofit of public senior housing units, including the Sol Scher Apartments,
Michael Valente Apartments, Sonny Duckman Apartments, and Morton Cohen
Apartments.

$1,925,000

Proposed Project

N

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Page 86

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy #3 – Implement measures to make Long Beach economic
generators more resilient, while also facilitating enhancement of
key commercial areas and the redevelopment of underutilized areas
to stimulate economic growth.
Superstorm Sandy devastated the City’s business community and damaged
many economic assets. The City of Long Beach made tremendous progress
in getting one of its primary assets, the Boardwalk, rebuilt in time in 2013
before the typically busy summer season. The Committee recognized that
there are additional efforts needed to protect the commercial areas in the
City as well as opportunities to grow the economy so the Community is less
dependent on summer guests. Several goals were identified to help fulfill the
strategy of protecting existing economic generators, planning for better use
of underutilized areas, and addressing resiliency and infrastructure
improvements together with economic activities:

Strategy #1, also includes streetscape improvements for pedestrian and bike
traffic to enhance the commercial appeal of these two corridors.
As a second phase to the above project, the Park Avenue Complete
Streets Phase 2 is a Featured Project that builds on the first phase by
creating additional stormwater storage areas to keep stormwater flooding off
Park Avenue. The project includes the reconstruction of Kennedy Plaza, to
include large-scale underground stormwater storage chambers and
strategically located green infrastructure, solar lighting, and reconfigured use
of the space. This project will enhance the City’s primary public space,
enhancing its appeal to residents and guests as well as the attendees at the
special events held at Kennedy Plaza.



Protect existing businesses and expand their economic opportunities;



Protect and then redevelop underutilized areas to stimulate
economic growth (also supports Strategy #1);



Incorporate resiliency and sustainability into economic growth
strategies and future planned developments (also supports Strategy
#1);

The Bayfront Revitalization Plan is a Featured Project that includes an
examination of the potential future use of the north shore utility area, which
is underutilized and holds great economic potential. The plan will include a
robust community visioning and public input process. Part of this effort will
be addressing the brownfield site in the north shore utility area. The City of
Long Beach was already awarded a Phase I study by NYS, and the City will
apply for a Phase II study to investigate the old incinerator plant on the
north shore. The Phase II study, entitled Brownfield Remediation
Studies for the NYRCR Plan, is included as an Additional Resiliency
Recommendation.



Expand Long Beach’s economy by providing additional guest
opportunities; and

Table III-3 at the end of this subsection provides additional detail on the
NYRCR Long Beach’s Proposed and Featured Projects.



Leverage economic investments to enhance resiliency and
sustainability.

Ongoing and future actions

Projects
The Committee considered project ideas that could accomplish multiple
objectives including redesigning infrastructure and amenities near existing
commercial areas to make them more resilient and create wider economic
appeal. A Proposed Project for this strategy, the Park Avenue/Beech
Street Streetscape Drainage Study and Infrastructure
Improvements, is expected to improve stormwater drainage in the busy
Park Avenue and Beech Street commercial corridors where frequent flooding
can block access to these areas. This project, described in more detail in

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies



Establish a local green building program with zoning and tax
incentives.



Maximize use of the area around the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR)
station/Waldbaum’s Shopping Center for transit-oriented
development (TOD). Conduct a feasibility study of the downtown
area to consider TOD.



Expand guest marketing by increasing the number of events (e.g.,
triathlon, beach events) and festivals held in the City and appealing
to a wide range of guests, including surfers, cyclists, and runners.

Page 87

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Expand retail and food concessions to enhance the Boardwalk. The
second part of the Boardwalk Visioning process will address future
enhancements of the Boardwalk, including examining the
appropriate type and amount of retail and food concessions.



Encourage appropriate development along the Boardwalk, including
the privately owned Foundation Block, the Hebrew Academy if it is
put up for sale, and the Superblock. As of February 2014, the City
zoning board approved an application for the Superblock to build two
15-story buildings with 522 one- and two-bedroom apartments. The
application also includes 11,000 square feet of retail space along the
Boardwalk and a 6,000-square-foot promenade to integrate public
space into the project.



Enhance gateways to Long Beach and install more public art on
commercial streets.



Encourage and assist small businesses and non-profits to obtain
financial assistance, develop business continuity plans, and rebuild
customer bases.



Install a fiber-optic network to develop maximum bandwidth for a
community-wide wireless network and encourage the growth of
Internet-based businesses.



Leverage Long Beach’s setting and proximity to New York City to
attract young technical entrepreneurs.



Identify workforce needs and create job training, including training
for green business opportunities, entrepreneur training, and job
matchmaking programs to fill job needs.

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

W. Beech Street

Source: Sustainable Long Island

Page 88

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-3: Strategy #3 Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy:


Implement measures to make Long Beach economic generators more resilient, while also facilitating enhancement of key
commercial areas and the redevelopment of underutilized areas to stimulate economic growth.
Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Park Avenue/Beech Street
Streetscape Drainage Study and
Infrastructure Improvements

This project involves making stormwater retention and management
improvements; bike, pedestrian, and streetscape improvements;
emergency signage; and solar-powered lighting for emergency
resiliency. Investment in these areas will assist with economic
development. This project adopts Complete Streets principles. See
project description in Table III-1 for more details.

$10,652,500

Proposed Project

Y

Park Avenue Complete Streets
Phase 2

This project involves the redevelopment of Kennedy Plaza in front of
City Hall to improve the City’s stormwater system. The redesign of
Kennedy Plaza would also remake the area into a highly aesthetic,
multi-purpose public space, respecting and honoring the memorials,
with the flexibility to host many types of public activities from small
gatherings to larger public events. See project description in Table
III-1 for more details.

$43,740,000

Featured Project

Y

Bayfront Revitalization Plan

Prepare a plan that examines opportunities to make bayfront critical
infrastructure more resilient and potential options to consolidate
industrial uses on the north shore. The plan will provide a blueprint
to lead to resilient redevelopment to unite this area with the rest of
the bayfront corridor and center of the City. This will include
brownfield remediation, connections to downtown and ocean,
housing options, and an economic opportunity feasibility study. The
plan will include a robust visioning and public input process.

$300,000

Featured Project

Y

Project Name

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Page 89

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy #4 – Increase Long Beach’s capacity to facilitate and
foster actions that lead to greater resiliency, emergency
preparedness, and sustainability.
In order to make Long Beach more resilient and to redevelop in a smarter,
stronger, and safer way, the Committee recognized that additional resources
would be needed to assist in this effort. Continuous planning and action will
be necessary for Long Beach to develop a multi-disciplinary disaster recovery
approach to facilitate an effective recovery, coordinate with other disaster
recovery entities, and include all residents affected by the storm.
The City of Long Beach has accomplished a great deal since Superstorm
Sandy made landfall and is a key organization for implementing additional
efforts going forward. The Committee also recognized the need for building
partnerships with other organizations to expand capacity. The following goals
support this strategy:


Identify and implement greater resiliency and sustainability options
into all actions;



Increase local emergency management preparedness response and
mitigation capability including pre-disaster planning for vulnerable
populations;



Increase community preparedness by developing community-based
emergency response and communication strategies;



Identify ways to offset the increasing cost of flood insurance
including additional efforts in the CRS program;



Update and enact planning documents and regulations to address
post-Sandy conditions, climate adaptation, resiliency strategies,
sustainability, and energy efficiency; and



Educate residents about the NFIP, the CRS Program, and home
mitigation techniques.

Projects
The Committee identified several projects that will help fulfill Strategy #4. To
increase the City’s capacity to better plan and prepare for future events, it
has identified establishing an Office of Emergency Management as a
Proposed Project. This project, entitled Establish Office of Emergency

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Management (OEM) through the Hire of Local Disaster Recovery
Manager (LDRM), has several components. Long Beach needs a full-time
LDRM to build on the lessons learned from Superstorm Sandy. The LDRM
would continue disaster planning efforts to help enhance response and
recovery from future storms. Lessons learned from Superstorm Sandy
include a need for better emergency response resources, such as services to
aid socially vulnerable populations during a disaster, pre-disaster agreements
with vendors such as cellular service networks to provide post-disaster
services, and design guidelines to educate homeowners, including Spanishspeaking populations, on resiliency techniques. An LDRM would better
position Long Beach to receive future grants, including local Emergency
Management Performance Grants. Emergency office setup and equipment
that is program eligible are needed for better functioning in an emergency.
A second project, the Bayfront Revitalization Plan, is a Featured Project
initially described in Strategy #3, is also included under Strategy #4 because
of the importance of continued attention to the north shore area that
includes many of the City’s critical facilities including utilities. This area is
both highly vulnerable and holds promise for future redevelopment. This
community plan, which will include a robust visioning and public input
process, will build on the Local Waterfront Revitalization Plan (LWRP) and
Comprehensive Plan update processes of the City’s Resilience-Planning
Initiative.
Almost all of Long Beach is within a Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). Owners with property in the SFHA
and a federally backed mortgage must purchase flood insurance. The costs
of flood insurance for some homeowners will increase due to provisions of
the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2012, even with recent
proposed changes to the Act in March 2014. The City already participates in
the Community Rating System (CRS) Program, which provides a flood
insurance discount for approved flood reduction activities. This project, CRS
Evaluation, involves analyzing the City’s participation in the CRS Program
with the goal of lowering flood insurance premiums for residents. In January
2014, the City announced that it had commissioned a firm to conduct a CRS
evaluation, and this project has been included as an Additional Resiliency
Recommendation to highlight its importance.
Table III-4 at the end of this subsection provides additional detail on the
NYRCR Long Beach’s Proposed and Featured Projects.

Page 90

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Ongoing and future actions


Increase residents’ household readiness (e.g., evacuation plan,
meeting point, go kits). This action could be added to the OEM
project.



Promote sign-up for the reverse-911 system and Long Beach
Response, an always available emergency communications service,
and promote quarterly tests of the system. This action could be
added to the OEM project.



Build on existing resident emergency teams, such as the City’s
Neighborhood Emergency Team (NET), to provide additional capacity
to address emergencies. Connect NET with other similar
neighborhood response teams and with the Nassau County
Community Emergency Response Team. This action could be added
to the OEM project.



Update the City’s Comprehensive Plan, which is a component of the
City of Long Beach’s Resilience-Planning Initiative effort. In
December 2013, the City announced that it had received funding
from the State to update the Comprehensive Plan.



Update the LWRP, another component of the Resilience-Planning
Initiative effort. The City also announced in December 2013 that it
had received funding to update the LWRP.



Prepare a Low Impact Development (LID) plan. As of February 2014,
the City is working with New York University to prepare an LID plan.



Continue revising the building code to make progress in flood
mitigation and energy efficiency.



Continue revising the zoning code to align land-use decisions with
ongoing planning initiatives.

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

City of Long Beach Public Library

Source: The LiRo Group



Prepare intergovernmental cooperative agreements with surrounding
communities on the barrier island to coordinate disaster responses.
This action could be added to the OEM project and should be
coordinated with Nassau County OEM.



Evaluate the feasibility of a regional emergency radio broadcast or
crowdsourcing system to facilitate communication with residents
when telecommunications and traditional media outlets are
unavailable. This action could be added to the OEM project.

Page 91

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-4: Strategy #4 Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy:


Increase Long Beach’s capacity to facilitate and foster actions that lead to greater resiliency, emergency preparedness, and
sustainability.

Project Name

Short Project Description

Office of Emergency Management
(OEM) through Hire of Local
Disaster Recovery Manager
(LDRM)

Establish office in City Hall including the hiring of a full time LDRM
to lead disaster planning, disseminate upcoming storm actions, and
coordinate emergency operations for larger hazard events such as
floods. The LDRM would coordinate with Nassau County OEM, the
State, and regional centers. The LDRM position would be funded
for 2 years and then the City would seek funds for its continuance.
The LDRM would be responsible for setting up post-disaster
agreements with vendors to provide needed services, helping to
establish a special needs registration, and setting up agreements
with non-profit organizations to provide services to vulnerable
populations before, during, and after disasters. Part of this project
includes the creation of a design guidelines document for elevation
and sustainability in both English and Spanish. The project will
include office setup and any support equipment that is program
eligible.

Bayfront Revitalization Plan

This project includes examination of consolidating industrial uses
on the north shore and to unite it with the rest of the bayfront
corridor and center of the City to reach its economic potential.
Additional project detail is found in Table III-3.

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Estimated
Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional
Project (Y/N)

$1,083,000

Proposed Project

Y

$300,000

Featured Project

Y

Page 92

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy #5 – Encourage and facilitate housing resiliency and
sustainability measures while striving to maintain the character of
Long Beach.
As described earlier, Long Beach was completely inundated by Superstorm
Sandy and almost every resident of Long Beach experienced damage to their
home. The storm displaced many residents for months at a time and some
have still not returned. Most of the homes are in FEMA SFHAs and subject to
future risk from flooding. It is vital to manage long-term risk for Long Beach
to protect its housing stock from flooding. In addition, providing
sustainability options for homes is an important goal of the City and it
complements the efforts to make homes more resilient. Goals that support
Strategy #5 are as follows:


Provide home elevation and floodproofing education and assistance
to residents in high-risk areas;



Protect and expand affordable housing options for Long Beach
residents;



Develop programs and partnerships to educate residents on
resiliency and sustainability options; and



Encourage residents to enact sustainable and energy efficient
practices.

Projects
While housing needs after Superstorm Sandy are primarily being addressed
by the NY Rising Housing Recovery Program, it was important for the
Committee to identify projects that supported residents while paying close
attention to housing for vulnerable populations. As described in the Strategy
#2 subsection, the Committee has identified two projects to protect the
housing for vulnerable populations through the Proposed Projects entitled
Protection of Public Housing Units and Protection of Senior Housing
Units. Funds for these projects have been sought from other programs but
the grants have not been approved.

low-interest loans available for residents who need to elevate their homes
but cannot self-fund it, or meet loan or grant requirements to participate in
other programs. As stated above, many homeowners were directly impacted
by Superstorm Sandy and need to elevate their homes.
The City has created a program to assist homeowners to implement
resiliency measures, including elevation, and has requested funding from
another grant source. This project, entitled the Residential Resilience
Project, is an Additional Resiliency Recommendation in this Plan 71.
Table III-5 at the end of this subsection provides additional detail on the
NYRCR Long Beach’s Proposed and Featured Projects.

Ongoing and future actions


Offer educational programs on retrofitting techniques for single- and
multi-family residential units that achieve both risk reduction and
energy techniques.



Develop a partnership with a university or college that can provide
technical resources to help homeowners conceive and implement
appropriate green techniques for homes (education expos,
workshops, and technical helpline).



Implement rain barrel and rain garden programs for residents.



Evaluate whether the existing housing stock is adequate to meet the
demand or if more options for rental and affordable housing are
needed.



Provide assistance to the Long Beach Housing Authority to identify
opportunities to add additional affordable housing.



Publicize model home designs and/or build a demonstration home
that features risk reduction and energy efficiency techniques.

To provide assistance for homeowners who have incurred significant financial
losses due to Superstorm Sandy and would have difficulty funding elevation,
the Committee developed the Revolving Loan Fund for Elevation, which
became a Featured Project for the NYRCR Plan. This project would make

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Page 93

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Seaview Terrace

Source: The LiRo Group

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Page 94

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-5: Strategy #5 Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy:


Encourage and facilitate housing resiliency and sustainability measures while striving to maintain the character of Long
Beach..
Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Protection of Public Housing Units

This project will enhance protection of two public housing units to
allow residents to return to the units as soon as possible after a
storm evacuation. The two public housing units are the Channel
Park Homes and Pine Town Homes. Coordinate with other grant
sources.

$2,965,000

Proposed Project

N

Protection of Senior Housing Units

This project will provide flood protection to public senior housing
units, including the Sol Scher Apartments, Michael Valente
Apartments, Sonny Duckman Apartments, and Morton Cohen
Apartments. Coordinate with other grant sources.

$1,925,000

Proposed Project

N

Revolving Loan Fund for Elevation

This program would make low interest loans available for
residents who need to elevate their homes and would be
administered by an appropriate agency.

$5,000,000

Featured Project

N

Project Name

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Page 95

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy #6 – Restore and enhance natural resources for both
resiliency and recreation purposes while also protecting important
cultural resources.

this subsection provides additional detail on the NYRCR Long Beach’s
Proposed and Featured Projects.

Located on a barrier island, Long Beach had abundant natural resources, and
due to its long, rich history as an early seaside resort close to New York City
and diverse cultural heritage, it also has its share of cultural resources. The
Committee recognized the importance of protecting these resources and
developed the following goals to help fulfill Strategy #6:




Protect beaches and build up dunes;
Restore and protect water quality and marshes in Reynolds Channel
and the bay; and
Evaluate methods to protect important cultural resources including
historic landmarks and religious organizations.

Projects
As described previously in the NYRCR Plan and detailed in Section I, the
USACE Draft Hurricane Sandy Limited Reevaluation Report (HSLRR) and
Environmental Assessment (EA) is a significant effort to rebuild the Long
Beach dunes and better protect the beach with reconstructed groins. This
project is a tremendous commitment of funding that will help fulfill
Strategy #6. The Committee evaluated additional ways to protect natural
and cultural resources and evaluated projects that could meet multiple
objectives. The Committee identified projects that supported this strategy
including the Proposed Project discussed in the Strategy #1 subsection,
Drainage Improvements. This project also includes installation of debris
separation chambers in appropriate locations to improve water quality to
outfalls into Reynolds Channel. A second phase to this project, the
Stormwater Project Phase 2/Stormwater Force Main Project, is a
Featured Project and includes green infrastructure and treatment of
stormwater outfall in additional areas, among other measures. Both of these
projects are expected to help improve water quality in Reynolds Channel.
An Additional Resiliency Recommendation to help the iconic Boardwalk reach
its full potential is the Boardwalk Visioning Part 2, which will build on the
original Boardwalk visioning process and determine additional improvements
needed for the Boardwalk to maximize its potential while maintaining the
character desired by the Long Beach community. Table III-6 at the end of

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Dunes in the West End

Source: Planning4Places, LLC

Ongoing and future actions









Explore recreational opportunities, such as a bike trail along the
entire barrier island, kayaking in the back bay, and a water taxi.
Install dune fencing and eliminate dune cuts (as of March 2014, the
City had released a bid for this work).
Initiate a tree trimming program to reduce downed trees during
high-wind events and coordinate a tree restoration program. In
November 2013, the City announced the first phase of a multi-phase
project to replace trees on public property that are dying as a result
of Superstorm Sandy.
Work with the USACE to maintain and enhance the beach and
oceanfront dunes. Perform additional dune reconstruction in front of
the Boardwalk and rebuild groins (current USACE project).
Work with the USACE to develop a plan for resiliency on the
bayfront.
Coordinate with the Town of Hempstead and Nassau County on the
restoration of marshes and wetlands off Long Beach to protect water
quality and assist in the natural protection against storms.

Page 96

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-6: Strategy #6 Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy:


Restore and enhance natural resources for both resiliency and recreation purposes while also protecting important cultural
resources.
Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Proposed or
Featured Project

Regional Project
(Y/N)

Drainage Improvements

This drainage improvement project, described in greater detail in
Table III-1, is also included under Strategy #6 because it will
include installation of debris separation chambers in appropriate
locations to improve water quality for important natural resources
such as Reynolds Channel.

$8,350,000

Proposed Project

Y

Stormwater Project Phase
2/Stormwater Force Main Project

As a continuation of the stormwater project, this project will
improve stormwater drainage across the City through the
following methods: converting areas served by sand gutters to a
positive drainage system, installing pressurized pipes (force
main), replacing inadequate and undersized drainage inlet
structures, installing control structures such as swirl separators to
prevent floatable materials from entering the drainage system,
and increasing stormwater storage through subsurface storage
chambers and bio-retention zones/rain gardens.

$114,830,000

Featured Project

Y

Project Name

Section III: Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Page 97

Section IV:
Implementation – project
profiles
Photo: The Canals neighborhood in the East End

Source: The LiRo Group

Section IV:
Implementation – project profiles
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program has allocated to
the NYRCR Long Beach Community up to $25 million. The funding is
provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
program. While developing projects and actions for inclusion in the NYRCR
Plan, Planning Committees took into account cost estimates, cost-benefit
analyses, the effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations
and critical assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees
also considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be
eligible for CDBG-DR funding.
The projects set forth in the NYRCR Plan are divided into three categories.
The order in which the projects and actions are listed in the NYRCR Plan
does not necessarily indicate the Community’s prioritization of these projects
and actions. Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding through the
Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are projects
that the Planning Committee has identified as important resiliency
recommendations and has analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for
funding through the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations (see Section V) are projects that the Planning Committee
would like to highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects or
Featured Projects.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in the NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR
Community’s CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed
Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review, HUD
eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the
projects and actions found in the NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in the NYRCR Plan
does not guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for
CDBG‐DR funding or that it will be implemented.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

This section provides a complete project profile for each Proposed or
Featured Project identified by the NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee)
and community. The Proposed and Featured Projects were identified,
selected, and advanced as a response to the risks, needs, and opportunities
described in Section II of the Long Beach NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan to address its goals of protection, resiliency, and
revitalization. The selection and identification of the projects took into
account all public input and the City’s accomplishments post-Sandy. It bears
repeating that the Committee coordinated closely with the City and once it
knew that the risk from oceanfront was being addressed to the extent
possible by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) through an extensive
set of projects some of which were already complete in March 2014, a main
priority was to help reduce flooding from the north shore.
The Consultant Team communicated with City staff and obtained technical
materials to help assess and better define the potential projects to follow up
on discussions from the Committee Meetings. The State and the Consultant
team met with City of Long Beach Department of Public Works on February
11, 2014, to discuss specific projects including bulkheading, storm drainage,
and protection of critical facilities, wells and pump stations. A detailed report
entitled Conditions Evaluation of Bulkheads & Outfall Structures in the City of
Long Beach, New York, a copy of recent bid information for a requirements
contract for all bulkhead activities are examples of information provided by
the City to the Consultant Team for review. The Consultant Team also
evaluated several of the facilities and systems proposed for protection in the
field.
The Proposed and Featured Projects are some of the implementation
mechanisms for the Section III reconstruction and resiliency strategies.
These projects represent actions that are expected to be implemented in the
near future to build resiliency and fulfill other important community goals.
The Consultant Team coordinated with City officials to obtain important
information needed to identify, develop and assess potential project ideas.

Page 99

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The regional significance of projects is noted in the project profile. Regional
significance can mean that a Proposed or Featured Project protects an asset
that is used by several communities (e.g., reduce flooding on an established
evacuation route) or it is the community’s part in a more global project that
spans several communities (e.g., a community restores the dunes on its part
of a barrier island). As described earlier, some Long Beach departments, like
the Fire Department, protect other communities on the barrier island, such
as the Atlantic and East Atlantic Beach fire districts, and have regional
significance.
Initially, the projects were categorized with a basic project description,
Recovery Support Function, beneficiaries of the project (i.e., public/private,
local/regional) were identified, and basic cost categories provided. As part of
an initial feasibility and funding evaluation, various sources of funding for the
projects were explored. The Committee used the input from the Public
Engagement Events, including online surveys, to make decisions about which
projects to select as Proposed or Featured. The results of Long Beach’s
Public Engagement Events are documented in more detail in Section V, and
the overall results were generally consistent with the Committee’s selection
of projects.
In addition to providing a detailed description of each project, the profiles
include information on two important elements used by the Committee to
evaluate the value of each project: a cost-benefit analysis and a risk
reduction analysis. The benefits were presented with qualitative descriptions
that demonstrate how the projects assist the community in economic,
environmental, and health and social services terms. Before initiating the
projects, these two analytical elements of the project profiles must be
understood.

Cost-benefit analysis
A cost-benefit analysis (CBA) is a tool used to calculate and compare the
benefits and costs associated with a project. The CBA provides decisionmakers with a framework for comparing different projects (i.e., anticipated
cost of implementation against total expected benefits) and determining
whether the benefits of a particular project outweigh the costs. More
specifically, the value of the CBA is two-fold: (1) to inform the NYRCR

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Planning Committees as they develop projects for implementation; and (2) to
help municipalities prepare grant applications for funding.
Because NYRCR is a community-driven process, the CBA focuses on
identifying project costs and benefits that easily relate to the communities
that the NYRCR Planning Committees represent. Community and Committee
input, informed by a true understanding of local conditions, needs and
community values, plays a crucial role in the selection of projects that are
implemented. The risk reduction benefits are described in terms of how
much the Proposed or Featured Project would lower the vulnerability score.
The additional benefits of the projects are provided in descriptive qualitative
terms with relevant data, where available, that explain how these projects
bring additional value to the community.
The costs and benefits used to evaluate projects through the CBA are
explained further below. The costs are estimated based on the evolving
nature of project development.
Project costs
Project profiles include an estimated cost for implementing the project. This
cost estimate does not include overall life-cycle costs of the project (e.g.,
operations and maintenance costs). Factors contributing to overall life-cycle
costs are described in general terms. To achieve the project’s anticipated
useful life, regular maintenance is necessary. Project design costs generally
include architectural and engineering (A & E) components. The CBA cannot
forecast costs or benefits with complete certainty. It does provide the
community with a practical understanding of the potential estimated costs of
project implementation and the potential benefits accrued to the community
with the particular project in place.
The cost of implementing a project is just one aspect of the justification for
funding these Proposed Projects. Conversely, another important variable is
the future costs of not implementing these Proposed Projects. Not
implementing the projects has the potential to negatively impact the longterm viability of both the City and its neighboring South Shore communities.
Although these lost opportunity costs of not implementing the projects do
not always lend themselves to quantification, they are no less important to
the analysis and are, therefore, addressed qualitatively. These costs include:

Page 100

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Economic loss to residents and to local and regional employers as a
result of the inability to work;



Hindrance in the provision of life safety and emergency services
resulting in repeated inability to access vast areas of the community;
and



Extensive, repetitive damage to personal property (vehicles,
residences) and public infrastructure resulting from frequent
recurring flooding and future storm events.

analysis uses information from the risk assessment in Section II to determine
the risk of an asset before the project implementation. It then estimates how
the risk will be lowered by showing how much the Proposed or Featured
Project would lower the vulnerability score.
Table IV-1 is a key to the symbols on the top right on the first page of each
project profile which shows how projects address Recovery Support
Functions. Some projects address multiple support functions. Figure IV-1
shows the locations of Proposed and Featured Projects.
Table IV-1: Key to Symbols

Project benefits
The types of benefits considered in the CBA include:








Risk reduction: The extent to which a project reduces the risk of
damage to a community asset from a future storm event (discussed
further below under “Risk Reduction Analysis”). 72
Economic: The project’s potential to help minimize economic costs,
secure jobs and reduce the time it takes for the local economy to
rebound from a storm event and the net effect on local municipal
expenditures.73

Symbol

Recovery Support Function
Infrastructure
Natural and Cultural Resources
Health and Social Services

Health and social services: Qualitative information was provided
on the overall population benefits of improved access to health and
social service facilities, including public safety services and degree to
which essential health and social service facilities are able to provide
services to a community during a future storm event as a result of
the project.

Community Planning and Capacity Building

Environmental protection: Benefits include the protection of
crucial environmental assets or high-priority habitat, threatened and
endangered species, migration, or habitat connectivity; any cleanup
resulting from the action; and creation of open space or a new
recreational asset.

Housing

Economic

Risk reduction analysis
A risk reduction analysis estimates the extent to which Proposed and
Featured Projects will lower the flood risk to identified community critical
assets and population when the project is in place. The risk reduction

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 101

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure IV-1: Proposed and Featured Project Locations

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 102

Proposed
Bulkheading – North Shore

Long Beach
soil backfill loading, with tie-backs and deadman anchors, and water height
to storm level. The project will connect to other bulkheading projects. It
would increase the shoreline defense from coastal flooding in areas with low
elevations and would protect inland and shore properties, including private
residences, commercial businesses on Park Avenue and Beech Street, the
former Medical Center, and most City facilities.

Picture of existing bulkheading (left) and rendering of potential improvement to
bulkheading (right)

Source: URS

Description
Issue: Superstorm Sandy devastated the north shore of Long Beach with
storm surge passing over the shoreline and damaging almost all homes,
businesses and critical facilities inland. This part of the City has its lowest
elevations and is extremely susceptible to storm surge flooding. The storm
showed the inadequacy of the existing bulkheads, which are too low or nonexistent, to provide protection from major storms. The City’s coordination
with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) has resulted in extensive
work on the oceanfront leaving the north shore as the most vulnerable area.
If nothing is done to protect the north shore, flooding will likely increase due
to changes in flood risk caused by factors such as sea-level rise. The
Committee, the City and the public have all recognized that this is a crucial
component to the future resiliency of Long Beach.
This project would provide incremental, phased installation of new, and
replacement and improvement (additional height) of existing substandard
bulkheads on the north shore to a uniform height as required to protect the
Community against coastal surge. Bulkheading would be designed to handle

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

The locations for the project will be identified through examination of the
City’s August 2013 bulkhead condition study, entitled Conditions Evaluation
of Bulkheads & Outfall Structures in the City of Long Beach, New York, and
consideration of which areas are most critical to address first. A study
examining potential locations and the feasibility of canal gates, which would
greatly reduce the need for bulkheading in the Canals neighborhood in the
East End if proven feasible, will be included in the project. The project
involves the following components:


Removal of existing structures (existing steel sheetpiling to be
replaced with straight faced heavy vinyl sheet bulkheads);



Installation of pile supported headwall, cast-in-place headwall
structure, and tie-backs; and



Installation of new pipe bedding material, new concrete outfall pipe
from existing manhole, and new tide valve.

This project should coordinate with NY Rising Housing Recovery Program for
privately owned bulkheads. Related projects included the North Shore
Protection of Critical Utilities and Canal Gates in the East End. This project
aligns with a key strategy from the 2013 Long Island Regional Economic
Development Council (LIREDC) Strong Island: Strategic Economic
Development Plan For Nassau and Suffolk Counties, which is to “to harden
our infrastructure, businesses and homes against the next major storm.”

Page 103

Bulkheading – North Shore

Cost estimate
$12,450,000

Cost estimate components


Feasibility study and project design – approximately $1,217,000



Construction – approximately $10,297,000



Construction management – approximately $936,000

address current and future flood risk. The City has experienced two major
storm events, Irene and Sandy, since 2011 and storm surge over the north
shore has been a major contributor to flooding in significant portions of the
City from these events. The City recognizes improvements such as
bulkheading are needed on the shoreline to protect both properties on the
water and inland. The significant investment of $12,450,000 is expected to
yield high returns in protecting many homes, businesses, first responder
facilities, and major employer/service providers from all but the largest
storms.

Benefits

Risk reduction

Health and social

a. The entire north shore bulkheading system would protect a
large area from most coastal storms. It is generally expected to
protect approximately 42 critical assets and to reduce the
vulnerability score of these assets by 1 or 2. This project addresses
areas with the lowest elevations and highest risk in Long Beach, the
north shore. In addition, it would provide protection from frequent
coastal flooding of the residential and commercial areas on and to the
north of Park Avenue and Beech Street in the West End which
encompasses an area of approximately four census tracts, 6,361 housing
units, 15,333 residents, and 1.7 miles of commercial business areas (1.1
miles on Park Avenue and 0.6 on Beech Street).

All residents of Long Beach, including socially vulnerable residents, are
expected to benefit from the protection along the north shore of Long Beach.
Bulkheading the north shore would protect several health and social service
facilities and protect 10 census block groups that have between 26%-45% of
the households at low/moderate income.
Economic
This project is generally expected to protect the main commercial corridors in
Long Beach and would help reduce the disruption and downtime to these
businesses, which were all severely impacted by Superstorm Sandy. The
project is also expected to reduce local government expenditures by
mitigating massive damage caused by storm surge across the north shore.
An estimated 1,715 primary jobs on the Park Avenue commercial corridor
and 422 on Beech Street commercial corridor would be protected 74.
Environmental
This project is expected to reduce some of the contamination associated with
flooding of buildings including the reduction of floatable debris that polluted
the waterways surrounding Long Beach after Superstorm Sandy.

Cost-benefit analysis
Long Beach is a fully developed community with a vulnerable shoreline. It
has infrastructure such as bulkheads that were not originally designed to

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

b. The overall phased replacement and additional height to north
shore bulkheading would help reduce the risk to a large number
of physical assets and is generally expected to provide an
increased level of protection to a majority of the population.
Assets Benefitting: 42 critical assets for entire bulkheading project, mostly
those north of Park Avenue and Beech Street in the West End including
essential government facilities and major commercial corridors.
Population Benefitting: Approximately 65% of the City’s population of
33,275 would benefit.

General time frame
Approximately 36 months

Page 104

Bulkheading – North Shore

General time frame for implementation milestones


Prepare feasibility study and engineering and soil study –
approximately 3 months



Submit to regulatory agencies for review and permit approval –
approximately 6 months



Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately 3
months



Construct project – approximately 24 months

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances, New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation permitting, USACE Section 10 and 404 permits,
and Coastal Zone Management (CZM) consistency concurrence (New York
State Department of State).

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach. See Figure IV-2 for project location.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 105

Bulkheading – north shore

Figure IV-2: Project Locations for Bulkheading – North Shore (showing goal of protection of entire north shore; tidal flow shown by arrows)

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 106

Proposed
Drainage Improvements

Long Beach
rendering them unusable to emergency vehicles and for residents trying to
reach established evacuation routes.
This project would provide a comprehensive stormwater study followed by
stormwater drainage improvements in several frequently flooded areas on
major access streets. As a first implementation phase, the project would
improve stormwater drainage in the areas that tie to evacuation routes and
flood at least 10 times per year during heavy rainfall and nor’easter events.
This part of the project involves


Removal and replacement of the roadway in the flooded areas; and



Increased drainage improvements with additional catch basins and
manholes.

Key project locations for this part include: 1) W. Park Ave. to Virginia Ave.
and Arizona Ave.; 2) E. Chester St. from Neptune Blvd. to Curley St.; 3)
National Blvd. from W. Penn St. to W. Olive St.; 4) E. Bay Dr. from Neptune
Blvd. to Lincoln Blvd.; 5) E. Pine St. from Park Pl. to Long Beach Blvd.
Backflow prevention devices

Source: URS

Description
Issue: Stormwater drainage is a persistent problem in Long Beach. The area
has many systems that are over capacity and with an original design that
cannot address current conditions. Some areas flood over 10 times a year
from heavy rainfall or tidal events. Tidal water from Reynolds Channel
coming up through stormwater drains was a primary cause of flooding of
homes during Hurricane Irene. The inability to address the current
stormwater flooding and prevent tidal water backflow can create costly rerouting of emergency vehicles and block access to commercial and
residential areas. During and soon after a storm, as with Superstorm Sandy,
the drainage problem can cause serious flooding to major access streets,

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

A second part of the project would install backflow prevention devices
(approximately 50) on stormwater outfall pipes and debris separation
chambers in appropriate locations to improve water quality. This project has
the following benefits:


Improves access to evacuation routes in case of emergency; and



Helps start improvements to overall drainage system.

This project helps address an issue from the April 2013 Cleaner Greener
Long Island Plan Adaptation to Climate Change plan: “inland, more frequent
and intense rainfall events could also cause travel disruptions due to flooded
intersections, roadways and rail lines.” This project is also a response to the
Strong Island report Goal 4 under the “Water” category to “Control flooding
and surface water pollution from stormwater runoff.” A related project is
Stormwater Force Main (Phase 2 of this project).

Page 107

Drainage Improvements

Cost estimate

Cost-benefit analysis

$8,350,000

Long Beach is a fully developed community with infrastructure that, as with
the stormwater system, was not originally designed to address current and
future flood risk. This critical investment in upgrading and protecting the
stormwater system is expected to reduce access problems for emergency
response vehicles and blocked access for residents trying to get to
established evacuation routes pre-storm. The project would reduce local
government expenditures in responding to frequently occurring stormwater
floods that occur at least 10 times per year during heavy rainfall events and
nor’easters. The project would also protect flooding to housing units where
backflow prevention devices are installed to prevent tidal water coming up
through the stormwater drains.

Cost estimate components


Prepare comprehensive drainage improvements study –
approximately $900,000



Construction – approximately $6,898,200



Construction management – approximately $551,800

Benefits
Health and social
This project is expected to improve access for emergency vehicles and
residents trying to reach established evacuation routes prior to major storms.
It would also improve access to health/social service facilities during
stormwater floods.
Economic
This project is expected to reduce flooding on important road corridors in
Long Beach, including those near the East End Commercial District and in
front of the former Long Beach Medical Center. By reducing flooding near
these important economic assets, less disruption would occur. The City
would also reduce staff costs to attend to these repetitively flooded areas. A
report entitled The Economic Impact and Financing of Infrastructure
Spending estimates that each dollar spent on infrastructure construction
doubles the return on the dollar in ultimate economic output. Over 20 years,
the return is $3.21 in economic activity75. The project is expected to protect
the area in front of the former Long Beach Medical Center and protect access
to 0.1 miles of commercial business area.
Environmental
Pollution to Reynolds Channel from stormwater runoff would be reduced.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Risk reduction
a. This project is expected to reduce stormwater risk to six critical
assets and reduce the vulnerability score by 1 for these assets.
The project would also help improve stormwater drainage in the areas
which flood at least 10 times per year and are tied to evacuation routes.
The backflow prevention devices would help reduce impacts to coastal
flooding that can penetrate the stormwater system during events like
Superstorm Sandy, which left the system clogged with sand and debris.
The approximately eight-block area to be protected (see “Key Project
Locations”) encompasses an area of a total of approximately 279
housing units and 667 people. This area will benefit from significantly
reduced likelihood of flooding from heavy rainfall events.
b. This project is expected to reduce stormwater risk to the
population that uses these heavily traveled streets that
frequently flood during rain storms.
Assets Benefitting: Seven assets occupy an approximately eight-block
area that will be protected from stormwater flooding. These assets are the
Martin Luther King, Jr. (MLK) Center, Park Avenue, East End Commercial
District, Fire Station #1, East Elementary School, a Pump/Lift Station, and
the former Long Beach Medical Center.

Page 108

Drainage Improvements
Population Benefitting: Protects residents who use these frequently
travelled streets and emergency vehicles during storms. Also protects
housing units flooded from tidal water entering stormwater system through
unprotected outfall pipes.



General time frame

The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances; New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation permitting, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and
Coastal Zone Management consistency concurrence (New York State
Department of State), if applicable.

Approximately 30 months

General time frame for implementation milestones


Prepare comprehensive study – approximately 9 months



Submit to regulatory agencies for review and permit approval –
approximately 3 months



Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately
3 months

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Construct project – approximately 15 months

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements

Jurisdiction
The project is located in the City of Long Beach. See Figure IV-3 for project
locations.

Page 109

Drainage Improvements

Figure IV-3: Project locations for Drainage Improvements

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 110

Proposed
Critical Facility Resiliency

Long Beach
measures for the West End and East Fire Stations and the Central Fire and
Police (Headquarters) include:





Raise electrical panels and conduit;
Floodproof and wind protect all doors including Bay doors;
Window protection from wind; and
Fixed/stationary generator where needed.

A second part is providing flood and wind protection for a post-disaster/postevacuation staging area at the Ice Arena/Recreation Center, which will be
used for distribution of emergency supplies and materials to residents. The
staging area will be overseen by the OEM. Specific measures at these
locations include:





Long Beach Fire Station in the East End

Source: The LiRo Group

Description
Issue: Superstorm Sandy rendered the police, fire, and emergency
responder facilities inoperable. All of these facilities were heavily flood
damaged and did not have power while trying to respond to post-storm
emergencies. Nine fires broke out after Sandy. The City also did not have a
pre-designated facility to receive and distribute emergency supplies and
materials which hindered the post-disaster operation.
The project includes elevation of electrical systems, backup generators and
critical IT equipment in the police and fire stations to function throughout a
severe storm. Project also includes wind protection of the roofs and walls of
these critical buildings. It includes adding protective panels at the doorways
of emergency responder facilities as well as sealing the lower building walls
to prevent water infiltration and elevation of firehouse operations. Specific

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Raise electrical panels and conduit;
Glass door replacement and flood shield;
Window protection from wind; and
Fixed/stationary generator.

Related projects include Parking Garage for Emergency Vehicles, Protection
of Community Centers, and Establish Office of Emergency Management.

Cost estimate
$2,387,000

Cost estimate components


Conduct retrofitting feasibility evaluation – approximately $50,000



Project design – approximately $260,000



Construction/retrofitting – approximately $1,904,000



Construction management – approximately $173,000

Page 111

Critical Facility Resiliency

Benefits
Health and social
Having the Ice Arena/Recreation Center functioning as a community
assistance center would provide a location for critical post-disaster supplies
to be provided to the entire City population, including vulnerable populations.
In addition, the project would help maintain police and fire protection
functions to residents post-disaster.
Economic
Protection of emergency responder facilities during storm events is expected
to reduce emergency and recovery costs post-disaster and preserves the
capability to respond to emergencies. This project is expected to reduce
post-disaster emergency and recovery costs by protecting the facilities. By
protecting this functionality, emergency responders can perform their duties
and help avoid adverse economic consequences. It can also help accelerate
the recovery by providing a post-disaster staging center for securing and
distributing vital supplies needed post-disaster. The project would help
protect the jobs of approximately 25 career uniformed firefighter positions,
165 volunteer firefighters, and 78 sworn police officers. In addition, the
protection of the Recreation Center and the Ice Arena is expected to reduce
any service disruptions to these facilities associated with flooding and high
wind, and therefore the project will help secure the positions of 321
employees (270 at Recreation Center and 51 at Ice Arena).
Environmental
This project would help reduce some contamination associated with flooding
of buildings and release of chemicals into floodwaters including reduction of
floatable debris that polluted the waterways surrounding Long Beach after
Superstorm Sandy.

Cost-benefit analysis
Almost all of Long Beach is in either high- or extreme-risk areas, so the
facilities cannot be relocated horizontally out of the floodplain as they are
local emergency service providers that must remain in Long Beach. An
investment in protecting these facilities is expected to lower local

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

government recovery expenditures from an event like Superstorm Sandy (the
damages to these seven facilities from Sandy was over $3 million) and would
better ensure that the critical functions of these facilities are maintained
during emergencies. Protecting post-storm designated staging centers would
help expedite recovery and lower secondary impacts, such as temporary
housing costs, by providing information and supplies to people to allow them
to start the recovery process quicker. With these vital information and supply
conduits located directly in the community, residents have less logistical
challenges, and can coordinate more efficiently with non-profit recovery
organizations, State and Federal recovery officials, the City, and neighbors.
This efficiency reduces displacement time, which slows the recovery, and
reduces the possibility of the impacted residents making the decision to
relocate to another community.

Risk reduction
a. This project is expected to reduce the flood risk to six critical
assets and reduce the vulnerability score by 1 to 3 for these
assets. The flood risk to these assets will be significantly reduced from
all but the largest storms.
b. In a disaster event, the entire City population is expected to
benefit from the risk reduction to these facilities, which would
better enable emergency responders to provide services. This
project will help maintain emergency services after a large disaster event
like Sandy where nine fires broke out immediately after the storm. The
location of Long Beach on a barrier island with low elevation, surrounded
by water and isolated from the mainland with limited access, magnifies
the importance of protecting the City’s emergency responder facilities.
Assets Benefitting: Seven – Three fire stations, police station, City Hall,
Ice Arena and Recreation Center.
Population Benefitting: The entire City population is served by these
emergency responder facilities.

General time frame
Approximately 24 months

Page 112

Critical Facility Resiliency

General time frame for implementation milestones

Environmental Conservation permitting, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) and Coastal Zone Management consistency concurrence (New York
State Department of State), if applicable.



Conduct retrofitting feasibility evaluation – approximately
3 months



Prepare project design – approximately 3 months

Jurisdiction



Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately
3 months

The project is in the City of Long Beach. See Figure IV-4 for project
locations.



Construct project – approximately 15 months

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances; New York State Department of

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 113

Critical Facility Resiliency

Figure IV-4: Projects Locations for Critical Facility Resiliency

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 114

Establish Office of Emergency
Management

Proposed
Long Beach
in City Hall with connection to back up power; and connect to the County,
State and, if necessary, Federal groups involved in emergency management.
The project would fund the LDRM for 2 years. The LDRM would coordinate
with Nassau County Government/OEM and tie to Regional disaster centers.
The project includes the following components:


Plan for disaster recovery and train applicable responders in disaster
planning;



Provide training on new critical emergency communications
equipment such as satellite capability for weather and emergency
communications;



Establish Memoranda of Understanding for related organizations to
provide post-disaster services. The LDRM would coordinate with the
Long Island Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster (LIVOAD) of
Nassau County to streamline efforts and maximize coverage;



Establish agreements with disaster recovery vendors;



Coordinate fire, police, and emergency service personnel and
equipment;



Prepare Resiliency Design Guidelines, in English and Spanish, to
educate homeowners on resiliency, elevation, and sustainability
options in a neighborhood context; and



Establish a protected and secure office in City Hall and outfit with
emergency office equipment, including electrical panels tied to a
generator, fixed emergency communication console, and hard wired
telecommunication systems.

Long Beach City Hall

Source: The LiRo Group

Description
Issue: Long Beach is at risk from flooding and high winds and would benefit
from additional resources for emergency operations and management.
Superstorm Sandy revealed additional emergency management and
resiliency needs in Long Beach including the need for a secure Office of
Emergency Management (OEM) command center. Additional resources and
an experienced Local Disaster Recovery Manager (LDRM) can help build on
existing City efforts so that residents have access to emergency
preparedness information, assets are protected and then positioned to assist
in the disaster operations, and response teams are established to check on
socially vulnerable populations during power outages.
This project is intended to establish a full-time OEM with hiring of LDRM to
lead disaster planning; disseminate upcoming storm actions; coordinate
emergency operations for larger hazard events such as floods; secure office

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Related projects include Critical Facility Resiliency, Protection of Community
Centers, and Parking Garage for Emergency Vehicles.

Page 115

Establish Office of Emergency Management (OEM)

Cost estimate
$1,083,000

Cost estimate components


LDRM staff position (2 years) – approximately $300,500



Secure OEM office (construction) – approximately $495,000



Secure OEM office (project design/construction management) –
approximately -$112,500



Prepare Resiliency Design Guidelines – approximately $175,000

Benefits

expected to lower local government expenditures from storms like
Superstorm Sandy and more frequent events.

Risk reduction
a. It is assumed that the actions of the LDRM, enhanced disaster
planning and training, establishing disaster recovery vendor
agreements, and the use of any new equipment would yield risk
reduction through better planning, preparedness, increased
capacity, and better pre-storm positioning. It is estimated that the
actions of the LDRM would first determine enhanced protection of key
emergency responder assets and facilities. Five critical assets related to
emergency responder services would be better protected, which is
expected to reduce the vulnerability score by 1 for these assets.

The LDRM, in coordination with LIVOAD, would develop agreements with
non-profit organizations to provide services to vulnerable populations after
storm events. Also included in the project is a special needs registration to
identify the specific needs and locations of vulnerable populations.

b. Both socially vulnerable populations and the entire population,
served through enhanced disaster planning and increased
emergency capability, would benefit from this project. The
design guidelines portion of the project would also help provide
educational materials to homeowners on elevating their homes, which
would help reduce risk.

Economic

Assets Benefitting: Five – Three fire stations, police station, and City Hall.

A new position would be created for approximately 2 years, with the
objective of ultimately making this job permanent. An apprenticeship to
accompany this position would be explored. Hiring an LDRM and securing
additional post-disaster support through agreements with service providers
and non-profit organizations is expected to help reduce local government
emergency and recovery costs in a disaster event.

Population Benefitting: Entire City population would benefit from
enhanced emergency preparedness.

Cost-benefit analysis

General time frame for implementation milestones

The City of Long Beach currently does not disaster recovery vendor
agreements, Design Guidelines, a secure OEM, critical emergency
communication equipment, a Local Disaster Recovery Manager, or an Office
of Emergency Management. Nearly the entire City is at extreme or high risk
from flooding. This project would provide the City necessary emergency
management capacity in relation to its risk, which is an investment that is



Prepare job announcement and hire LDRM – approximately
3 months



Prepare design guidelines – approximately 9 months



Establish Memorandum of Understandings (MOUs) and
agreements – approximately 9 months

Health and social

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

General time frame
Approximately 24 months

Page 116

Establish Office of Emergency Management (OEM)


Physical office setup – approximately 12 months

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances.

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach. The project location is shown in
Figure IV-5.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 117

Establish Office of Emergency Management (OEM)

Figure IV-5: Project Location for OEM

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 118

Proposed
Protection of Community Centers

Long Beach

centers up and running soon after a storm. The project locations are the
Long Beach Main Library and the Martin Luther King Jr. Center. The facilities
are not meant to have full protection from a storm but if impacted by a
storm, would be resilient enough to be operational quickly. Their function is
to provide community assistance after storm evacuation and re-entry of the
City population. These locations will serve as places where residents can
come to receive personal assistance from agencies as well as recovery
information. The centers will also be meeting places for residents to gather.
Key project information is as follows:

Long Beach Main Library



Flood protect and wind retrofit community center buildings, including
louvre floodshield, door floodproofing, and window and door wind
protection;



Raise electrical panels, conduit, and telecommunications equipment;



Provide emergency power and other necessary fixed equipment
needed for disaster recovery; and



Repurpose centers with second floors as community assistance
centers.

Source: The LiRo Group

Description
Issue: The residents of Long Beach need a protected community assistance
center in the early recovery stage of a disaster where they can gather for
emergency needs and recovery information after a storm. After Superstorm
Sandy, residents were without many basic services and information about
the recovery. Key community centers were damaged by Sandy and
inoperable. This project would design and construct resiliency protection for
existing community centers to be used as community assistance centers
after a disaster.
The project involves flood protection of buildings, raising existing electrical
systems, and installing new electrical generation equipment to have the

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Related projects include Critical Facility Resiliency and Establish Office of
Emergency Management.

Cost estimate
$1,335,000

Cost estimate components


Project design/feasibility – approximately $192,700



Construction/retrofitting – approximately $1,047,300



Construction management – approximately $95,000

Page 119

Protection of Community Centers

Benefits
Health and social
The entire City population is expected to have better access to needed postdisaster supplies, services, and information that would be provided in the
protected community assistance centers. The Martin Luther King, Jr. (MLK)
Center also serves an area with a sizeable low/moderate-income (LMI)
population (located in a census block group with 70% of the households
LMI) while the main library serves the entire City, including all socially
vulnerable populations.
Economic
Protection of these centers is expected to help them recover their functions
quicker and would protect the jobs of employees. Establishing community
assistance centers would help expedite the recovery of Long Beach by
providing needed resources to residents and business owners. This project
would help reduce local post-disaster emergency and recovery costs by
protecting the facilities. In addition, the protection of the MLK Center and the
Main Library is expected to reduce any service disruptions to these facilities
associated with flooding and high wind, and therefore the project will help
secure the positions of 49 employees (12 at MLK and 37 at library).
Environmental
This project is expected to help reduce some contamination associated with
flooding of buildings and release of chemicals into floodwaters including
reduction of floatable debris that polluted the waterways surrounding Long
Beach after Superstorm Sandy.

Cost-benefit analysis
Long Beach recognizes the urgency of having a protected facility to serve as
a community assistance center after Superstorm Sandy. This project is an
investment that is expected to protect the Martin Luther King Center and
Main Library, which were severely damaged by Superstorm Sandy (MLK
Center had over $440,000 worth of damages), and to provide a facility that
could serve as community assistance center. Protecting post-storm
community assistance centers would help expedite recovery and lower

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

secondary impacts, such as temporary housing costs, by providing
information to people to allow them to start the recovery process quicker.
With this vital information conduit located directly in the community,
residents have less logistical challenges, and can coordinate more efficiently
with non-profit recovery organizations, State and Federal recovery officials,
the City, and neighbors. This efficiency reduces displacement time, which
slows the recovery, and reduces the possibility of the impacted residents
making the decision to relocate to another community.

Risk reduction
a. This project is expected to reduce flood risk to two critical
assets and reduce the vulnerability score by 1 or 2 for these
assets. The additional benefit of this project is the repurposing into
community assistance centers would provide information and supplies to
assist residents and businesses. The community assistance center can
help expedite the recovery process for the whole community as residents
and business owners would be better positioned to start cleanup and
repairs to their properties. The flood risk to these assets will be
significantly reduced from all but the largest storms.
b. The population that uses these facilities as well as the
population that may be impacted by future disasters would
benefit from this project. The location of Long Beach on a barrier
island and its responsibilities as an incorporated City create the need for
greater self-sufficiency during a disaster recovery.
Assets Benefitting: Two – Main Library and MLK Center.
Population Benefitting: These two community centers serve a majority of
the Long Beach residents and could assist the entire population as a
community assistance center.

General time frame
Approximately 24 months

General time frame for implementation milestones


Prepare project design – approximately 3 months

Page 120

Protection of Community Centers


Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately 3
months



Construct project – approximately 18 months

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances.

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach. See Figure IV-6 for project
locations.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 121

Protection of Community Centers

Figure IV-6: Project Locations for Protection of Community Centers

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 122

Proposed
Park Avenue/Beech Street Streetscape
Long Beach
Drainage Study and Infrastructure Improvements
project incorporates Complete Streets principles and includes bike,
pedestrian and streetscape improvements to increase pedestrian safety and
improve guest and resident access to key commercial areas. This project is
expected to improve stormwater drainage on these two primary evacuation
routes out of the community. Other elements include:

Proposed improvements along Park Avenue

Source: City of Long Beach

Description
Issue: The pre-storm surge flooding from Superstorm Sandy made Park
Avenue, Beech Street, and the other established evacuation routes
inoperable for periods of time. Electric power substations were damaged and
the City had no power for over a week. Unsafe conditions for emergency
responders and residents resulted without adequate street lighting.
The project combines needed infrastructure improvements in two of the
principal commercial corridors on Long Beach with solar powered lighting in
these areas for emergency resiliency. The project includes stormwater
retention and management improvements through the use of rain gardens,
retention structures, new drainage piping and catch basins, introducing
pervious landscape, and decreasing paved surfaces on Park Avenue (Monroe
Blvd. to Lafayette Blvd.) and Beech Street (Ohio Ave. to New York Ave.). The

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles



Design retention structures under roads, parking and sidewalks; and



Add emergency lighting (LED Solar Powered Street Lights on
individual concrete foundations) in various locations on Park Avenue
and Beech Street (per coordination with City and Long Island Power
Authority [LIPA]/Public Service Electric and Gas Company [PSEG])
and needed signage for evacuation routes.

This project supports the April 2013 Cleaner Greener Long Island Plan (CGLI)
Transportation Strategy 1.3, which reads: “Improve safety of streets for
pedestrians and cyclists through implementation of Complete Streets, signal
optimization, and a comprehensive bike plan.” This plan also notes that
“inland, more frequent and intense rainfall events could also cause travel
disruptions due to flooded intersections, roadways and rail lines” and this
project would help reduce those impacts. Related projects include Park
Avenue Complete Streets Phase 2 (Kennedy Plaza Revitalization), Bayfront
Revitalization Plan, and Drainage Improvements.

Cost estimate
$10,652,500

Cost estimate components


Conduct drainage study – approximately $250,000



Park Ave./Beech St. drainage/streetscape project design –
approximately $922,500

Page 123

Park Avenue/Beech Street Streetscape Drainage Study and Infrastructure Improvements


Park Ave./Beech St. drainage/streetscape construction –
approximately $7,380,000



Solar-powered lighting design – approximately $165,000



Solar-powered lighting construction – approximately $1,210,000



Construction management – approximately $725,000

Benefits
Health and social
Reducing stormwater on Park Avenue and Beech Street is expected to assist
with a more orderly evacuation prior to an event and improve access for
emergency vehicles on established evacuation routes prior to major storms.
Solar-powered lights provide more safety when power is out after an
emergency.
Economic
Complete Streets projects have a proven track record of increasing retail
sales and sales tax, and decreasing vacancies, among businesses in the
project area. Projects from California to New York City incorporating
Complete Streets concepts have improved pedestrian and transit access to
stores in key commercial areas, resulting in greater economic activity and
increased jobs.76

Risk reduction
a. The Park Avenue section of the project is expected to reduce
the stormwater flood risk to six critical assets, while the Beech
Street section is expected to reduce the risk to two critical
assets. Both reduce the vulnerability score by 1 for these assets. Both
of these streets are established evacuation routes and the project would
reduce stormwater flood risk on these routes. This approximately 1.7
mile stretch of commercial business area will be protected (1.1 miles on
Park Avenue and 0.6 miles on Beech Street) and an estimated 1,715
primary jobs on Park Avenue and 422 on Beech Street associated with
these commercial areas would be protected. This area will benefit from
significantly reduced likelihood of flooding from heavy rainfall events.
b. The population that resides, works, and shops in the Park
Avenue and Beech Street commercial corridors, including
guests, would benefit from this project.
Assets Benefitting: Eight –Park Avenue Commercial District, Park Avenue,
LIRR Station, Central Fire Station, City Hall, West End Commercial Area,
Police Station, and Beech Street.
Population Benefitting: A majority of Long Beach residents would use
Park Avenue and Beech Street as evacuation routes and frequent commercial
areas on these streets.

Environmental

General time frame

Creation of more pervious surface through landscaping is expected to help
improve water quality.

Approximately 48 months

Cost-benefit analysis
Long Beach is a fully developed community with infrastructure such as the
stormwater system that was not originally designed to address current and
future flood risk. This critical investment in upgrading and protecting the
stormwater system is expected to help improve access on established
evacuation routes pre-storm. The project would also provide safety measures
such as emergency lighting that would help City officials and residents in
future storms.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

General time frame for implementation milestones


Conduct drainage study – approximately 6 months



Prepare project design – approximately 6 months



Submit to regulatory agencies for review and permit approval –
approximately 3 months



Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately 3
months

Page 124

Park Avenue/Beech Street Streetscape Drainage Study and Infrastructure Improvements


Construct project – approximately 30 months

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances; New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation permitting, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) and Coastal Zone Management consistency concurrence (New York
State Department of State), if applicable.

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach. See Figure IV-7 for the project
locations.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 125

Park Avenue/Beech Street Streetscape Drainage Study and Infrastructure Improvements

Typical streetscape section

Source: City of Long Beach

Figure IV-7: Project Locations for Park Avenue/Beech Street Streetscape Drainage Study and Infrastructure Improvements

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 126

Proposed
Parking Garage for Emergency Vehicles

Long Beach

West End, site to be determined, or in the Waldbaum’s Shopping Center. The
design of the structure should incorporate measures to protect the apparatus
and equipment from wind and debris to the extent possible. The project
would:


Provide a secure holding and staging area for emergency vehicles
and emergency responder apparatus;



Allow for easy access and egress of emergency vehicles; and



Allow for improved logistics and positioning during emergencies.

Related projects include Critical Facility Resiliency and Establish Office of
Emergency Management.

Cost estimate
$14,705,000
Typical fire department apparatus

Source: Peter Stehlik PS-2507 via Wikimedia Commons

Cost estimate components


Feasibility study on sites – approximately $125,000

Description



Project design – approximately $1,620,000

Issue: Superstorm Sandy rendered emergency response vehicles and
apparatus unusable. This issue was caused by a lack of high ground in Long
Beach which inhibits a safe placement of these vehicles and apparatus, and
the flooding from Sandy destroyed them. To address this issue, a safe and
elevated location within City limits needs to be identified and/or constructed.



Construction – approximately $11,880,000



Construction management – approximately $1,080,000

This project is to construct a parking garage (approximately 300 spaces) that
is structured to hold emergency response vehicles and equipment at a
second-story level which would also act as an emergency distribution center.
The first potential location is directly behind City Hall which is next to
primary emergency responder facilities. Other potential locations include the

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Benefits
Health and social
Providing for a safe location to store emergency vehicles during a storm
generally allows for emergency response activities to resume in a quicker
manner after a storm or disaster for the entire population, including socially
vulnerable populations.

Page 127

Parking Garage for Emergency Vehicles
Economic
During Superstorm Sandy, fire apparatus and emergency vehicles were
damaged and two sets of apparatus had to be leased. Other City vehicles
were also damaged or destroyed. Having emergency vehicles protected
during storm events is expected to reduce emergency and recovery costs
post-disaster as well as preserving the capability to respond to emergencies.
During non-storm/emergency periods, the parking spaces in the garage can
be used by shoppers, beach goers, and train riders. It will help increase
business in the Long Beach commercial districts where parking is limited.
Environmental

services after a large disaster event like Sandy where nine fires broke
out immediately after the storm.
Assets Benefitting: Five Emergency vehicles that are critical parts of
emergency responder facilities (police and fire stations) and City vehicles
from the City Garage.
Population Benefitting: The entire City population depends on these
emergency vehicles for protection from during emergencies like fires.

General time frame
Approximately 36 months

This project is expected to help reduce some contamination associated with
flooding of vehicles and release of chemicals into floodwaters.

General time frame for implementation milestones

Cost-benefit analysis



Prepare feasibility study of parking garage sites – approximately
6 months



Prepare project design – approximately 6 months



Submit to regulatory agencies for review and permit approval –
approximately 3 months



Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately 3
months



Construct project – approximately 18 months

Long Beach is located on a barrier island with no natural high ground and its
emergency vehicles were destroyed by Superstorm Sandy. This project
provides an innovative way to protect emergency vehicles from future events
while providing an emergency distribution center. Replacing destroyed fire
apparatus can range from $500,000 to over $1,000,000 and this project will
help avoid these type damages while maintaining critical emergency services.
The project also provides an economic benefit with increased parking.

Risk reduction
a. This project is generally expected to reduce the flood risk to
essential functional equipment of five critical assets (apparatus
and emergency vehicles used by emergency responders) and to
reduce the vulnerability score of these assets by 1 to 2. In
addition, this project helps maintain emergency responder services,
which can help reduce the secondary impacts of a storm (e.g., fight fires
that break out, rescue people in harm’s way). The flood risk to these
assets will be significantly reduced from all but the largest storms.
b. The assets protected by this project, which affect public safety,
potentially impact the entire City population including socially
vulnerable populations. This project will help maintain emergency

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances; New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation permitting, if applicable. The project would
comply with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Community Development Block Grant–Disaster Recovery program income
requirements as defined in the April 2013 State of New York Action Plan for
Community Development Block Grant Program Disaster Recovery.

Page 128

Parking Garage for Emergency Vehicles

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach. See Figure IV-8 for project
locations.

Parking garage example

Source: Steve Morgan

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 129

Parking Garage for Emergency Vehicles

Figure IV-8: Project Locations for Parking Garage for Emergency Vehicles

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 130

Protection of Wells and
Sewer Pump/Lift Stations

Proposed
Long Beach
resident (the local customer base) needs to function – drinking water and
sewage. Key project elements include:


Design flood protection/elevation of pumps and electrical equipment
from saltwater;



Allows for upgraded pumps and electrical supply and controls;



Protects residents from disease and preserves ability to use City
systems; and



Allows emergency responders/medical personnel adequate supply of
water/sewer.

Key project locations for the project include:
Pump/Lift Station, W. Park Avenue and Grand Boulevard

Source: The LiRo Group

Description
Issue: Superstorm Sandy destroyed pumps for both water supply and
sewage removal. The saltwater destroyed the pump electrical components
and water seals, making the pumps inoperable. As a result of this and the
damage to the Water Pollution Control Plant and Water Purification Plant, the
residents and businesses of Long Beach were without water and sewage
treatment for more than 2 weeks. In addition, due to the sewage treatment
system damages, raw sewage had to be discharged into Reynolds Channel.
This project would study two methods of protection of these critical systems.
The first is to construct flood barriers around the pump stations. The second
method is to raise the pumps and electrical systems above the flood height.
There are three pump stations and two wells. Both methods add backup
generators elevated above the storm level. Protection of the wells and
pump/lift stations is vital in maintaining two services that each business and

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles



W. Park Ave. and New York Ave.;



Lafayette Blvd. and W. Bay Drive;



E. Park Ave. and Roosevelt Blvd.;



Farrell St. and E. Park Ave.; and



E. Park Ave. and Maple Blvd.

Specific measures at each well and pump station include:


Raise electrical panels and wiring;



Elevate fixed emergency generator; and



Provide deployable dyke around building.

Related projects include Critical Facility Resiliency and North Shore Protection
of Critical Utilities (which includes protection of the Water Pollution Control
Plant and Water Purification Plant). The project should coordinate with the
City Capital Program.

Page 131

Protection of Wells and Sewer Pump/Lift Stations

Cost estimate
$2,480,000

from damages to wells and pump/lift stations, which were damaged and
inoperable after Superstorm Sandy, and to help avoid environmental
contamination of the community and Reynolds Channel.

Cost estimate components

Risk reduction



Project design – approximately $320,000



Construction – approximately $1,980,000



Construction management – approximately $180,000

a. This project is generally expected to reduce the flood risk to five
critical assets and to reduce the vulnerability score of these
assets by 2 to 3. In addition, this project helps maintain operation of
the overall water and wastewater systems, which are needed for all
businesses and residents, and helps reduce the chance of sewage
contamination that occurs due to sewage backup and bypasses. The
flood risk to these assets will be reduced from all but the largest storms.

Benefits
Health and social
The protection of wells and pump/lift stations is expected to benefit all
residents of Long Beach, including socially vulnerable populations.
Economic
Without water and sewage, businesses could not operate, which would result
in a potential loss of jobs. In addition, residents would not be able to occupy
their homes, which would result in a loss to the customer base. Protection of
these assets facilitates a more rapid recovery and is expected to reduce the
chance of long-term displacement of residents and business that would
result in reduced economic activity and potential job losses. This project is
expected to help reduce post-disaster emergency and recovery costs by
protecting these facilities and all the residences and businesses they serve.
Environmental

b. The well and stations are critical components of the overall
water supply/wastewater system and protecting them is
expected to maintain these critical services to the entire City
population while reducing risk from sewage contamination in
structures, streets and Reynolds Channel.
Assets Benefitting: Five – Three pump/lift stations and two wells.
Population Benefitting: Entire City population is served by the water and
wastewater systems.

General time frame
Approximately 24 months

General time frame for implementation milestones

This project is expected to reduce contamination associated with damage to
the sewage system and resulting bypass with direct discharge into the bay.



Prepare project design – approximately 3 months



Cost-benefit analysis

Submit to regulatory agencies for review and permit approval –
approximately 3 months



Superstorm Sandy severely damaged the water and wastewater system of
Long Beach, including the wells and pump/lift stations (over $5 million
damages and costs to system). This project is expected to reduce the cost

Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately 3
months



Construct project – approximately 15 months

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 132

Protection of Wells and Sewer Pump/Lift Stations

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances; New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation permitting, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) and Coastal Zone Management consistency concurrence (New York
State Department of State), if applicable.

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach. See Figure IV-9 for project
locations.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 133

Protection of Wells and Sewer Pump/Lift Stations

Figure IV-9: Project Locations for Protection of Wells and Sewer Pump/Lift Stations

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 134

Proposed
Protection of Public Housing Units

Long Beach



Flood protective measures to the ground floor areas include louvre
floodshields;



Elevation of electrical, power supply conduit, and
telecommunications equipment; and



Wind protection of windows.

Related projects include Establish Office of Emergency Management, Critical
Facility Resiliency, Protection of Senior Housing Units, and Drainage
Improvements. The project should coordinate with alternate funding sources,
both State and Federal.

Cost estimate
$2,965,000

Cost estimate components
Bolted flood shield

Source: FEMA

Description
Issue: Superstorm Sandy kept residents out of public housing for months.
Most residents were displaced for 3 to 4 weeks by Superstorm Sandy and
some residents were out of their homes for up to 7 months. Many public
housing residents cannot afford to remain away from their homes for any
length of time.
This project is to enhance protection of two public housing units (Channel
Park Homes and Pine Town Homes) to allow residents to return to the units
as soon as possible after a storm evacuation. The project includes:

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles



Project design – approximately $347,000



Construction – approximately $2,400,000



Construction management – approximately $218,000

Benefits
Health and social
This project is generally expected to protect the approximately 600 residents
served by these facilities, most of whom are members of a socially
vulnerable population.

Page 135

Protection of Public Housing Units
Economic

General time frame for implementation milestones

Protection of these housing units is expected to help them recover their
functions faster after a storm and help residents return to work sooner. If
occupants of these public housing units are able to return to their homes
sooner, the burden on government for providing temporary housing is
reduced.



Prepare project design – approximately 6 months



Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately
3 months



Construct project – approximately 15 months

Environmental
This project is expected to help reduce some contamination associated with
flooding of buildings and release of chemicals into floodwaters including
reduction of floatable debris that polluted the waterways surrounding Long
Beach after Superstorm Sandy.

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances.

Cost-benefit analysis

Jurisdiction

If this project is not built, Long Beach is likely to incur significant financial
costs on a recurring basis related to repair of assets like these two housing
units, which were severely damaged by Superstorm Sandy. In addition,
severe damage to these housing units by Sandy resulted in disruption to the
residents who lived in the units and high temporary housing costs to the
government, which can be avoided with the construction of this project.

The project is in the City of Long Beach and Channel Park Homes is
administered by the Long Beach Housing Authority. See Figure IV-10 for the
project locations.

Risk reduction
a. This project is generally expected to reduce the flood risk to two
critical assets and reduce the vulnerability score of these assets
by 1. The flood risk to these assets will be reduced from all but the
largest storms.
b. The housing facility operated by the Long Beach Housing
Authority serves approximately 600 people.
Assets Benefitting: Two – Channel Park Homes and Pine Town Homes.
Population Benefitting: Approximately 600 residents live in these units.

General time frame
Approximately 24 months

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 136

Protection of Public Housing Units

Figure IV-10: Project Locations for Protection of Public Housing Units

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 137

Proposed
Protection of Senior Housing Units

Long Beach



Flood protective measures to the ground floor areas include louvre
floodshields;



Elevation of or other type of flood protection (e.g., flood protected
room) to electrical, power supply conduit, and telecommunications
equipment; and



Wind protection of windows and roof replacement for high wind
protection.

Related projects include Establish Office of Emergency Management, Critical
Facility Resiliency, Protection of Public Housing Units, and Drainage
Improvements. The project should coordinate with alternate funding sources,
both State and Federal.

Cost estimate
Flood protected room with utilities in apartment basement

Source: URS

Description
Issue: Senior citizens of Long Beach, especially those with mobility and
medical requirements, are subject to additional stress from evacuation and
being displaced in a storm. Most residents were displaced for 3 to 4 weeks
by Superstorm Sandy and some residents were out of their homes for up to
7 months.
This project is to provide flood and wind protection to four public senior
housing units (Sol Scher Apartments, Michael Valente Apartments, Sonny
Duckman Apartments, and Morton Cohen Apartments). This would allow the
housing units to be more quickly available for senior resident return. Key
project elements include:

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

$1,925,000

Cost estimate components


Project design – approximately $221,000



Construction – approximately $1,563,000



Construction management – approximately $141,000

Benefits
Health and social
This project is generally expected to protect the approximately 300 residents
served by these facilities, most of whom are members of a socially
vulnerable population.

Page 138

Protection of Senior Housing Units
Economic
Protection of these housing units is expected to help them recover their
functions faster after a storm and get employees back to work. This more
rapid recovery reduces the chance that these units would reduce services,
leading to employees seeking other work and resulting job losses. If
occupants of these senior public housing units are able to move quickly back
to their homes, the burden on government to provide temporary housing is
reduced.

Population Benefitting: Approximately 300 residents live in these units.

Environmental



Prepare project design – approximately 6 months

This project would help reduce some contamination associated with flooding
of buildings and release of chemicals into floodwaters including reduction of
floatable debris that polluted the waterways surrounding Long Beach after
Superstorm Sandy.



Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately
3 months



Construct project – approximately 15 months

Cost-benefit analysis
If the protection of the senior housing units project is not built, Long Beach
is likely to incur significant financial costs on a recurring basis related to
repair of assets like these four housing units, which were severely damaged
by Superstorm Sandy. In addition, severe damage to these housing units by
Sandy resulted in disruption to the residents who lived in the units and high
temporary housing costs to the government, which can be avoided with the
construction of this project.

General time frame
Approximately 24 months

General time frame for implementation milestones

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances.

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach and administered by the City of Long
Beach Housing Authority. See Figure IV-11 for the project locations.

Risk reduction
a. This project is generally expected to reduce the flood risk to
four critical assets and reduce the vulnerability score of these
assets by 1. The flood risk to these assets will be reduced from all but
the largest storms.
b. These housing facilities operated by the Long Beach Housing
Authority serve approximately 300 people.
Assets Benefitting: Four – Sol Scher Apartments, Michael Valente
Apartments, Sonny Duckman Apartments, and Morton Cohen Apartments.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 139

Protection of Senior Housing Units

Figure IV-11: Project Locations for Protection of Senior Housing Units

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 140

Stormwater Project Phase 2/
Stormwater Force Main Project

Featured
Long Beach
Exact project locations are to be determined. This project supports solving
an issue raised in the April 2013 Cleaner Greener Long Island Plan,
Adaptation to Climate Change section, “inland, more frequent and intense
rainfall events could also cause travel disruptions due to flooded
intersections, roadways and rail lines.” Related projects include Drainage
Improvements (Phase 1) and Park Avenue/Beech Street Streetscape
Drainage Study and Infrastructure Improvements.

Cost estimate
$114,830,000

Cost estimate components

Underground stormwater retention

Source: URS

Description
Issue: Superstorm Sandy caused serious flooding to major access streets,
rendering them unusable to emergency vehicles.



Prepare data collection and study report – approximately
$1,030,000



Project construction – approximately $113,800,000 (based on City
grant application plus two additional pump stations)

Benefits
Health and social



Installing pressurized system of pipes (force main);

This project is expected to help improve access for emergency vehicles and
residents trying to reach established evacuation routes prior to major storms.
It would improve access to health and social service facilities in stormwater
flooding.



Replacing inadequate and undersized drainage inlet structures;

Economic



Installing control structures to filter out debris; and



Increasing stormwater storage through subsurface storage chambers
and bio-retention.

This project is expected to help the City increase its capacity to reduce the
disruptions and damage to stormwater flooding, which can occur in all the
main commercial areas. By reducing flooding near these important economic
assets, less disruption of services would occur.

As a second implementation phase, this project would continue stormwater
drainage upgrades by:

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 141

Stormwater Project Phase 2/Stormwater Force Main Project
Environmental

General time frame

Pollution to Reynolds Channel from stormwater runoff would be reduced.

Approximately 36 months

Cost-benefit analysis

General time frame for implementation milestones

Long Beach is a fully developed community with flat terrain, a high water
table, and undersized infrastructure. If this project is not built, Long Beach is
likely to have continued access problems for emergency response vehicles
and blocked access for residents trying to get to established evacuation
routes due to stormwater flooding from heavy rainfall associated with the
onset of large storm events like Superstorm Sandy. The construction of this
project is expected to lower frequently recurring financial costs for road
repairs.



Prepare stormwater data collection/study report – approximately
9 months



Submit to regulatory agencies for review and permit approval –
approximately 3 months



Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately
3 months



Construct project – approximately 21 months

Risk reduction
a. This project is generally expected to reduce the stormwater
flooding risk to 29 critical assets and to reduce the vulnerability
score of these assets by 1. The project is expected to also improve
stormwater drainage in the areas that tie to evacuation routes.
b. Most of the City’s residents and guests would receive positive
risk reduction benefits from this project. Emergency vehicles
need streets clear of stormwater flooding, especially prior to a
large event like Superstorm Sandy, so this project is expected to
help maintain ingress and egress for emergency vehicles. In
addition, this project is expected help reduce stormwater flooding on
streets that tie into established evacuation routes and is expected to help
many Long Beach residents evacuate with less delay prior to a large
storm like Superstorm Sandy.

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances; New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation permitting, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and
Coastal Zone Management consistency concurrence (New York State
Department of State).

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach.

Assets Benefitting: 29 including the major commercial corridors,
government facilities, schools, and major arterials.
Population Benefitting: A majority of the Long Beach population would
benefit from this project.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 142

Featured

North Shore Protection of
Critical Utilities

Long Beach
The project is the implementation of a key strategy from the “Strong Island
2013 Update,” the Reynolds Channel Shoreline Stabilization Project, which
identifies that shoreline protection is needed in this vulnerable area.

Cost estimate
$12,900,000

Cost estimate components
Picture of existing shoreline with no bulkheading (left) and rendering of potential
bulkheading in this area west of Long Beach Bridge (right)

Source: URS

Description



Prepare engineering and soil study – refer to City grant



Project construction – refer to City grant



Construction management – refer to City grant

Issue: Superstorm Sandy devastated the north shore of Long Beach. The
storm showed the inadequacy of the existing bulkheads to protect from
major storms. All the major utilities of Long Beach are located on the north
shore adjacent to an unprotected shoreline. All these utilities were severely
damaged by Sandy, resulting in a lack of power, water, and sewage for more
than 2 weeks.

Benefits

This project is to provide coordination with the $12.9 million north shore
bulkheading project from National Boulevard to the Long Beach Bridge,
which currently has no bulkheading, announced by Governor Cuomo in
November 2013. The project also includes flood barriers (i.e., either
deployable or Dutch dams) around major utilities, including the Water
Pollution Control Plant and the Water Purification Plant, to protect these
critical facilities. The project would ultimately connect to additional current
and proposed bulkheading projects including Bulkheading - North Shore and
Canal Gates in the East End. This project is out for bid as of March 2014,
with work starting later in 2014.

Economic

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Health and social
Bulkheading is expected to protect a majority of the City from coastal surge
and is expected to provide some level of protection to essential health and
social services facilities to help quickly recover function after a storm.
This project is expected to reduce flooding in the critical north shore utility
area, including the Water Purification Plant and the Water Pollution Control
Plant. This project is also generally expected to protect the main commercial
corridors in Long Beach and would help reduce the disruption and downtime
to these businesses, which were all severely impacted by Superstorm Sandy.
Environmental
The project is expected to reduce contamination associated with flooding of
buildings including reduction of floatable debris that polluted the waterways
surrounding Long Beach after Superstorm Sandy.

Page 143

North Shore Protection of Critical Utilities

Cost-benefit analysis

General time frame

Long Beach is a fully developed community with a vulnerable shoreline. It
has infrastructure such as bulkheads that were not originally designed to
address current and future flood risk. The City recognizes that improvements
like bulkheading are needed on the shoreline to protect properties both on
the water and inland and especially the critical utilities on the north shore.
This innovative project is expected to reduce local government expenditures
from repairs to the major utilities, which were heavily damaged by
Superstorm Sandy.

Approximately 30 months

Risk reduction
a. The whole phased replacement and adding height to the
entire north shore bulkheading system is generally expected
to protect approximately 42 critical assets and to reduce the
vulnerability score of these assets by 1 or 2. In addition, it is
generally expected to provide protection from frequent coastal
flooding of the residential and commercial areas on and to the north
of Park Avenue and Beech Street in the West End which
encompasses an area of approximately four census tracts, 6,361
housing units, 15,333 residents, and 1.7 miles of commercial
business areas (1.1 miles on Park Avenue and 0.6 miles on Beech
Street).
b. The overall phased replacement and adding height to north
shore bulkheading is expected to reduce flood risk to a large
number of physical assets and is generally expected to provide
an increased level of protection to a majority of the population.

General time frame for implementation milestones


Prepare engineering and soil study – refer to City grant



Submit to regulatory agencies for review and permit approval –
refer to City grant



Prepare bid documents and review responses – refer to City grant



Construct project – refer to City grant

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances, New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation permitting, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Section 10 and 404 permits, and Coastal Zone Management consistency
concurrence (New York State Department of State).

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach. See Figure IV-12 for project
location.

Assets Benefitting: Entire north shore bulkheading system – 42 critical
assets including the Water Pollution Control Plant, the Water Purification
Plant, electric power substation, and assets located north of Park Avenue and
Beech Street in the West End including essential government facilities and
major commercial corridors.
Population Benefitting: A majority of the population would be protected
by the entire system.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 144

North Shore Protection of Critical Utilities

Figure IV-12: Project Location for North Shore Protection of Critical Utilities

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 145

Featured
Canal Gates in the East End

Long Beach

Cost estimate
$26,400,000

Cost estimate components


Prepare engineering and soil study –approximately $4,400,000



Project construction – approximately $20,000,000



Construction management –approximately $2,000,000

Benefits
Health and social

Flood protective measure (rubber dam) at bay end of canal

Source: URS

Description
Issue: Superstorm Sandy devastated the north shore of Long Beach. The
storm showed the inadequacy of the existing bulkheads to protect the area
from major storms.
This project is to explore the feasibility of canal gates, or a similar type
protective device, at the bay ends of the 4 canals located in the East End
(Neptune Blvd. to Curley St.). The project also involves the potential phased
installation of the gates. This project would ultimately connect to additional
current and proposed bulkheading projects (the North Shore Protection of
Critical Utilities and North Shore –Bulkheading projects). The project is part
of the larger north shore shoreline defense system.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Bulkheading is expected protect a majority of the City from coastal surge,
and to help provide some level of protection to essential health and social
services facilities to help quickly recover functions after a storm.
Economic
This project is expected to help reduce flooding in the Canals neighborhood
in the East End. This project is also generally expected to provide another
layer of shoreline defense, which is needed to protect the main commercial
corridors in Long Beach and would help reduce the disruption and downtime
to those businesses, which were all severely impacted by Superstorm Sandy.
Environmental
The project is generally expected to help reduce contamination associated
with buildings being flooded including reduction of floatable debris that
polluted the waterways surrounding Long Beach after Superstorm Sandy.

Page 146

Canal Gates in the East End

Cost-benefit analysis

General time frame for implementation milestones

Long Beach is a fully developed community with a vulnerable shoreline. It
has infrastructure like bulkheads that was not originally designed to address
current and future flood risk. The City recognizes that shoreline
improvements like canal gates are needed to protect properties both on the
water and inland. This significant investment is expected to yield high
returns in protecting homes, businesses, first responder facilities, and major
employer/service providers damaged or destroyed by Superstorm Sandy.



Prepare engineering/feasibility study – approximately 9 months



Regulatory agency review/permit approval and prepare bid
documents and review responses – approximately 6 months



Construct project – approximately 21 months

Risk reduction
a. The entire effort to protect the north shore, including canal
gates and bulkheading, is generally expected to protect
approximately 42 critical assets, and to reduce the vulnerability
score of these assets by 1 or 2. In addition, it is generally expected
to provide protection from frequent coastal flooding of the residential
and commercial areas on and to the north of Park Avenue and Beech
Street in the West End which encompasses an area of approximately
four census tracts, 6,361 housing units, 15,333 residents, and 1.7 miles
of commercial business areas (1.1 miles on Park Avenue and 0.6 miles
on Beech Street).

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances, New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation permitting, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Section 10 and 404 permits, and Coastal Zone Management consistency
concurrence (New York State Department of State).

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach. See Figure IV-13 for project
locations.

b. The overall canal gates/bulkheading of the north shore is
expected to reduce risk to a large number of physical assets and
provide an increased level of protection to a majority of the
population.
Assets Benefitting: Entire north shore protection system including canal
gates – 42 critical assets, which includes mostly those north of Park Avenue
and Beech Street in the West End, including essential government facilities
and major commercial corridors such as E. Park Avenue in the East End.
Population Benefitting: A majority of the population would benefit from
the entire system.

General time frame
Approximately 36 months

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 147

Canal Gates in the East End

Figure IV-13: Project Locations for Canal Gates in the East End

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 148

Park Avenue Complete Streets
Phase 2

Featured
Long Beach

Description

Cost estimate components

Issue: The pre-storm surge flooding from Superstorm Sandy made the
established evacuation routes inoperable for periods of time.



Prepare project design including drainage study – approximately
$4,860,000

This project involves a second phase to the Park Avenue Streetscape and
Drainage Infrastructure Improvement project. This phase includes the
redevelopment of Kennedy Plaza in front of City Hall to improve the City’s
stormwater system by providing large-scale underground stormwater storage
chambers as well as strategically located green infrastructure and solar
powered lighting. The re-design of Kennedy Plaza would remake it into an
aesthetically pleasing multipurpose public space that respects and honors the
memorials while having the flexibility of hosting many types of public
activities, from small gatherings to larger public events.



Project construction – approximately $35,640,000



Construction management – approximately $3,240,000

This project supports the April 2013 Cleaner Greener Long Island Plan (CGLI)
Transportation Strategy 1.3, which reads: “Improve safety of streets for
pedestrians and cyclists through implementation of Complete Streets, signal
optimization, and a comprehensive bike plan.” This plan also notes that
“inland, more frequent and intense rainfall events could also cause travel
disruptions due to flooded intersections, roadways and rail lines” and this
project would help reduce those impacts. Related projects include Park
Avenue/Beech Street Streetscape Drainage Study and Infrastructure
Improvements, Drainage Improvements, and Stormwater Project Phase
2/Stormwater Force Main Project. See Figure IV-14 for rendering of
potential re-design of Kennedy Plaza.

Benefits
Health and social
Reducing stormwater on Park Avenue and Beech Street is expected to assist
with a more orderly evacuation prior to an event and improve access for
emergency vehicles on established evacuation routes prior to major storms.
Economic
Complete Streets projects have a proven track record of increasing retail
sales and sales tax among businesses, and decreasing vacancies, in the
project area. Projects from California to New York City incorporating
Complete Streets concepts have improved pedestrian and transit access to
stores in key commercial areas, resulting in greater economic activity and
increased jobs.
Environmental
Creation of more pervious landscape would help improve water quality.

Cost estimate

Cost-benefit analysis

$43,740,000

Long Beach is a fully developed community with infrastructure like the
stormwater system that was not originally designed to address current and
future flood risk. This critical investment in upgrading and protecting the
stormwater system is generally expected to help improve access on
established evacuation routes pre-storm.

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 149

Park Avenue Complete Streets Phase 2

Risk reduction
a. The Park Avenue section of the project is expected to reduce
the stormwater flood risk to six critical assets and reduce the
vulnerability score by 1 for these assets. In addition, this
project would help reduce stormwater on a major evacuation
route. The approximately 1.1-mile commercial area on Park Avenue will
receive additional protection which helps protect an estimated 1,715
primary jobs on Park Avenue. This area will benefit from significantly
reduced likelihood of flooding from heavy rainfall events.
b. The population that resides, works, and shops in the Park
Avenue and Beech Street commercial corridors, including
guests, would benefit from this project.

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances; New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation permitting, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) and Coastal Zone Management consistency concurrence (New York
State Department of State), if applicable.

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach. See Figure IV-14 for potential redesign of Kennedy Plaza.

Assets Benefitting: Six critical assets, including LIRR Station, Police
Station, City Hall, Fire Station, and established evacuation route.
Population Benefitting: A large number of Long Beach residents would
use Park Avenue as an evacuation route and frequent the commercial area
on this street.

General time frame
Approximately 30 months

General time frame for implementation milestones


Prepare project design – approximately 6 months



Submit to regulatory agencies for review and permit approval –
approximately 3 months



Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately
3 months



Construct project – approximately 18 months

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 150

Park Avenue Complete Streets Phase II

Figure IV-14: Potential Redesign of Kennedy Plaza

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 151

Featured
Bayfront Revitalization Plan

Long Beach
include the North Shore Protection of Critical Utilities and Park Avenue/Beech
Street Streetscape Drainage Study and Infrastructure Improvements,
Drainage Improvements.

Cost estimate
$300,000

Cost estimate components
Long Beach bayfront industrial area

Source: URS



Prepare plan – approximately $300,000

Benefits
Description

Health and social

Issue: The north shore of Long Beach from approximately National
Boulevard to the Long Beach Bridge is where most of the City’s primary
utilities are, including the Water Pollution Control Plant and the Water
Purification Plant. There is a need to build on previous resiliency efforts in
this area and examine ways to advance protection before redevelopment can
be considered.

This project is expected to identify additional resiliency measures for an area
that includes or is adjacent to two census block groups where a majority of
households are at low/moderate income levels. This project would examine
measures to make the entire area more resilient and lower its flood risk.

This project builds on the City’s current “Creating Resilience: A Planning
Initiative” efforts, which include updating its comprehensive plan and the
Local Waterfront Revitalization Plan (LWRP). This project involves the
preparation of a plan that examines opportunities to make bayfront critical
infrastructure more resilient and potential options to consolidate industrial
uses on the north shore to lead to resilient redevelopment. This will include
brownfield remediation, connections to downtown and the ocean, and an
economic opportunity feasibility study. This plan will include a robust
community visioning and public input process. The approximate location of
the project is the north shore from National Boulevard to Long Beach Bridge
but this may be modified as the project is developed. Related projects

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Economic
This plan is expected to lay the groundwork for additional resiliency and
redevelopment in the north shore area, which could boost future economic
activity. Additional resiliency efforts in the bayfront can increase the
resiliency of the area and is expected to reduce future City emergency and
recovery costs.
Environmental
Reducing industrial uses on the bayfront is expected to help protect Reynolds
Channel from stormwater pollution. Part of the plan would address the
brownfield on the north shore; redevelopment should take into consideration
environmental justice concerns.

Page 152

Bayfront Revitalization Plan

Cost-benefit analysis

General time frame for implementation milestones

Long Beach has a significant number of critical utilities located in one of the
most vulnerable locations in the City. This plan is a sound approach to
evaluate how assets in the bayfront area of Long Beach could be further
protected and lower damages from events like Superstorm Sandy.



Prepare bid documents and review responses – approximately
3 months



Prepare plan – approximately 15 months



Risk reduction
a. The assets in the bayfront area are currently some of the most
vulnerable in Long Beach. Other efforts, like the bulkheading
and Dutch dams, are expected to help reduce vulnerability and
this plan can help identify additional risk reduction measures.
b. The actual risk reduction of this project is difficult to estimate
but part of the plan would identify additional resiliency
measures for critical assets that affect a majority of the Long
Beach population.

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances.

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach.

Assets Benefitting: Not applicable.
Population Benefitting: Plan identifies additional resiliency for critical
assets needed by entire City population.

General time frame
Approximately 18 months

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 153

Featured

Revolving Loan Fund for
Elevating Homes

Long Beach

Description
Issue: Thousands of homes in Long Beach were severely flooded by
Superstorm Sandy. Elevation is a resiliency method well suited to protecting
homes against floods but can be costly.
This project is a program for residents who need to elevate their homes to
obtain low-interest loans administered by an appropriate agency. The exact
locations of homes to be elevated are to be determined. A related project is
Establish an Office of Emergency Management.

Cost estimate
$5,000,000

Cost estimate components


Conduct feasibility analyses of elevating homes – approximately
$100,000



Elevate homes – approximately $4,500,000



Project management – approximately $400,000

Benefits
Health and social
Availability of low-interest loans is expected to help make elevation more
affordable for all populations, including socially vulnerable ones.
House elevation: Long Beach, NY,
March 2013 (top); June 2013 (bottom)

Source: FEMA News Photo

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Economic
This project is expected to help increase resilient residential construction and
make elevation more affordable, which would help maintain the customer
base for small businesses in Long Beach. Local government expenditures

Page 154

Revolving Loan Fund for Elevating Homes
associated with debris removal and emergency management costs are
expected to be reduced in proportion to the number of homes elevated,
which this project would help make elevations more affordable.
Environmental
This project should reduce some contamination associated with buildings
being flooded including reduction of floatable debris that polluted the
waterways surrounding Long Beach after Superstorm Sandy.

Cost-benefit analysis
Long Beach has hundreds to thousands of homes that should be elevated. If
this revolving loan fund project is not funded, residential structures in Long
Beach are likely to continue to be damaged by events like Superstorm Sandy.



Conduct feasibility analyses of elevating homes – approximately 6
months



Elevate homes – approximately 36 months

Local, State, and Federal government regulatory
requirements
The following is a non-exhaustive list of applicable requirements: The City of
Long Beach Code of Ordinances; New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation permitting.

Jurisdiction
The project is in the City of Long Beach.

Risk reduction
a. For the property owners who participate in this program, the
risk to their individual homes and structures is expected to be
greatly reduced. Sixty-eight % of Long Beach’s housing stock
sustained heavy or strong damage related to Superstorm Sandy (10,554
housing units) and many owners would need to elevate their homes.
b. This project is expected to help make elevation, a proven
mitigation technique, more affordable for Long Beach residents.
Assets Benefitting: Residential structures to be identified.
Population Benefitting: To be determined.

General time frame
Approximately 48 months

General time frame for implementation milestones


Identify organization to lead process – approximately 3 months



Identify interested participants – approximately 3 months

Section IV: Implementation – project profiles

Page 155

Section V:
Additional materials
Photo: Second Public Engagement Event, November 7, 2013

Source: Sustainable Long Island

Section V:
Additional materials
A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations
The Additional Resiliency Recommendations listed in Table V-1 are projects
that the NYRCR Planning Committee would like to highlight because they
help fulfill the reconstruction and resiliency strategies in Section III but are
not categorized as Proposed or Featured Projects. These recommendations
are generally additional ongoing projects or demonstrate further progress
toward the overall NYRCR goals. These recommendations are categorized by
strategy. A short project description is included in addition to a rough
estimated cost and whether the project is a regional project. The costs are
estimated based on the evolving nature of project development. Identifying
these projects in the NYRCR Long Beach Plan will aid Long Beach in potential
future implementation.

Section V: Additional materials

Page 157

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations

Short Description

Estimated Cost

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Microgrid for Select
Community Assets

Use localized power generation to maintain power to specific
assets if the utility grid becomes de-energized in the next storm
event. The project proposes to use natural gas and hydrogen
fuel cells to power key community assets with local generators.
This project could construct a microgrid of reliable power
sources with low emissions to power selected assets (East and
West Elementary School, City Hall, Fire and Police Stations at
City Hall).

$9,000,000

Y

Bayside Flood Gates
Feasibility Analysis

Conduct Bayside Flood Gates Feasibility Analysis – at existing
transportation structures for storm surge barrier protection.

$1,000,000 to
$2,000,000

Y

Transfer of Sewage
Treatment to Bay Park
STP

Transfer sewage treatment to Bay Park STP via sewer lift station
and current sewage treatment plant location. Current sewage
treatment plant decommissioning and pipeline from Bay Park
STP to 2 miles out into Atlantic Ocean.

$35,000,000 to
transfer from Long
Beach to Bay Park
STP; $700,000,000
for Ocean outfall

Y

Strategy 3 – Implement measures to make Long
Beach economic generators more resilient, while
also facilitating enhancement of key commercial
areas and the redevelopment of underutilized
areas to stimulate economic growth

Brownfield Remediation
Studies

The City has been awarded a Phase I study and will apply for a
Phase II study. The identified area is the old incinerator plant on
the north shore.

Less than
$1,000,000 for
Phase II study

N

Strategy 4 – Increase Long Beach’s capacity to
facilitate and foster actions that lead to greater
resiliency, emergency preparedness, and
sustainability

Community Rating
System Evaluation

The City hired a firm to review the City’s floodplain management
system with the goal of lowering flood insurance premiums for
residents. The review is expected to include a scoring evaluation
with the National Flood Insurance Program’s Community Rating
System.

$35,000

N

Strategy 5 – Encourage and facilitate housing
resiliency and sustainability measures while
striving to maintain the character of Long Beach

Residential Resilience
Project

The City has created a program to assist homeowners in
implementing resiliency measures and requested.

$25,000,000

N

Strategy 6 – Restore and enhance natural
resources for both resiliency and recreation
purposes while also protecting important cultural
resources

Boardwalk Visioning
Phase 2

Build on the original Boardwalk visioning process and determine
additional improvements needed for the Boardwalk to maximize
its potential while maintaining the character desired by Long
Beach.

Less than
$1,000,000

N

Strategy
Strategy 1 – Employ appropriate techniques to
mitigate ocean and bay storm surge and
stormwater flooding to protect Long Beach’s
infrastructure, people, and assets while
positioning for resilient redevelopment

Section V: Additional materials

Project Name

Page 158

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Master table of projects
The Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional Resiliency
Recommendations (ARR) identified throughout the Long Beach NY Rising
Community Reconstruction Plan are reflected in Table V-2 below. These
projects and recommendations are categorized by Reconstruction and
Resiliency Strategy and project category. The table also provides short
project descriptions, estimated costs, and whether the
project/recommendation is a regional project. The costs are estimated based
on the evolving nature of project development. In some cases, projects and
recommendations may address more than one Reconstruction and Resiliency
Strategy.

Section V: Additional materials

Page 159

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2: Master Table of Projects
Strategy
Strategy 1 – Employ
appropriate techniques to
mitigate ocean and bay
storm surge and
stormwater flooding to
protect Long Beach’s
infrastructure, people,
and assets while
positioning for resilient
redevelopment

Project Name

Short Description

Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Bulkheading – North Shore

The entire north shore of Long Beach needs major storm
protection. This project is to provide phased installation,
replacement, and improvement to bulkheads for the north
shore for storm protection. Phasing to be developed for
critical areas as established by August 2013 Long Beach
Bulkhead study.

Proposed
Project

$12,450,000

Y

Drainage Improvements

Stormwater drainage in critical areas, including those that
tie to evacuation routes and adjacent hot spots. Includes
comprehensive stormwater study and addition of backflow
prevention valves on stormwater outfalls and green
infrastructure for retention.

Proposed
Project

$8,350,000

Y

Critical Facility Resiliency

Feasibility study and implementation for flood and wind
protection, and backup power at critical emergency
responder facilities; include support equipment. Create a
community assistance center at the Ice Arena/Recreation
Center.

Proposed
Project

$2,387,000

Y

Park Avenue/Beech Street
Streetscape Drainage Study
and Infrastructure
Improvements

Comprehensive stormwater study that leads to stormwater
drainage improvements, green infrastructure, streetscape
improvements, emergency signage, and solar-powered
lighting.

Proposed
Project

$10,625,500

Y

Parking Garage for Emergency
Vehicles

Study locations for and construct a parking garage
structured to hold emergency response vehicles and
equipment at a second-story level which will also act as an
emergency distribution center.

Proposed
Project

$14,705,000

N

Protection of Wells and Sewer
Pump/Lift Stations

Protection for three pump stations and two wells, and
backup generators elevated above the storm level.

Proposed
Project

$2,480,000

Y

Park Avenue Complete Streets
Phase 2

Improve the City’s stormwater system via redevelopment of
Kennedy Plaza in front of City Hall to provide large-scale
underground stormwater storage chambers and strategically
located green infrastructure, solar lighting and reconfigured
use of the space.

Featured
Project

$43,740,000

Y

Section V: Additional materials

Page 160

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2: Master Table of Projects (Continued)
Strategy
Strategy 1 (cont.)

Project Name

Short Description

Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Stormwater Project Phase
2/Stormwater Force Main
Project

Improve stormwater drainage, including installing
pressurized pipes (force main), replacing drainage inlet
structures, and increasing stormwater storage.

Featured
Project

$114,830,000

Y

North Shore Protection of
Critical Utilities

Provide coordination with the $12.9 million north shore
bulkheading project, announced by Governor Cuomo in
November 2013, which will develop bulkheading from
National Boulevard to the Long Beach Bridge. Includes flood
barriers (i.e., deployable barriers or Dutch dams) around
major utilities.

Featured
Project

$12,900,000

Y

Canal Gates at the East End

Assess and provide phased installation of moveable canal
gates to mitigate flooding of the canal area. Coordinate with
north shore bulkheading project.

Featured
Project

$26,400,000

Y

Microgrid for Select Community
Assets

Use localized power generation to maintain power to
specific assets if the utility grid becomes de-energized in the
next storm event. The project proposes to use natural gas
and hydrogen fuel cells to power key community assets with
local generators. This project could construct a microgrid of
reliable power sources with low emissions to power selected
assets (East and West Elementary School, City Hall, Fire and
Police Stations at City Hall).

ARR

$9,000,000

Bayside Flood Gates Feasibility
Analysis

Conduct Bayside Flood Gates Feasibility Analysis at existing
transportation structures.

ARR

$1,000,000 to
$2,000,000

Y

Transfer of Sewage Treatment
to Bay Park STP

Transfer sewage treatment to Bay Park STP via sewer lift
station and current sewage treatment plant location.
Current sewage treatment plant decommissioning and
pipeline from Bay Park STP to 2 miles out into Atlantic
Ocean.

ARR

$35,000,000 to
transfer from
Long Beach to
Bay Park STP;
$700,000,000 for
pipe to Ocean
outfall

Y

Section V: Additional materials

Page 161

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2: Master Table of Projects (Continued)
Strategy
Strategy 2 – Protect
critical Long Beach health
and social services assets
and increase the capacity
to provide needed
emergency and
community services
before, during, and after
disasters

Strategy 3 – Implement
measures to make Long
Beach economic
generators more resilient,
while also facilitating
enhancement of key
commercial areas and the
redevelopment of
underutilized areas to
stimulate economic
growth

Project Name

Short Description

Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Critical Facility Resiliency

Feasibility study and implementation for flood and wind
protection, and backup power at critical emergency
responder facilities; include support equipment. Create a
community assistance center at the Ice Arena/Recreation
Center.

Proposed
Project

$2,387,000

Y

Protection of Community
Centers

Feasibility study, design and construct resiliency protection
for existing community centers to be used in an emergency.

Proposed
Project

$1,335,000

N

Protection of Public Housing
Units

Enhance protection of two public housing units to allow
residents to return to the units as soon as possible after a
storm evacuation. The two public housing units are the
Channel Park Homes and Pine Town Homes. Coordinate
with other funding sources.

Proposed
Project

$2,965,000

N

Protection of Senior Housing
Units

Provide flood protection to public senior housing units,
including the Sol Scher Apartments, Michael Valente
Apartments, Sonny Duckman Apartments, and Morton
Cohen Apartments. Coordinate with other funding sources.

Proposed
Project

$1,925,000

N

Park Avenue/Beech Street
Streetscape Drainage Study
and Infrastructure
Improvements

Comprehensive stormwater study that leads to stormwater
drainage improvements, green infrastructure, streetscape
improvements, emergency signage, and solar-powered
lighting.

Proposed
Project

$10,652,500

Y

Park Avenue Complete Streets
Phase 2

Improve the City’s stormwater system via redevelopment of
Kennedy Plaza in front of City Hall to provide large-scale
underground stormwater storage chambers and strategically
located green infrastructure, solar lighting and reconfigured
use of the space.

Featured
Project

$43,740,000

Y

Bayfront Revitalization Plan

Prepare a plan to examine resiliency and consolidation
options for north shore critical infrastructure for resiliency
and redevelopment to unite the bayfront with the rest of
the corridor and center of the City. This will include
brownfield remediation, connections to downtown and
ocean, housing options, and an economic opportunity
feasibility study.

Featured
Project

$300,000

Y

Section V: Additional materials

Page 162

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2: Master Table of Projects (Continued)
Strategy

Strategy 4 – Increase
Long Beach’s capacity to
facilitate and foster
actions that lead to
greater resiliency,
emergency preparedness,
and sustainability

Strategy 5 – Encourage
and facilitate housing
resiliency and
sustainability measures
while striving to maintain
the character of Long
Beach

Project Name

Short Description

Brownfield Remediation Studies

The City has been awarded a Phase I study and will apply
for a Phase II study. The identified area is the old
incinerator plant on the north shore.

Establish an Office of
Emergency Management
(OEM) and Hire a Local
Disaster Recovery Manager
(LDRM)

Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

ARR

Less than
$1,000,000 for
Phase II study

N

Establish office in City Hall including hiring an LDRM to lead
the OEM to conduct disaster planning, disseminate
upcoming storm actions, coordinate larger hazard events
like floods, and work with a community education plan.
Includes office setup in City Hall to be operational postdisaster.

Proposed
Project

$1,083,000

Y

Bayfront Revitalization Plan

Prepare a plan to examine resiliency and consolidation
options for north shore critical infrastructure for resiliency
and redevelopment to unite the bayfront with the rest of
the corridor and center of the City. This will include
brownfield remediation, connections to downtown and
ocean, housing options, and an economic opportunity
feasibility study.

Featured
Project

$300,000

Y

Community Rating System
Evaluation

The City hired a firm to review the City’s floodplain
management system with the goal of lowering flood
insurance premiums for residents. The review is expected to
include a scoring evaluation with the National Flood
Insurance Program’s Community Rating System.

ARR

$35,000

N

Protection of Public Housing
Units

Enhance protection of two public housing units to allow
residents to return to the units as soon as possible after a
storm evacuation. The two public housing units are the
Channel Park Homes and Pine Town Homes. Coordinate
with other funding sources.

Proposed
Project

$2,965,000

N

Protection of Senior Housing
Units

Provide flood protection to public senior housing units,
including the Sol Scher Apartments, Michael Valente
Apartments, Sonny Duckman Apartments, and Morton
Cohen Apartments. Coordinate with other funding sources.

Proposed
Project

$1,925,000

N

Section V: Additional materials

Page 163

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2: Master Table of Projects (Continued)
Strategy

Strategy 6 – Restore and
enhance natural
resources for both
resiliency and recreation
purposes while also
protecting important
cultural resources

Project Name

Short Description

Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

Featured
Project

$5,000,000

N

Revolving Loan Fund for
Elevating Homes

Make low-interest loans available for residents who need to
elevate their homes; would be administered by an
appropriate agency.

Residential Resilience Project

The City has created a program to assist homeowners in
implementing resiliency measures and requested funding.

ARR

$25,000,000

N

Drainage Improvements

Stormwater drainage in critical areas, including those that
tie to evacuation routes and adjacent hot spots. Includes
comprehensive stormwater study and addition of backflow
prevention valves on stormwater outfalls and green
infrastructure for retention.

Proposed

$8,350,000

Y

Stormwater Project Phase
2/Stormwater Force Main
Project

Improve stormwater drainage, including installing
pressurized pipes (force main), replacing drainage inlet
structures, and increasing stormwater storage.

Featured
Project

$114,830,000

Y

Boardwalk Visioning Phase 2

Build on the original Boardwalk visioning process and
determine additional improvements needed for the
Boardwalk to maximize its potential while maintaining the
character desired by Long Beach.

ARR

Less than
$1,000,000

N

Section V: Additional materials

Page 164

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

C. Public engagement process
The NYRCR Long Beach public engagement process included 12 Planning
Committee meetings, three Public Engagement Events, and online surveys
(as of March 31, 2014). Each Planning Committee Meeting was open to the
public and audience participation was encouraged through questions at the
end of the meeting and public comment cards. The meetings occurred on
the following dates:



An official press release describing the work before and after the
Public Engagement Event was distributed to local papers.



Information and flyers were distributed electronically and in person
to the following entities:


LongBeachListens.com listserv (900 people);



Long Beach Community Organizations Active in Disasters (23
member organizations);



What Long Beach Can Be!! (1,229 members);



Imagine Long Beach (2,568 members);



City of Long Beach official website ;



City of Long Beach’s Facebook page (9,775 members);



Long Beach Chamber of Commerce, Public Library, Public School
Board, and the Parent-Teacher Association ;



Media outlets such as the Long Beach Herald, Patch, News 12,
Fios, and Newsday (articles published in the Long Beach Herald
and Newsday);



Local civic associations;



Houses of worship;

Public Outreach for Engagement Events



The methods used to notify the public of the Public Engagement Events and
the NYRCR planning process were as follows:

Long Beach Latino Civic Association and Circulo de la Hispanidad
(translated into Spanish);



Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Center and Magnolia Senior
/Community Center;



Long Beach Reach, Federation Employment and Guidance
Services, Inc. Health and Human Services, and Project Hope;



Individuals who are active in their community;



Farmers’ Market;



Long Beach High School/Nike alternative school program; and



Long Beach bus depot/shelters.



September 18 and 26, 2013



October 3, 14 and 24, 2013



November 16, 2013



December 5, 2013



January 9 and 23, 2014



February 6, 2014



March 11 and 27, 2014

The Public Engagement Events took place at strategic intervals and were
accompanied with online surveys for those not able to attend. Further
discussion of the meetings and methods for public outreach are provided in
the following subsections.



The New York State and Long Beach NYRCR Facebook pages
provided information, documents, meeting dates, and answers to
questions that were posted. The Facebook page was shared with
local groups that are also on Facebook.


Website: http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr/community/citylong-beach



Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/LBCRP (531 members)

Section V: Additional materials

Page 165

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan



Additionally, flyers were distributed at the following locations for the
November 7, 2013, event:


500 flyers were distributed at the Waldbaum’s shopping center
in early November.



500 flyers were distributed throughout the West End during the
Dune Grass Planting event on Saturday, November 2, 2013.



1,000 flyers were distributed throughout the East End and
Central District stores in late October and early November,
including at the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) station.



Lawn signs – 40 distributed citywide for February 27, 2014, event.



Additionally, flyers were distributed at the following locations for
February 27, 2014, event:





1,500 at the Long Beach Polar Bear Plunge Event on February 2;



250 at the Winter Farmers’ Market on February 5;



500 at the Lindell Elementary School on February 24;



50 to Key Food Supermarket on February 20;



250 to the City of Long Beach Community Development Office
for additional distribution to the West End on February 20;



100 to Circulo de la Hispanidad organization for distribution to its
members on February 20; and



100 to the Long Beach Latino Civic Association for distribution to
its membership on February 20.

The first Public Engagement Event was publicized at the LIRR Long
Beach station and bus shelters via Street Teams.

First Public Engagement Event
The first Public Engagement Event was held on October 10, 2013, and was
attended by more than 100 residents. An online survey was developed to
obtain feedback on resiliency planning from residents unable to attend
meetings.

Section V: Additional materials

First Public Engagement Event, October 10, 2013

Source: Sustainable Long Island

The event opened with an overview of the NYRCR planning process and the
City’s progress in implementing projects. The overview was presented by the
Committee Co-Chairs, the City, and the Consultant Team. Most of the
meeting involved a facilitated breakout session during which participants
were asked for feedback on the Vision Statement, needs and opportunities,
key strategies, and community assets. Spanish-speaking interpreters were
made available. Residents discussed their particular concerns during the
aftermath of Superstorm Sandy and emphasized that they were impacted the
most by flooding and loss of heat, sewers, and access to food and fuel.
Residents added they were also impacted by lack of communication, lack of
cell towers/internet, debris taking weeks to be removed, and lack of drinking
water.
During the event, participants were also asked to identify their preferred
mitigation strategies to lessen flood impacts shown in Table V-3. The
perceived effectiveness of mitigation strategies, as identified by participants,
is shown in Table V-3.

Page 166

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-3: Perceived Effectiveness of Mitigation Strategies
Effectiveness of four types of mitigation strategies to lessen the impact of flood events:
Four types of mitigation strategies

Community Value

Hard Infrastructure (bulkheads, cement walls)

High

Resiliency Techniques (elevate homes)

High

Soft Infrastructure (dunes, wetlands)

High

Stormwater Management (bioswales)

High

Strategies to achieve resiliency on the oceanfront:
Resiliency strategies on the oceanfront
Build dunes, bulkheads, and/or flood gates to protect homes and infrastructure
Harden critical infrastructure

Community Value
High
Medium

Convert abandoned areas to open space

Low

Do not rebuild on areas with high rebuilding costs

Low

Relocate homes and infrastructure further from shorelines

Low

Strategies to achieve resiliency on the bayfront:
Resiliency strategies on the bayfront
Build dunes, bulkheads, and/or flood gates to protect homes and infrastructure
Harden critical infrastructure

Community Value
High
Medium

Convert abandoned areas to open space

Low

Do not rebuild on areas with high rebuilding costs

Low

Relocate homes and infrastructure further from shorelines

Low

Section V: Additional materials

Page 167

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Second Public Engagement Event
The second Public Engagement Event, held on November 7, 2013, included a
review of strategies presented in the NYRCR Long Beach Conceptual Plan.
Over 50 residents attended the meeting. This Public Engagement Event
included a presentation on the status of the project and participants were
organized into facilitated focus groups to further discuss the strategies that
were included in the NYRCR Long Beach Conceptual Plan. Three hardcopies
of the Conceptual Plan were placed in the library for review, and it was
available online on the NYRCR website. Participants were asked to identify
strategies to achieve resiliency, identify ideas for new projects by
Reconstruction Strategy, provide input on economic development strategies
to achieve resiliency, and discuss projects identified as “ready to go.”
Community value of the preferred strategies to achieve resiliency are shown
in Table V-4.

Second Public Engagement Event, November 7, 2013

Source: Sustainable Long Island

Section V: Additional materials

Page 168

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-4: Second Public Engagement Event Activity Results
Strategies to achieve resiliency
Strategies

Community Value

Establish a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with local cellular carriers to ensure better response after
storms (e.g., expanded and faster access to mobile cell phone towers after a storm).

High

Install flood barriers at canal entrances.

High

Introduce green infrastructure, such as bioswales in road medians, porous paving in parking areas, and rain
gardens, to assist with stormwater management.

High

Protect critical facilities and major utilities by making system-wide improvements, including elevating critical
mechanical systems, hardening outer structures, constructing ring walls or berms, elevating vulnerable key
components, providing backup power, and updating sewage treatment plants to improve water quality.

High

Develop response teams to check on and assist populations on a continuous basis until power is restored.

Medium

Enhance the Complete Streets Program to reduce traffic congestion; improve traffic circulation, traffic
calming, and bicycle routes; reduce vehicle-pedestrian conflicts; and improve parking. It will also provide a
means to reduce flooding with rain gardens, and holding basins for the water.

Medium

Relocate emergency generators to upper floors, and harden where necessary, to maintain power and
functionality during future hazard events.

Medium

Repurpose public buildings to create refuge centers during and after major storms.

Medium

Update post-Sandy and complete the Local Waterfront Revitalization Plan.

Medium

Balance future redevelopment needs with Environmental Justice concerns.

Low

Continue accruing Community Rating System points (a voluntary incentive program that recognizes and
encourages community floodplain management activities that exceed the minimum requirements) from the
National Flood Insurance Program to reduce flood insurance premiums.

Low

Develop MOUs with food assistance groups (e.g., Island Harvest, Long Island Cares, Meals on Wheels) to
arrange for assistance for the elderly in walk-up buildings when the power is out.

Low

Enhance the resiliency of key social service facilities, including the Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Center.

Low

Establish a local Office of Emergency Management.

Low

Facilitate the bulkheading of medical and health care centers.

Low

Section V: Additional materials

Page 169

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-4: Second Public Engagement Event Activity Results (Continued)
Strategies to achieve resiliency
Strategies

Community Value

Prepare a list of disaster recovery services vendors for the City and enter into MOUs.

Low

Promote sign-up for the Reverse 911 System and Long Beach Response, an always-available emergency
communications service, and promote quarterly tests of the system.

Low

Protect facilities with critical government services to maintain continuity of operations after major storms.

Low

Protect senior housing/centers and housing for other vulnerable populations.

Low

Restore and protect fire, ambulance, and police facilities.

Low

Restore and protect schools and daycare facilities to allow schools to be operable quickly after storms.

Low

Set up special needs registration so that vulnerable people (elderly, bilingual, disabled, low income) can
identify themselves and receive needed services during emergencies (e.g., assistance with evacuation,
transportation to inland hospitals if on a respirator).

Low

Section V: Additional materials

Page 170

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-5: Survey Results

Survey results
A survey soliciting input from Long Beach residents on key topics related to
Superstorm Sandy was conducted (available on the NYRCR Long Beach
website) from October 2013 through February 2014. The survey asked
questions on how Superstorm Sandy affected residents, what issues are still
concerns during flood events, priorities for the future, and comments on the
types of strategies that would lessen flooding during storm events. 204
people who identified themselves as Long Beach residents responded to the
survey and the results are found on the following pages.

Second Public Engagement Event, November 7, 2013

Source: Sustainable Long Island

Section V: Additional materials

How severely Sandy affected residents’ lives
Affected

Community
Value

Communication access (phone, email)

High

Displaced from home

High

Drinking water (shower, etc.)

High

Power/electricity

High

Sewer & stormwater drainage

High

Fuel for cars/automobiles

Medium

Gas (heat/cooking)

Medium

Public safety concerns

Medium

Transportation access

Medium

Access to food

Low

Displaced from school

Low

Displaced from work

Low

Medical attention

Low

Other (please specify)

Low

Page 171

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-5: Survey results (Continued)

Table V-5: Survey results (Continued)
Importance for the future

Remaining concerns during flood events
Issues

Community
Value

Community
Value

Importance

Electricity (loss of power)

High

Improved communication systems

High

Home flooding

High

Improved emergency preparedness, management, or response

High

Roads (flooding)

High

Improved infrastructure to serve commercial and/or industrial areas

High

Sewer or wastewater

High

Physical barriers to block or divert flood waters

High

Waterfront erosion

High

Restored, repaired, or expanded marshes and wetlands to absorb
stormwater, tides, and flooding

High

Access to food/replace lost food

Medium

Access to fuel for evacuation, getting to work or personal
emergencies

Medium

Gas (cooking, heat – loss of power)

Medium

Reliable, effective, real-time communication

Medium

Access to emergency supplies, clothes and goods

Low

Businesses or place of employment closed or shut down

Low

Other (please specify)

Low

Private transportation

Low

Public transportation

Low

Section V: Additional materials

Green infrastructure to reduce runoff and improved maintenance of
stormwater retention facilities

Medium

Improved drainage and capacity of storm sewer system

Medium

Reduced flooding in commercial areas to protect business
investments

Medium

Restored, repaired, or expanded dunes

Medium

Restored access to medical care

Medium

Strengthen infrastructure to better withstand future storms

Medium

Homes elevated above 100-year floodplain

Low

Improved homeowner understanding of reconstruction
options/practices

Low

Other (please specify)

Low

Public education about possible longer-term effects from storm
damage

Low

Voluntary relocation or buy-outs where appropriate

Low

Page 172

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-5: Survey results (Continued)
Perceived effectiveness of strategies for achieving resiliency
Community
Strategies
Value
Hard infrastructure (i.e. bulkheads, expanded sewers, cement walls,
storm drains, fortified structures, etc.)

High

Resiliency techniques (i.e. elevation of homes, renewable energy
sources, water retention areas; resiliency and response plan for
schools.)

High

Communication (i.e. central location or points of contact, evacuation
and communication plan that connects with existing plans as
appropriate, volunteer street sweep teams, system for providing first
responders and residents with real-time information)

Medium

Emergency management & response (Improve coordination; harden
emergency services buildings such as police and fire departments
where necessary; create community assistance center, “safe zones,”
etc.)

Medium

Soft infrastructure (i.e. dunes, wetlands, vegetation, bioswales,
French drains, open space, etc.)

Medium

Natural water capture and filtration (i.e. bioswales, new/expanded
tree pits, green and roofs, etc.)

Low

Other (please specify)

Low

Section V: Additional materials

Page 173

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Third Public Engagement Event
The third Public Engagement Event was held on February 27, 2014, at the
Lindell Elementary School. It involved a review of the Proposed Projects and
Featured Projects in consideration for the NYRCR Plan. The event was set up
as an open house format with two short orientations throughout the
meeting. Project boards were set up so that specific projects could be viewed
and discussed in more detail with the Committee Members and the
Consultant Team. Project Evaluation Guides were also made available so that
participants could indicate their support for each project, the reasons why
they felt that the projects were important and how they addressed
community needs, and any other comments on the projects presented.
Over 100 residents attended the meeting. A survey (which was available online and a link provided on the NYRCR Long Beach website) was also
circulated to ascertain residents’ opinions on suggested Proposed and
Featured Projects for those residents who could not attend the Public
Engagement Event. Overall results from public input on the projects
indicated that 76% of respondents rated overall support for the projects
between “Moderate” and “High.” Table V-6 provides details on the level of
community support by specific project.

Third Public Engagement Event,
February 27, 2014

Source: Sustainable Long Island

The participants provided information on how long they have lived in Long
Beach:


28% have lived in Long Beach for 20 or more years;



25% for 11-20 years;



17% for 6-10 years;



12% for 1-5 years;



5% for less than 1 year; and



13% did not respond to this question.

Flyers for Third Engagement Meeting in English and Spanish

Source: Sustainable Long Island

Section V: Additional materials

Page 174

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-6: Community Support by Project
Based upon February 27, 2014, Public Engagement Event
Project Category

Community
Support

Bulkheading – North Shore

Proposed Project

High

Canal Gates in the East End

Featured Project

High

Drainage Improvements

Proposed Project

High

North Shore Critical Facilities Bulkheading
(funding announced by Governor Cuomo in November
2013)

Featured Project

High

North Shore Bulkheading Final Phase (since the
2/27/14 meeting, this has been combined with
Bulkheading–North Shore project)

Featured Project

High

Protection of Wells and Pump/Lift Stations

Proposed Project

High

Stormwater Project Phase II

Featured Project

High

Bayfront Revitalization Plan

Featured Project

Medium

Critical Facility Resiliency

Proposed Project

Medium

Protection of Community Centers

Proposed Project

Medium

Revolving Loan Fund for Elevating Homes

Featured Project

Medium

Streetscape Drainage Infrastructure

Proposed Project

Medium

Establish Office of Emergency Management

Proposed Project

Low

Park Ave Complete Streets II

Featured Project

Low

Parking Garage for Emergency Vehicles

Proposed Project

Low

Protection of Public Housing Units

Proposed Project

Low

Protection of Senior Housing Units

Proposed Project

Low

Project Name

Section V: Additional materials

Page 175

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

D. Community asset inventory
In Table V-7, risk scores are defined as follows:
>53 = severe risk (shown in red)
24 – 53 = high risk (shown in orange)
6 – 23 = moderate risk category (shown in green)
<6 = residual risk
Table V-7: Risk Assessment Scores for Critical Assets
Risk Assessment
Asset

Section V: Additional materials

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Bayfront Esplanade

3

4

1

12

Beachfront Boardwalk

3

4

3

36

Beach Terrace Care Center

3

4

3

36

Channel Park Homes

3

3

3

27

Cingular Wireless Cellular Tower

3

4

4

48

City Hall

3

3

5

45

City Library

3

3

3

27

Clark Street Splash Park

3

4

1

12

Commercial District – East End

3

3

3

27

Commercial District – Park Avenue

3

3

3

27

Commercial District – West End

3

3

3

27

East Elementary School

3

3

4

36

Fire Station #1

3

3

5

45

Fire Station #2

3

3

5

45

Fire Station #3 (Headquarters)

3

4

5

60

Page 176

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-7: Risk assessment scores for critical assets (Continued)
Risk Assessment
Asset

Section V: Additional materials

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Foundation Block

3

4

2

24

Georgia Street Splash Park

3

3

1

9

Haas Pavilion

3

4

3

36

Headstart Facility

3

3

3

27

Kennedy Plaza

3

3

1

9

Komanoff Pavilion

3

4

3

36

Leroy Conyers Park

3

3

1

9

Lindell Elementary School

3

3

4

36

Long Beach Auxiliary Police

3

3

3

27

Long Beach Boulevard Bridge

3

4

4

48

Long Beach Boulevard Gateway Area

3

4

3

36

Long Beach Bus Garage/Vehicle
Maintenance

3

4

3

36

Long Beach Ice Arena

3

4

2

24

Long Beach Medical Center (former)

3

4

4

48

Long Beach Recreation Center

3

4

3

36

Long Island Rail Road Station

3

3

4

36

Magnolia Senior Community Center

3

3

3

27

Major Arterial – Beech Street

3

3

4

36

Major Arterial – Broadway

3

3

4

36

Page 177

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-7: Risk assessment scores for critical assets (Continued)
Risk Assessment
Asset

Section V: Additional materials

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Major Arterial – Park Avenue

3

3

4

36

Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Center

3

4

3

36

Michael Valente Senior Apartments

3

3

3

27

Morgan Stern Pavilion

3

4

3

36

Morton Cohen Senior Apartments

3

3

3

27

North Shore Brownfield

3

4

2

24

Pine Townhouses

3

4

3

36

Police Station

3

3

5

45

Power Supply Infrastructure

3

3

5

45

Public Works Facility

3

3

3

27

Pump/Lift Station

3

4

4

48

Pump/Lift Station

3

4

4

48

Pump/Lift Station

3

3

4

36

Pump/Lift Station

3

3

4

36

Pump/Lift Station

3

3

4

36

Seaview Terrace

3

3

3

27

Sherman Brown Sports Courts

3

4

1

12

Sol Scher Senior Apartments

3

3

3

27

Sonny Duckman Senior Apartments

3

3

3

27

Stormwater Management System

3

4

4

48

Page 178

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-7: Risk assessment scores for critical assets (Continued)
Risk Assessment
Asset

Section V: Additional materials

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Superblock

3

4

2

24

U.S. Post Office

3

3

2

18

Verizon Substation

3

3

4

36

Veterans Memorial Park

3

3

1

9

Water Pollution Control Plant

3

3

5

45

Water Purification Plant

3

4

5

60

Well

3

3

4

36

Well

3

3

4

36

West Elementary School

3

3

4

36

West End Library

3

3

3

27

Williams/Transco High Pressure Gas Pipeline

3

3

4

36

Page 179

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Community asset, landscape attributes, and risk assessment information
In Table V-8, assets with risk scores over 53 are in the severe risk category. Assets with scores between 24 and 53 are in the high-risk category. Assets with scores between 6 and 23 are in the moderate-risk category. And lastly, assets with scores less than 6
means are in the residual risk category.
Table V-8: Community Asset Inventory - Long Beach Assets, Landscape Attributes, and Risk Assessment Scores
ASSET INFORMATION
Risk
Area

Asset

Asset Class

LANDSCAPE ATTRIBUTES

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate(1)

Beach
Width(2)

Shore
Defenses(3)

Protective
Vegetation(4)

Dunes or
Bluffs(5)

RISK ASSESSMENT

Soils(6)

Landscape
Attribute
Score(7)

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Bayfront Esplanade

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

1

12

Beachfront Boardwalk

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Clark Street Splash Park

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

1

12

Georgia Street Splash Park

High

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

1

9

Kennedy Plaza

High

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

1

9

Leroy Conyers Park

High

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

1

9

Sherman Brown Sports
Courts

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

1

12

Veterans Memorial Park

High

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

1

9

Long Beach Ice Arena

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

2

24

Long Beach Recreation
Center

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Magnolia
Senior/Community Center

High

Health and Social
Services

Yes

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Martin Luther King, Jr.
Community Center

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Channel Park Homes

High

Housing

Yes

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Pine Town Homes

Extreme

Housing

Yes

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Senior Housing

High

Housing

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Senior Housing

High

Housing

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Senior Housing

High

Housing

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Senior Housing

High

Housing

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Beach Terrace Care Center

Extreme

Housing

Yes

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Cingular Wireless Cellular
Tower

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Verizon Substation

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

City Hall

High

Health and Social
Services

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

5

45

Section V: Additional materials

Page 180

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-8: Community Asset Inventory - Long Beach Assets, Landscape Attributes, and Risk Assessment Scores (Continued)
ASSET INFORMATION
Risk
Area

Asset

Asset Class

LANDSCAPE ATTRIBUTES

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate(1)

Beach
Width(2)

Shore
Defenses(3)

Protective
Vegetation(4)

Dunes or
Bluffs(5)

RISK ASSESSMENT

Soils(6)

Landscape
Attribute
Score(7)

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

City Library

High

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

West End Library

High

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

East Elementary School

High

Health and Social
Services

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Lindell Elementary School

High

Health and Social
Services

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

West Elementary School

High

Health and Social
Services

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Headstart Facility

High

Health and Social
Services

Yes

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Fire Station #1

High

Health and Social
Services

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

5

45

Fire Station #2

High

Health and Social
Services

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

5

45

Fire Station #3

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

5

60

Long Beach Auxiliary Police

High

Health and Social
Services

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Police Station

High

Health and Social
Services

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

5

45

Post Office

High

Health and Social
Services

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

2

18

Commercial District – East
End

High

Economic

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Commercial District – Park
Avenue

High

Economic

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Commercial District – West
End

High

Economic

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Long Beach Boulevard
Gateway Area

Extreme

Economic

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Haas Pavilion

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Hannah and Isidore
Komanoff Pavilion

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Long Beach Medical Center

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

No

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Morgan Stern Pavilion

Extreme

Health and Social
Services

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Section V: Additional materials

Page 181

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-8: Community Asset Inventory - Long Beach Assets, Landscape Attributes, and Risk Assessment Scores (Continued)
ASSET INFORMATION
Risk
Area

Asset

Asset Class

LANDSCAPE ATTRIBUTES

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate(1)

Beach
Width(2)

Shore
Defenses(3)

Protective
Vegetation(4)

Dunes or
Bluffs(5)

RISK ASSESSMENT

Soils(6)

Landscape
Attribute
Score(7)

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Long Beach Bus
Garage/Vehicle
Maintenance

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Public Works Facility

High

Health and Social
Services

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Long Beach Boulevard
Bridge

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Long Island Railroad
Station

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Major Arterial - Beech
Street

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Major Arterial - Broadway

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Major Arterial - Park
Avenue

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Water Pollution Control
Plant

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

5

45

Water Purification Plant

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

5

60

Pump/Lift Station

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Pump/Lift Station

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Pump/Lift Station

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Pump/Lift Station

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Pump/Lift Station

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Well

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Well

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Power Supply
Infrastructure

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

5

45

Stormwater Management
System

Extreme

Infrastructure Systems

No

No, locally
significant

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Williams/Transco High
Pressure Gas Pipeline

High

Infrastructure Systems

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

Foundation Block

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

2

24

Superblock

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Low

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

2

24

Section V: Additional materials

Page 182

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-8: Community Asset Inventory - Long Beach Assets, Landscape Attributes, and Risk Assessment Scores (Continued)
ASSET INFORMATION
Risk
Area

Asset

Asset Class

LANDSCAPE ATTRIBUTES

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Erosion
Rate(1)

Beach
Width(2)

Shore
Defenses(3)

Protective
Vegetation(4)

Dunes or
Bluffs(5)

RISK ASSESSMENT

Soils(6)

Landscape
Attribute
Score(7)

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

North Shore Brownfield
Site

Extreme

Economic

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

2

24

Reynolds Channel

Extreme

Natural and Cultural
Resources

No

No

Medium

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Erosion rate: Long-term average erosion rate ≥1 foot per year or unknown
Beach width: Waterline frequently at shore defense or upland vegetation
Shore defenses: Absent, not constructed to anticipated conditions, or deteriorating
Protective vegetation: Dense, healthy vegetation, wetlands between asset and flood source absent

Section V: Additional materials

(5) Dunes or bluffs: Dunes absent, below BFE, discontinuous, eroding; Bluff slope unstable, little vegetation
(6) Soils: Asset on coastal barrier island or filled wetland
(7) Landscape attribute score: “Yes” = +0.5

Page 183

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk Score Interpretation
100-year event
(Hazard score = 3)
5

15

30

45

60

75

4.5

13

27

40.5

54

67.5

4

12

24

36

48

60

10.5

21

31.5

42

52.5

9

18

27

36

45

7.5

15

22.5

30

37.5

6

12

18

24

30

4.5

9

13.5

18

22.5

3

6

9

12

15

1.5

3

4.5

6

7.5

1

2

3

4

5

3.5
Exposure

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

Vulnerability

Risk
Category

100-year Event
Risk Score

500-year Event
Risk Score

>53

>70

Risk scores in this category occur only if one of the two factors, exposure or vulnerability, is rated 5, and the other is 4 or higher; this could represent
that the asset is in a dangerous situation. Both exposure and vulnerability should be reduced, if possible. Consider relocation a priority option for
these assets.

High

24 – 53

32 – 70

Risk scores in this category are indicative of conditions that could lead to significant negative outcomes from a storm. Using the risk scoring system, a
total of 24 (or 32 for the 500-year event) can only be achieved if the vulnerability is 4 and exposure is 2, or vice versa. A vulnerability of 4 indicates
the likely loss of service of an asset for an extended period of time. For many assets this may be unacceptable. Actions should be taken to reduce
vulnerability, such as elevating or floodproofing the asset, to help avoid a long-term loss of function. A score of 4 for exposure indicates most of the
local landscape attributes that help reduce storm damages are absent. Actions to restore landscape attributes may be appropriate. All other risk
scores higher than 24 (or 32 for the 500-year event) indicate either the exposure or the vulnerability, or both, are higher than the conditions
discussed above, lending more weight to the need to take actions that reduce risk. Relocation may be necessary in the future if other means of
adaptation or management actions are not effective.

Moderate

6 – 23

8 –31

Residual

<6

<8

Severe

Section V: Additional materials

Comment

Risk scores in this category pose moderate to serious consequences, but adaptation may be of lower priority due to one factor, exposure or
vulnerability, remaining relatively low. Use a combination of measures to reduce exposure and/or vulnerability.
Risk scores in this category occur when both exposure and vulnerability are relatively low. This situation suggests floods would pose minor or
infrequent consequences. However, a vulnerability score of 3 may not be acceptable for critical facilities or high community value assets, because the
community cannot afford to be without these services, event on an infrequent basis. Note that risk is never completely eliminated. Some residual risk
still remains even after management measures have been implemented. Monitor conditions and adapt as necessary.

Page 184

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

E. Endnotes
1

2

3

12

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, North Atlantic Division. North Atlantic
Coast Comprehensive Study (NACCS): Nassau County Back-bays Focus
Area Analysis, September 20, 2013.

Long Beach Public Schools. Available at: http://www.lbeach.org/.
Accessed December 2013.

13

Nassau County Press Release. “Mangano Announces Nickerson Beach To
Open For The 2013 Summer Season: Superstorm Sandy Cleanup
Completed.” Available at:
http://www.nassaucountyny.gov/agencies/countyexecutive/newsrelease/
2013/05-22-2013.html. Accessed March 2014.

National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Sandy
(AL182012) 22-29 October 2012 (February 12, 2013). Available at:
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Sandy.pdf. Accessed
October 2013.

14

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Deaths Associated with
Hurricane Sandy, October – November 2012.” Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report. May 24, 2013. Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6220a1.htm.
Accessed October 2013.

15

National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Sandy
(AL182012) 22-29 October 2012 (February 12, 2013). Available at:
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Sandy.pdf. Accessed
October 2013.

Federal Emergency Management Agency Fact Packs and FEMA Individual
Assistance data analyzed by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development.

4

Ibid.

5

City of Long Beach website Accessed on January 31, 2014:
http://www.longbeachny.gov/index.asp?Type=B_BASIC&SEC=%7BDFA7
1937-3AE3-4B88-AF18-63FEFC8AB2E2%7D

16

City of Long Beach Local Waterfront Revitalization Program November
2007. Accessed January 31, 2014:
http://www.longbeachny.gov/vertical/sites/%7BC3C1054A-3D3A-41B38896-814D00B86D2A%7D/uploads/%7BE508E1B4-68AB-41B8-916C98B3AFF26601%7D.PDF

State of New York. State of New York Action Plan for Community
Development Block Grant Program Disaster Recovery. Prepared by the
New York Homes and Community Renewal Office of Community Renewal.
Federal Register Docket No. FR-5696-N-01. April 2013.

17

Ibid.

18

EQECAT. Post-Landfall Loss Estimates for Superstorm Sandy. November
1, 2012. Available at http://www.eqecat.com/catwatch/post-landfall-lossestimates-superstorm-sandy-released-2012-11-01/. Accessed October
2013.

19

Kaplan, Thomas and Raymond Hernandez, “Cuomo Cites Broad Reach of
Hurricane Sandy in Aid Appeal”, New York Times (November 26, 2012).
Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/27/nyregion/governorcuomo-says-hurricane-sandy-was-worse-than-katrina.html. Accessed
October 2013.

20

Rifilato, Anthony and Alexandra Spychalsky, “People of the Year 2012:
The volunteers and first responders: Neighbors step up to make recovery
possible” Long Beach Herald (December 27, 2012). Available at:

6

7

Ibid.

8

Ibid.

9

U.S. Census.

10

“Long Beach Sewage Treatment Plant Alternatives Feasibility Study” by
Dvirka and Bartilucci, October 2009

11

City of Long Beach Fire Department. Available at:
http://www.longbeachny.gov/index.asp?Type=B_BASIC&SEC=%7B89B96
95B-1D9A-49A1-B3CC-192093C90DFC%7D Accessed December 2013.

Section V: Additional materials

Page 185

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

http://liherald.com/longbeach/stories/The-volunteers-and-firstresponders,45157?page=1&content_source= Accessed March 2014
21

Ibid.

22

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, North Atlantic Division. North Atlantic
Coast Comprehensive Study (NACCS): Nassau County Back-bays Focus
Area Analysis, September 20, 2013.

23

Nassau County Press Release. “Mangano Announces Nickerson Beach To
Open For The 2013 Summer Season: Superstorm Sandy Cleanup
Completed.” Available at:
http://www.nassaucountyny.gov/agencies/countyexecutive/newsrelease/
2013/05-22-2013.html. Accessed March 2014.

24

Federal Emergency Management Agency Fact Packs and FEMA Individual
Assistance data analyzed by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development.

25

Ibid.

26

Ibid.

27

Rifilato, Anthony and Alexandra Spychalsky, “People of the Year 2012:
The volunteers and first responders: Neighbors step up to make recovery
possible” Long Beach Herald (December 27, 2012). Available at:
http://liherald.com/longbeach/stories/The-volunteers-and-firstresponders,45157?page=1&content_source= Accessed March 2014.

28

29

Eltman, Frank, “NY Town Eyes Hospital Reopening Months after Sandy”
The Big Story (March 23, 2013). Available at:
http://bigstory.ap.org/article/ny-town-eyes-hospital-reopening-monthsafter-sandy Accessed March 2014
Rifilato, Anthony and Alexandra Spychalsky, “People of the Year 2012:
The volunteers and first responders: Neighbors step up to make recovery
possible” Long Beach Herald (December 27, 2012). Available at:
http://liherald.com/longbeach/stories/The-volunteers-and-firstresponders,45157?page=1&content_source= Accessed March 2014.

Section V: Additional materials

30

New York State Department of Health, Drinking Water Advisories
Following Hurricane Sandy. Available at:
https://www.health.ny.gov/environmental/water/drinking/boilwater/sandy
/ Accessed March 2013

31

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, North Atlantic Division. North Atlantic
Coast Comprehensive Study (NACCS): Nassau County Back-bays Focus
Area Analysis, September 20, 2013.

32

City of Long Beach 2013–2017 Capital Improvement Plan Summary.

33

National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Irene
(AL092011) 21-28 August 2011 (December 14, 2011, Revised through
April 11, 2013) Available at:
http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL092011_Irene.pdf Accessed March
2014

34

U.S. Geological Survey Hurricane Irene Storm Tide Mapper Available at:
http://wim.usgs.gov/stormtidemapper/stormtidemapper.html# Accessed
March 2014

35

Schwirtz, Michael. “On Decimated Shore, a Second Life for Christmas
Trees” New York Times (February 3, 2013). Available at:
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/04/nyregion/on-decimated-shore-asecond-life-for-christmas-trees.html?_r=0 Accessed March 2014

36

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Jones Inlet to East Rockaway Inlet (Long
Beach). Available at:
http://www.nan.usace.army.mil/Missions/CivilWorks/
ProjectsinNewYork/JonesInlettoEastRockawayInlet(LongBeach).aspx
Accessed March 2014

37

Whittle, Patrick. “Flood review ordered to help lower rates” Newsday
(February 3, 2014). Available at: http://www.newsday.com/longisland/towns/long-island-now-1.1732330/flood-review-ordered-to-helplower-rates-1.6936003 Accessed February 2014

38

Whittle, Patrick. “Zoning board clears way for Long Beach high-rise
project” Newsday (February 27, 2014). Available at:

Page 186

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

http://www.newsday.com/long-island/nassau/zoning-board-clears-wayfor-long-beach-high-rise-project-1.7233318 Accessed March 2014
39

Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery.

40

Ibid.

41

Ibid.

42

Ibid.

43

DeNisco, Alison. “Schools bounce back from Superstorm Sandy” District
Administration (October 2013) Available at:
http://www.districtadministration.com/article/schools-bounce-backsuperstorm-sandy Accessed January 2014

44

45

Federal Emergency Management Agency Map Service Center website –
SFHA for the City of Long Beach, NY. Available at:
http://map1.msc.fema.gov/idms/IntraView.cgi?KEY=16852991&IFIT=1
Accessed February 2014.
City of Long Beach Water Department 2011 Drinking Water Quality
Report. Available at:
http://www.longbeachny.gov/vertical/sites/%7BC3C1054A-3D3A-41B38896-814D00B86D2A%7D/uploads/Water_Report_2012_from__2011.pdf
Accessed March 2014.

50

U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 2008–2012 5 Year
Estimates, Table DP02 Selected Social Characteristics in the United
States. Available at http://factfinder2.census.gov. Accessed January 2014.

51

U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 2008–2012 5-Year
Estimate. Available at:
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml Accessed
January 2014.

52

Ibid.

53

Ibid.

54

Ibid.

55

U.S. Census Bureau. 2011 ZIP Code Business Patterns (NAICS). Available
at http://censtats.census.gov/cgi-bin/zbpnaic/zbpsect.pl. Accessed
January 2014.

56

U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 2008–2012 5-Year
Estimate. Available at
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml. Accessed
January 2014.

57

Ibid.

58

Ibid.

46

Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery.

59

47

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, North Atlantic Division. North Atlantic
Coast Comprehensive Study (NACCS): Nassau County Back-bays Focus
Area Analysis. September 20, 2013.

U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 2008–2012 5 Year
Estimates, Table DP04 Selected Housing Characteristics in the United
States. Available at http://factfinder2.census.gov. Accessed January 2014.

60

Ibid.

61

Ibid.

62

U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 2008–2012 5 Year
Estimates, Table DP02 Selected Social Characteristics in the United
States. Available at http://factfinder2.census.gov. Accessed January 2014.

63

Ibid.

48

49

Harrison, Lauren P. and Joie Tyrrell. “Lawrence district voters OK school’s
sale to academy” Newsday (March 31, 2014). Available at:
http://www.newsday.com/long-island/nassau/lawrence-district-voters-okschool-s-sale-to-academy-1.7566389 Accessed March 2014.
South Shore Blueway: The South Shore Blueway Plan. Available at:
http://www.southshoreblueway.com/ Accessed October 2013.

Section V: Additional materials

Page 187

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

64

65

U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 2008–2012 5 Year
Estimates, Table DP-1 Profile of General Demographic Characteristics
2000: Census 2000 Summary File 1 (SF1) 100 Percent Data. Available at
http://factfinder2.census.gov. Accessed January 9, 2014. Table DP-1
Profile of General Population and Household Characteristics 2010: 2010
Summary File 1. *2020 population projection increases based on work of
Program of Applied Demographics at Cornell University
(http://pad.human.cornell.edu/counties/projections.cfm) for Nassau
County.
U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 2008–2012 Five-Year
Estimates, Table S1901 Income in the past 12 Months (In 2012 Inflation
Adjusted Dollars). Available at http://factfinder2.census.gov. Accessed
January 2014.

66

U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 2008–2012 5 Year
Estimates, Table DP04 Selected Housing Characteristics in the United
States. Available at http://factfinder2.census.gov. Accessed January 2014.

67

Ibid.

68

Federal Emergency Management Agency Housing Assistance Program
Database as of June 23, 2013. Notes: ZIP code boundaries do not
coincide exactly with planning area boundaries. Also, the income
information is self-reported.

69

New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal Available at:
https://www1.dhcr.state.ny.us/BuildingSearch/default.aspx Accessed
December 2013.

70

Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional Sustainability Plan Final May 2013

71

For homeowner survey forms for this project, see the City of Long Beach
website available at:
http://www.longbeachny.gov/vertical/sites/%7BC3C1054A-3D3A-41B38896-814D00B86D2A%7D/uploads/Hazard_Mitigation_Survey_Forms.pdf
Accessed March 2014.

72

New York Rising Community Reconstruction Program. NYRCR Program
Guidance to Firms, Project Evaluation, December 30, 2013. p.3.

Section V: Additional materials

73

These costs could relate to reduced emergency and recovery
expenditures in the future less implementation costs for the life of the
project.

74

U.S. Census Bureau. On the Map. Available at:
http://onthemap.ces.census.gov/ Accessed March 2014

75

Cohen, Isabelle, Thomas Freiling, and Eric Robinson. “The Economic
Impact and Financing of Infrastructure Spending” Available at:
http://www.wm.edu/as/publicpolicy/documents/prs/aed.pdf Accessed
February 2014

76

Smart Growth America/National Complete Streets Coalition. “The Many
Benefits of Complete Streets” PowerPoint available at:
http://www.smartgrowthamerica.org/complete-streets/complete-streetsfundamentals/benefits-of-complete-streets/ Accessed February 2014.

Page 188

Long Beach NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

F. Glossary
A & E – Architectural & Engineering
BFE – Base flood elevation
CBA – Cost-benefit analysis
CDBG-DR – Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery
CRS – Community Rating System
DOS – Department of State
DOT – Department of Transportation
FEMA – Federal Emergency Management Agency
GIS – Geographic Information System
HUD – Department of Housing and Urban Development

NYSERDA – New York State Energy Research and Development Authority
NYS DOS – New York State Department of State
OEM – Office of Emergency Management
PSEG – Public Service Electric and Gas Company
SFHA – Special Flood Hazard Area
STP – Sewage Treatment Plant
TIGER – U.S. DOT Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery
TOD – transit-oriented development
TOH – Town of Hempstead
USACE – U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
USGS – U.S. Geological Survey

HCVP – Housing Choice Voucher Program
IT – Information Technology
LIREDC – Long Island Regional Economic Development Council
LMI – Low- and moderate-income
LID – Low Impact Development Plan
LIPA – Long Island Power Authority
LIVOAD – Long Island Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster
LWRP – Local Waterfront Revitalization Program
MLK – Martin Luther King, Jr.
MOU – Memorandum of Understanding
NDRF – National Disaster Recovery Framework
NET – Neighborhood Emergency Team
NFIP – National Flood Insurance Program
NYRCR – NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
NYS – New York State

Section V: Additional Materials

Page 189

www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr

