Lower Manhattan

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

| MARCH 2014 as
pay i 1 i
Oi ensecveescacee fe -

St

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Members of the Lower Manhattan NYRCR
Planning Committee

Daniel Ackerman (Co-Chair)
Catherine McVay Hughes (Co-Chair)
Wellington Chen

Betty Cohen

Hope Cohen

George Cominskie

Kerri Culhane

Robin Forst

Timur Galen

David Gruber

Tessa Huxley

Robert Keating

Michael Levine

Gigi Li

Sam Miller

Marco Pasanella

Damaris Reyes

The Committee would also like to acknowledge
the several Community members who actively
participated in the majority of Committee
meetings and Public Engagement Events. Thank
you for your passion and dedication. Our plan—
and our community—are better because of your
thoughtful contributions.

This document was developed by the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Lower
Manhattan Planning Committee as part of the
NYRCR Program within the Governor’s Office
of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is
supported by New York State (NYS) Homes and
Community Renewal, NYS Department of State,
and NYS Department of Transportation.

The document was prepared by the following
consulting firms:

e HR8&A Advisors

e Parsons Brinckerhoff

¢ Cooper, Robertson & Partners

e Mathews Nielsen Landscape Architects
e VJ Associates

* OpenPlans

e Hammes Company

e Johnson & Asberry

Cover Photos: Lower Manhattan (front). South Street
Seaport (back). Sources: Flickr user Kevin H. (front);
Flickr user James Willamore (back). Both licensed under
Creative Commons.

All photos taken by Consultant Team unless
otherwise noted.
Foreword

Introduction

In the span of approximately one year,
beginning in August 2011, the State of New
York experienced three extreme weather
events. Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee,
and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the
lives of New Yorkers and their communities.
These tragic disasters signaled that New Yorkers
are living in a new reality defined by rising sea
levels and extreme weather events that will occur
with increased frequency and power. They also
signaled that we need to rebuild our communities
in a way that will mitigate against future risks and
build increased resilience.

To meet these pressing needs, Governor
Andrew M. Cuomo led the charge to develop an
innovative, community-driven planning program
on a scale unprecedented and with resources
unparalleled. The NY _ Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program empowers
the State’s most impacted communities with the
technical expertise needed to develop thorough
and implementable reconstruction plans to build
physically, socially, and economically resilient
and sustainable communities.'

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Program overview

The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor
Cuomo in April of 2013, is a more than $650
million planning and implementation process
established to provide rebuilding and resiliency
assistance to communities severely damaged
by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and
Superstorm Sandy. Drawing on lessons learned
from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program
is a unique combination of bottom-up community
participation and  State-provided technical
expertise. This powerful combination recognizes
not only that community members are best
positioned to assess the needs and opportunities
of the places where they live and work, but also
that decisions are best made when they are
grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by
the latest innovative solutions.

One hundred and two storm-affected localities
across the State were originally designated to
participate in the NYRCR Program. The State
has allocated each locality between $3 million
and $25 million to implement eligible projects
identified in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for
these projects is provided through the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) Community Development Block Grant -
Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program.

Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising
one or more of the 102 localities, were created and
led by a NYRCR Planning Committee composed
of local residents, business owners, and civic
leaders. Member s of the Planning Committees
were identified in consultation with established
local leaders, community organizations, and
in some cases municipalities. The NYRCR
Program sets a new standard for community
participation in recovery and resiliency planning,
with community members leading the planning
process. Across the State, more than 500 New
Yorkers represent their communities by serving
on Planning Committees. More than 400 Planning
Committee Meetings have been held, during
which Planning Committee members worked
with the State’s NYRCR Program team to develop
community reconstruction plans and _ identify
opportunities to make their communities more
resilient. All meetings were open to the public.
An additional 125-plus Public Engagement
Events attracted thousands of community
members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR
planning process and proposals. The NYRCR
Program’s outreach has included communities
that are traditionally underrepresented, such as
immigrant populations and students. All planning
materials are posted on the NYRCR Program’s
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcn),
providing several ways for community members
and the public to submit feedback on materials
in progress.

Throughout the planning process, Planning
Committees were supported by staff from
the Governors Office of Storm Recovery
(GOSR), planners from New York State (NYS)
Department of State (DOS) and NYS Department
of Transportation (DOT), and consultants from
world-class planning firms that specialize in
engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green
infrastructure, and more.

With the January 2014 announcement of the
NYRCR Program’s expansion to include 22 new
localities, the program comprises over 2.7 million
New Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square
miles, which is equivalent to 14% of the overall
State population and 12% of the State’s overall

geography.

The NYRCR Program does not end with this
NYRCR Plan. Governor Cuomo has allocated
over $650 million of funding to the program for
implementing projects identified in the NYRCR
Plans. NYRCR Communities are also eligible for
additional funds through the program’s NY Rising
to the Top Competition, which evaluates NYRCR
Communities across eight categories, including

best use of technology in the planning process,
best approach to resilient economic growth,
and best use of green infrastructure to bolster
resilience. The winning NYRCR Community in
each category will be allocated an additional $3
million of implementation funding. The NYRCR
Program is also working with both private and
public institutions to identify existing funding
sources and create new funding opportunities
where none existed before.

TheNYRCR Program has successfully coordinated
with State and Federal agencies to help guide
the development of feasible projects. The
program has leveraged the Regional Economic
Development Council’s State Agency Review
Teams (SARTs), comprised of representatives
from dozens of State agencies and authorities,
for feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR
Communities. The SARTs review projects with
an eye toward regulatory and permitting needs,
policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding
sources. The NYRCR Program is continuing to
work with the SARTs to streamline the permitting
process and ensure shovels are in the ground as
quickly as possible.

On the pages that follow, you will see the results
of months of thoughtful, diligent work by NYRCR
Planning Committees, passionately committed to
realizing brighter, more resilient futures for their

communities.
The NYRCR Plan

This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward
rebuilding a more resilient community. Each
NYRCR Planning Committee began the planning
process by defining the scope of its planning
area, assessing storm damage, and identifying
critical issues. Next, the Planning Committee
inventoried critical assets in the community
and assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On
the basis of this work, the Planning Committee
described recovery and resiliency needs and
identified opportunities. The Planning Committee
then developed a series of comprehensive
reconstruction and resiliency strategies, and
identified projects and implementation actions to
help fulfill those strategies.

The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR
Plan are divided into three categories. The order
in which the projects and actions are listed in
this NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate
the NYRCR Community’s prioritization of these
projects and actions. Proposed Projects are
projects proposed for funding through a NYRCR
Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding.
Featured Projects are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee has identified as important
resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in
depth, but has not proposed for funding through
the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are projects and actions that
the Planning Committee would like to highlight
and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects
or Featured Projects. The Proposed Projects and
Featured Projects found in this NYRCR Plan were
voted for inclusion by official voting members of
the Planning Committee. Those voting members
with conflicts of interest recused themselves from
voting on any affected projects, as required by the
NYRCR Ethics Handbook and Code of Conduct.

The NYRCR Lower Manhattan Community
is eligible for up to $25 million in CDBG-DR
implementation funds.

While developing projects for inclusion in this
NYRCR Plan, Planning Committees took into
account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses,
the effectiveness of each project in reducing
risk to populations and critical assets, feasibility,
and community support. Planning Committees
also considered the potential likelihood that a
project or action would be eligible for CDBG-DR
funding. Projects and actions implemented with
this source of Federal funding must fall into a
Federally-designated eligible activity category,
fulfill a national objective (meeting an urgent
need, removing slums and blight, or benefiting
low to moderate income individuals), and have

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding
is linked. These are among the factors that
the Governors Office of Storm Recovery will
consider, in consultation with local municipalities
and nonprofit organizations, when determining
which projects and actions are best positioned
for implementation.

The total cost of Proposed Projects in this
NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR Community’s
CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some
Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due
to environmental review, HUD eligibility, technical
feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of
the projects and actions found in this NYRCR
Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State,
and local laws and regulations, including the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion
of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan does
not guarantee that a particular project or action
will be eligible for CDBG-DR funding or that it will
be implemented. The Governor’s Office of Storm
Recovery will actively seek to match projects with
funding sources.

In the months and years to follow, many of the
projects and actions outlined in this NYRCR Plan
will become a reality helping New York not only to
rebuild, but also to build back better.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

NYRCR Communities

 

-
i vr

Capital District
& North Country

   

 Y ee
Southem Tier 7 Su |

if I
: : = ~ |uason Valley
/ oa gr | & Catskills

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Contents
Foreword 3
Executive summary i
1. Community overview
Geographic scope of NYRCR Plan I-14
Community overview |-7
Description of storm damage I-14
Recovering from the storm I-14
Critical issues I-17
Community vision I-19
Relationship to regional plans I-21
ll. Assessment of risk and needs
Description of community assets and assessment of risk ll-4
Assessment of risk to assets and systems I-17
Assessment of needs and opportunities I-21
lll. Reconstruction and resiliency strategies
Reconstruction and resiliency strategies Ill-1
IV. Implementation-Project profiles
Implementation—Project profiles IV-1
Community emergency preparedness program IV-3
Community resource/recovery centers and CBO grant program IV-9

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Residential resiliency and education program IV-19
Small business resiliency and education program IV-27
Stormwater capture and retention study IV-33
Wetland creation at East River Park IV-39
Berming and deployable walls at Battery Park IV-43
Targeted flood protection strategy for lower West Street IV-49
Coastal protection study for IV-59
east and west side IV-59

 

V. Additional materials

 

 

 

 

 

 

Additional resiliency recommendations v-1
Master table of projects V-7
Public engagement process V-11
Community asset inventory V-17
Appendix A - Existing plans and initiatives V-21
Appendix B - Risk assessment tool V-29
Endnotes V-33

 

Glossary V-35
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Executive summary

The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Plan for Lower
Manhattan is driven by the idea that community resiliency following
an emergency depends on the ability of both physical and social
structures to bounce back after such an event. Superstorm Sandy
unleashed devastating effects in Lower Manhattan, throughout New
York City, and in the tri-State area - effects that persist even today, 17
months later. Visible impacts tell of the damage done to buildings and
infrastructure: from temporary boilers that still heat some apartment
buildings, to shuttered storefronts along Front Street in Lower Manhattan,
to the lasting closure of the Montague subway tunnel. The resiliency of
physical structures, however, is no more important than social resiliency
and the strength of the ties that bind a community together.

 

Immediately after Superstorm Sandy, community organizations such as Good
Old Lower East Side (GOLES) rallied volunteers for recovery efforts.
Source: Courtesy of GOLES.

Lower Manhattan and the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The Governor's Office of Storm Recovery has allocated up to $25
million in Federal Community Development Block Grant-Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) dollars to fund eligible recovery and resiliency
projects in the Lower Manhattan Planning Area, a mosaic of diverse
neighborhoods in Manhattan south of 14" Street, from the Hudson
River to the East River.

The Lower Manhattan Planning Committee is made up of 17 members
of the community, including members of all three Community Boards
that fall within the Planning Area, community residents, business leaders,
and representatives of local non-profit organizations. The Committee
faced a daunting task in collectively assessing the needs and priorities
of the Planning Area, which is the single largest NYRCR Planning Area by
population and covers many neighborhoods with differing demographics,
character, density, and building types. Across these divergent localities,
there is one constant: the high price of physical interventions and
infrastructure hardening, particularly given the dense urban environment
here that dates back to New Amsterdam’s beginnings.

Many efforts led by public agencies, utilities, and private building owners
throughout Lower Manhattan are already underway. Identifying and
considering these initiatives allowed the Planning Committee to pinpoint
gaps that could be filled through the NYRCR Program.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Sandy’s impact and the recovery

The combination of high tide, a full moon, and Superstorm Sandy’s
size and wind dynamics created a massive surge of salt water,
causing flooding and sewer backup. Flooding primarily affected the
areas with lowest elevation adjacent to the shoreline, and in some cases,
water overtopped the bulkheads and infiltrated areas inland. In addition
to direct damage caused by flooding, preventative transportation and
utility shutdowns and major power failures led to the widespread loss

of electrical power, steam, transit, and telecommunications systems,
impacting the Community even in areas not reached by flood waters.
Following Superstorm Sandy, local emergency response efforts based on
pre-existing social infrastructures seemed to materialize overnight, with
community groups jumping into action to augment public recovery and
rebuilding efforts.

A community-driven process

This Plan showcases a community-based planning process that has
integrated both social and physical resiliency to inform a plan for a
more resilient Lower Manhattan for years to come.

This Plan is the product of a collaborative community-based process
led by the Committee. Input on needs and comments on projects were
gathered through three Public Engagement Events, meetings of all three
local Community Boards, and responses received from the public through
the internet and in person. Based on this feedback, the Committee has
developed an NYRCR Plan that seeks to address the specific and unique
needs of the communities in the Lower Manhattan Planning Area. At early
Public Engagement Events, public feedback contributed to the Community Lower Manhattan is located at the southern tip of the island of Manhattan

Vision Statement, which reflects these goals. (top). Community members voiced their feedback during Public Engagement

Events (bottom).

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Community vision statement

Through the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan, the Lower Manhattan
community aims to improve the capacity
and readiness of all community
members to prepare for, respond to, and
quickly recover from severe weather-related
events; to address needs currently
unmet by existing rebuilding and resiliency
efforts; and to support the vital and
diverse character and history of Lower
Manhattan.

The Vision Statement reflects the Committee’s focus on the strategic
use of NYRCR funding to fill gaps in resiliency efforts already underway,
with an emphasis on meeting the needs of the most vulnerable
residents in Lower Manhattan. Vulnerable populations are those
individuals who have limited mobility due to physical or other disability,
limited communication skills (e.g., due to limited English proficiency), and/
or a limited ability to control their environment. They are the most at risk
during emergency events, and their collective safety was compromised by
Community-based organizations collected food and supplies to deliver to the particular effects of Superstorm Sandy and the power failures and cold
residents throughout Lower Manhattan. Source: Courtesy of GOLES. weather that followed soon thereafter.

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Critical issues and approaches

To address the needs of vulnerable populations during and following
emergencies, the Committee focused on providing support to the
community-based organizations (CBOs) that serve these residents on
a daily basis.

In addition to the focus on vulnerable populations, the Planning
Committee has prioritized strategic investments that are
complementary to existing recovery and resiliency initiatives, by
boosting emergency preparedness coordination, educating residents
and small businesses about resiliency, and filling gaps in resiliency
planning. The Committee also sought ways to leverage other efforts or
investments by filling funding gaps for existing or planned government
programs, and to create or expand scalable programs that could be
replicated citywide. Finally, the Committee sought to identify projects that
are highly feasible, able to be implemented on a short timeline, and whose
benefits could thus be realized within the next few years.

Given this framework, the main areas of focus of the Committee were
bolstering community emergency preparedness by investing in existing,
unfunded initiatives; concentrating efforts and resources toward programs
that benefit vulnerable populations; and developing replicable programs
that seed further investment wherever possible.

 

A blueprint for future resiliency é

Community-based organizations quickly established supply distribution
The NYRCR Plan for Lower Manhattan offers a blueprint for the networks to deliver critical support to vulnerable populations in the wake of
implementation of the goals of the Planning Committee, outlining Superstorm Sandy. Source: Courtesy of GOLES.

concrete strategies for enhancing the Community’s resiliency.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Recovery support functions 4&) 9)
The NYRCR Plan is informed by six Recovery Support Functions,

established by President Barack Obama in 2011 through the National Community Planning Natural & Cultural Infrastructure
. & Capacity Building Resources
Disaster Recovery Framework. These Recovery Support Functions

were used when developing needs, opportunities, strategies, and
projects to ensure that a comprehensive approach is reinforced a
throughout the effort to shape a holistic resiliency strategy for the
Community.
Health & Housing Economic
Social Services Development

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TYPICAL COMMUNITY GARDEN AREA,
|

INFILTRATION LAYER

 

Dry floadproof walls around boiler roa:
2 above desi;

at least ign flood elevation
Note:

INFILTRATION LAYER DEPTH AND MATERIAL VARIES AS

   

Reinforce boiler room walls below grade with pilasters,
Reinforce base slab to support hydrostatic loads.

PER DESIGN CAPACITY FOR STORMWATER RUNOFF
COLLECTION AREA,

 

DESIGN FEASIBILITY PENDING CONFIRMATION OF
SUBSOILS AN D/OR DEPTH OF BEDROCK.

To enhance residential building resiliency, one Proposed Project would fund Another Proposed Project would allocate funding toward the study and
the creation of information center, and the provision of technical and financial implementation of stormwater capture measures in the Planning Area,
assistance, around making resiliency upgrades to residential buildings. potentially including drainage systems in community gardens, seen here.
Strategies and projects

The NYRCR Plan contains six strategies and incorporates nine Proposed
and Featured Projects to improve the resiliency of Lower Manhattan, as
described below. Proposed Projects are projects that the Lower Manhattan
Planning Committee has recommended to be fully funded through the
NYRCR process. Featured Projects are innovative projects that may
require additional funding sources for implementation, and for which the
Committee has recommended funding an initial phase of implementation.
The projects are not listed in any priority order.

Community emergency preparedness program (Proposed Project).
This project would create: (a) one or more local community emergency
preparedness coordinators and (b) local emergency preparedness
programs and plans, throughout the Planning Area.

Community resource/recovery center and CBO grant program
(Proposed Project). This project would fund: (a) a network of hardened
community resource/recovery centers, to be based out of existing
community facilities and organizations; and (b) grants to provide technical
and financial assistance programs to CBOs to implement the functions
of the community emergency preparedness plans.

Residential resiliency and education program (Proposed Project).
This project would fund: (a) the creation of a resiliency information

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

assistance center for residential building owners, tenants’ associations,
and managers, as well as (b) technical assistance and _ individual
counseling and (c) financial assistance for improving the resiliency of
residential buildings.

Small business resiliency and education program (Proposed
Project). This project would fund: (a) the creation of an information
and assistance center to connect ground-floor and below-grade small
business retailers with existing programs and resources, as well as offer
technical assistance for improving the resiliency of operations and retail
spaces, and (b) financial assistance to help small businesses pay for
technical audits and recommended resiliency upgrades.

Stormwater capture and retention study (Proposed Project). This
project would fund: (a) a study to examine feasibility, costs and benefits,
and potential sites for a high-impact implementation program of various
stormwater capture and retention approaches in the Planning Area,
followed by (6) the implementation of recommended scalable pilot
projects.

Wetland creation at East River Park (Proposed Project). This project
would fund the construction of a one-acre artificial wetland on a currently
unoccupied portion of land in East River Park near Corlears Hook.

Berming and deployable walls at Battery Park (Featured Project).
This project would support the implementation of a system of berms
and adjoining deployable flood barriers at Battery Park, for protection

vi
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

against a 500-year flood event, as well as conceptual design for future
phase(s) of work to the east and west of the Phase 1 project site.

Targeted flood protection strategy for Lower West Street (Featured
Project). This project would fund a feasibility study and conceptual
design for a targeted strategy for protection of the lower West Street area
against a 100-year flood event, proposing strategies at sites to the north
and south of Battery Park City.

Coastal protection study for west and east side (Proposed Project).
This project would fund a feasibility study and conceptual design for a
series of multipurpose flood barriers for protection of the east and west
sides of Lower Manhattan against a 100-year flood event, using measures
such as a raised greenway, berming, and deployable walls.

Outline of the Plan

The Plan begins with Section I. Community Overview, which provides an
orientation to the Community, the critical issues laid bare by Superstorm
Sandy, and the Planning Committee’s work in the context of ongoing
resiliency and recovery work.

The following Section, Il. Assessment of Risks and Needs, describes the
diverse assets at risk from future storms, and uses the Planning Committee
and public feedback to catalog those risks. Using the risk assessment tool
developed by the NYRCR Program, this section identified key opportunities
for action that form the rationale for resiliency strategies and the related
projects developed by the Planning Committee.

The next Section, Ill. Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies describes
strategies developed by the Committee to respond to needs, opportunities,
and risks to assets measured through the risk assessment process.

The Proposed and Featured Projects, which are the path to implementing
those strategies, are described in more detail in Section lV. Implementation—
Project Profiles.

The final Section, V. Additional Resiliency Recommendations, describes
additional resiliency recommendations strongly supported by the
Community, as well as provides a list of the Proposed and Featured Projects
described in Section IV. This Section also describes in more detail the public
engagement process which informed this Plan, and provides additional
information around existing local initiatives, the risk assessment process,
and the assets identified by the Community in Section Il.
 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Geographic scope of NYRCR Plan

The NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Program was established to provide
additional rebuilding and __ revitalization
assistance to communities severely damaged
during Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene,
and Tropical Storm Lee. New York State
has allocated up to $25 million in Community
Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery
(CDBG-DR) funding from the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to
implement eligible projects identified in this
Lower Manhattan NYRCR Plan. The Lower
Manhattan Planning Committee (Committee),
composed of volunteer members representing
various constituencies of Lower Manhattan, has
undertaken an extensive planning process to
identify short- and long-term resiliency projects
that may be funded with this allocation. The
Committee has also identified a broader vision
for the long-term future of the Community, as
well as additional projects recommended for
implementation with other funds.

For the purposes of the NYRCR Program,
the Planning Committee defined the Lower
Manhattan Planning Area as the area
south of 14° Street to the Battery, from the
Hudson to the East River. The Planning Area
includes vibrant, culturally diverse, mixed-
use neighborhoods; serves as an international

I-1 Community overview

 

The Planning Area includes diverse, mixed-use neighborhoods south of 14th Street. Sources (clockwise from
top left): Flickr user NYC [heart] NYC; Flickr user Ismo; Wikimedia Commons author chensiyuan; and Wikimedia
Commons author Beyond My Ken. All are licensed under Creative Commons.

center for commerce; and is home to more than Sandy (Sandy) as well as significant lasting
300,000 residents.2 Lower Manhattan sustained impacts to area residents. This area covers the
substantial economic damage from Superstorm — entireties of Manhattan Community Districts 1, 2,
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

@

 

Figure I-1: Lower Manhattan Planning Area and Focus Area

C] Planning Area

 

 

Focus Area

ff
AABN UHOROECEE
|
ThhWweaASs

sa
aguties
BEBGALT
EE
Aa onBe
z er
FALESUSs

 

 

 

 

Planning, MAP-Pluto v13.1; NYRCR Planning

Source: New York City Department of City
Committee and public input

a 0100s eps 7
oP cea ee me

pees

a
ek! 1
ery west guee

        

Miles »

              

 

Community overview |-2

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

and 3, including the downtown neighborhoods
of the Financial District, Battery Park City,
South Street Seaport Historic District, Civic
Center, Tribeca, Two Bridges, the Lower East
Side, Alphabet City, Washington Square, Little
Italy, Nolita, Chinatown, East Village, Greenwich
Village, West Village, Hudson Square, SoHo and
the Meatpacking District. Figure I-1 indicates
the Planning Area as designated by the Planning
Committee.

The Planning Committee also identified a
Focus Area within the Planning Area along the
Lower Manhattan coastal edge, defined by
the zones that are at extreme and high risk
of coastal flooding. The coastal edge of Lower
Manhattan, which is exposed to wave action,
sustained the greatest damage from Sandy
within the Planning Area and still continues to
recover. These areas remain at the highest risk
of future flooding. The Planning Committee
devoted special attention to this area, while also
recognizing that communities beyond this high-
risk zone were also significantly impacted by
Sandy and remain vulnerable.

The Planning Area is surrounded by water on
two of three sides. On the east and west sides
of the Planning Area are the East and Hudson
Rivers, respectively. Beyond the southern tip of

Lower Manhattan is Upper New York Harbor,
which leads to Lower New York Harbor and the
Atlantic Ocean. The Planning Area tends to have
a manmade-—rather than natural—coastal edge,
with a variety of piers, seawalls, and bulkheads
lining and protecting the shoreline. Esplanades
are also located along most of the waterfront.

Major landfill has taken place over the course of
centuries, expanding the shoreline significantly
from its original contours. Over the past century,
as skyscrapers were built upward, Manhattan
was built outward. The most recent major landfill
involved the construction of Battery Park City
using materials excavated from the construction
of the original World Trade Center site.

Lower Manhattan is not directly exposed to
the open ocean, but both the East River and
Hudson River waterfronts are subject to tidal
movement. Lower Manhattan is at risk of water
from the Hudson River upstream, including
increased flooding from intense rain and ice melt.
Importantly, the East River is not truly a river, but
rather a tidal strait, part of a tidal estuary, that is
subject to tidal forces from both New York Harbor
and Long Island Sound.

The Planning Area encompasses much of
the original settled area of Manhattan, prior

to the rapid growth that expanded to the
north, following the street grid laid out by
the Commissioner’s Plan of 1811. As a result,
one of the defining features of the Planning
Area is that its street network is less regimented
than that of other parts of Manhattan, with
multiple intersecting sub-grids and a_ variety
of complex junctions and intersections. The

 

The Lower Manhattan coastline has expanded due
to landfill over the past few centuries. Source: with
permission from NYC EDC, NYC DCP, Colton 1886
Map; 1609 Shoreline.
Planning Area is also a convergence point for
almost all of the subway lines in New York City,
and is additionally host to two regional highway,
six ferry, and five bridge and tunnel connections.
These transportation connections both serve
Lower Manhattan and provide connections for
regional travel, critical to the city’s and the
region’s transportation network. Ferries are also
a Critical element of the transportation network,
bringing commuters from Staten Island, New
Jersey, Brooklyn, and Queens.

Lower Manhattan’s utility infrastructure is
both old and diverse, with a complex mix of
overlapping power, steam, telecommunications,
and water wastewater lines located below
the streets. All of these utilities are central to the
orderly functioning of the Planning Area, from
the power required for almost all aspects of daily
life, to the telecommunications that support both
residences and commercial businesses, to the
steam that provides heat (and in some cases,
air conditioning) to many large buildings. The
Planning Area is both home to certain critical
facilities (including telephone switching “central
offices” and telecom hotels) and dependent on
external sources of power, gas, and steam. One
of the most critical power facilities is Consolidated
Edison’s (ConEd’s) 13th Street power substation,
which is located along the East River at the

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

northeast corner of the Planning Area.

In general, the Planning Area is relatively flat,
without any particularly major changes in
elevation or topographical features. However,
the portion of the area along the central spine of
Manhattan is at a higher elevation, and therefore,
more resilient to coastal flooding. In addition,
there are specific topographic features within
the Planning Area that are worth noting, and that
make certain areas more susceptible to coastal
flooding. Canal Street is located along the original
route of a canal that used to drain to the Hudson
River, and as a result, is located at a low point
within the surrounding area. Alphabet City (the
area located east of First Avenue between 14"
Street and Houston Street) and the Lower East
Side are generally flat and are located in close
proximity to the East River.

Major portions of the coastal edges/shorelines of
the Planning Area are lined with parks, including
East River Park, Hudson River Park, and Battery
Park, while other areas have bulkheads with
esplanades, including the South Street Seaport
area and Battery Park City.

 

 

 

 

i

aaj Marsh

Made Land

Pie CITTRESS ASSOC LATION
. rea) Lea

a)

== Sewers

Canal Street and Alphabet City are historic
marshland areas located at low elevations, as seen
in Egbert Viele’s 1865 map of Manhattan. Source:
Wikimedia Commons author Thesupermat.

Community overview |-4
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

What do the risk areas mean?

flooding. They identified three risk areas:

three hurricane.

 

NY Department of State (DOS), with the assistance of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), mapped geographic areas representing the likelihood for coastal

e« Extreme: Areas currently at risk of frequent inundation and vulnerable to erosion and
wave action over three feet (FEMA V zone), subject to shallow coastal flooding (within
the National Weather Service’s shallow coastal flooding advisory threshold), or likely to
be inundated in the future due to sea level rise (assumes three feet).

« High: Areas outside the extreme risk area that are currently at risk of infrequent
inundation (FEMA A zone, meaning there is a 1% annual chance of flooding) or at future
risk of shallow coastal flooding with sea level rise (assumes three feet).

« Moderate: Areas outside the extreme and high risk areas but currently at moderate risk
of inundation from infrequent events (FEMA shaded X zone, meaning there is a 0.2%
annual chance of flooding) or at risk of being in the 100 year floodplain with sea level
rise (assumes of three feet), and any areas expected to be inundated by a category

A more detailed description of the NYS DOS Risk Assessment Area Mapping Methodology
can be found on the NYRCR website, as can a link to an online viewer for the risk assessment
area maps, at hittp://stormrecovery.ny.gov/community-reconstruction-program.

 

 
@

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Figure I-2: NYS DOS Hazard Zones

 

NYS DOS Risk Zones
High
Moderate

[ Planning Area
SA Focus Area
|| Extreme

i
«
\

[

Mile

      

 

   
 

ns © ack a x . he %
fig tes: : Son
TF “He Bae eae ' -
see NO
Hil WIA SeScce NS
HOUUURED SS! See SES — WK ©
B® Bl ed a pease GAN >
TRV Lee aace ANE Lp y
- +4 anges == =i © ge, lly
ADDU UUUMIDURESS tees ae a ae

gos CUES oie cit
aun
ails ateande sae
a ata ans a
ee Ea
indie =e

lmsctess

u we [oe
pati eatlle ce
_

BPI
i
ee

Fa

sn tere

tea Lanter \
Cue par pas ay

me
co
mn
=
_

           

 

 

 

Community overview I-6
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Community overview

The Lower Manhattan Planning and Focus
Areas are extremely diverse and _ include
numerous neighborhoods such as: Alphabet
City, Chinatown, East Village, Financial
District, Greenwich Village, Hudson Square,
Little Italy, Lower East Side, Meatpacking
District, Nolita, South Street Seaport, SoHo,
Tribeca, Two’ Bridges, and West Village.
The Planning Area covers approximately 2,720
acres, with 58,600 feet of coastline, and is home
to approximately 314,000 people, according
to the 2010 Census.? The Focus Area covers
approximately 728 acres, features the same
amount of coastline and is home to approximately
one-third of the Planning Area population, or
about 102,000 people according to the 2010
Census.

The Focus Area includes a broad mixture
of land uses (based on data from the NYC
Department of City Planning’s MapPLUTO
database). Residential uses comprise 23% of
the total land area, predominantly consisting
of high-rise buildings. Commercial uses cover
21% of the land area, the majority concentrated
in the Financial District, one of the world’s most
prominent financial capitals and the fourth-
largest central business district in the nation.
Public facilities cover 11% of the area, while
parking, transportation, and utilities cover almost

a quarter of the area. In addition, there are more
than 100 acres of open space in the Focus Area,
comprising about 13% of land area, mostly along
the waterfront, which includes 23,730 linear
feet of public esplanade. The remaining 8% of
land is composed of vacant and industrial uses.
Ownership of land is split roughly evenly between
public and private entities.*

The Lower Manhattan Planning and Focus
Areas are diverse with regard to income,
ethnicity, and age, creating pockets of
populations that are particularly vulnerable
to catastrophic events. The median household
income of the Planning Area is roughly $64,200,
compared with Manhattan’s overall median
income of $66,800. However, median income
varies greatly throughout the Planning Area,
with the highest median incomes in Greenwich
Village, Tribeca, and the Financial District, at
approximately $150,000, according to the
2007-2011 American Community Survey. The
Lower East Side, Two Bridges, and Chinatown
have some of the lowest median incomes, at
approximately $20,000.5

Within the Planning Area, approximately 60% of
residents identify as White, 25% as Asian, 6%
as Black, and 6% as American Indian/Pacific
Islander/Other races. A further 16% identify as

being of Hispanic origin. The Focus Area has
a similar distribution across racial and ethnic
groups with slightly larger proportions of Black,
American Indian/Pacific Islander/Other, and
Hispanic populations.®

The Lower Manhattan Planning and Focus
Areas are home to large immigrant populations
who may face particular challenges during
emergency events due to language and
cultural barriers. According to the 2005-2009
American Community Survey, 13% of adults in
the Planning Area report speaking English “not
well” or “not at all” compared with 9% overall
in Manhattan. This rate is slightly higher in the
Focus Area at approximately 15%.’

Many residents have noted the need for
increased resources for elderly populations.
According to the 2005-2009 American
Community Survey, approximately 13% of the
population in the Planning Area and Focus Area is
over 65 years old, similar to the distribution of this
age cohort across Manhattan.® Building typology
and quality play a large role in how elderly and
vulnerable populations are impacted by severe
weather events.

The vast majority of residents in the Planning
Area are renters living in medium-to-large
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Lower Manhattan is home to diverse communities with regards to age, income, and ethnicity. Sources (clockwise from top left): Flickr user Paul Lowry; Flickr user Susan
NYC. Both licensed under Creative Commons.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

apartment buildings. According to the 2005-
2009 American Community Survey, in the
Planning Area, 41% of units are in mid-sized
apartment buildings of 10 to 50 units, and 44%
are in buildings with more than 50 units.? The
Focus Area, by comparison, has a significantly
higher proportion of large apartment buildings,
with almost 70% of housing units located in
high-rise buildings of 50 or more units. These
building typologies pose particular challenges
for vulnerable populations during power outages,
forcing many residents to rely on stairs to move up
and down throughout the building, and persevere
without heat, cooling, lighting, and/or water in
many cases.

Ninety-percent of residents in the Focus Area are
renters, suggesting limited control over resiliency
improvements, as landlords are responsible for
capital upgrades in their buildings.'° Limited
financial resources among landlords can often
restrict their ability to invest in necessary resiliency
upgrades, particularly in rent-controlled or rent-
stabilized buildings.

There are also 32 New York City Housing
Authority (NYCHA) public housing developments
in the Planning Area and 15 in the Focus Area.
When including Section 8, and other subsidized
developments, this number is significantly larger.

These buildings often struggle to meet regular
maintenance goals and may face particular
challenges in making additional resiliency
upgrades.

The character of the commercial corridors
within the Planning Area runs the spectrum.
Historically, Lower Manhattan was a_ center
of maritime trade, with a waterfront lined with
docks, wharves, and warehouses. As the area
transitioned to a more service- and tourism-
based center, it also continued in its role as a
center of government, with a large number of
City, State, and Federal offices. At the same time,
the historical waterfront areas have transitioned
into a variety of new uses, including residential,
office/retail, tourism destinations, and open
spaces. Commercial buildings range from high-
density office buildings in the Financial District
to numerous low-scale, mixed-use corridors
throughout the Planning Area, which offer
ground floor retail with housing and office space
above. The area continues to undergo transition,
with traditional commercial areas adding new
residential buildings, the redevelopment of
the World Trade Center site, and the economic
growth of areas such as the Lower East Side,
Tribeca, and SoHo.

 

Walk-up residential buildings are found throughout
the Planning Area (top). Governor Alfred E. Smith
Houses is one of many NYCHA developments in
the Focus Area (bottom). Source (bottom): Flickr user
-TvL-, licensed under Creative Commons.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Figure I-3: Median household income Figure I-4: Percent, non-English Speaking households

 

    
 
  

   

CJ Planning Area L_] Pavey ns
Median Household Income ekg at aE pe
[____] $16,081 - $30,000 haabrg
Fe -,
[7] $30,000 - $60,000
Ae. ae
[HBB 360,000 - $90,000 —
wes
[HE 390,000 - $120,000 _ pi
1
HEB 120,000 - $205, 192 Wat: :
Ee ie ce

ee 6 ee ee
te oe Sa ee
me a

mi
cos 0s '
Se ities

 

 

 

 

 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2007-2011 American Community Survey. Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2005-2009 American Community Survey.

Figure I-5: Percent over 65 years of age

CE JPaanning Area

Percent Over 65 Years of Age
[| 0% -5%

[] 5.1% - 10%

[0 10.1% - 15%

HE 15.1% - 20%

HE 20.1% - 27%

   

 

 

“
oo 08 1
ties

 

 

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2007-2011 American Community Survey.

Community overview I-10
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Description of storm damage

The combination of high tide, a full moon, and
Superstorm Sandy’s size and wind dynamics
created a massive surge of water that funneled
up through the Narrows at the entrance to
Upper New York Harbor. The tide gauge at the
Battery measured a flooding height of 14 feet
above Mean Lower Low Water,"’ surpassing
the previous high water mark (set by Hurricane
Donna in 1960) by four feet.’? This large influx
of water led to still water (as opposed to wave-
driven) flooding of many of the shoreline areas
of Lower Manhattan, with significant salt water
flooding and sewer backup of building first floors,
basements, and underground infrastructure—
including transportation, electrical power, and
telecommunications equipment. The damage to
physical assets was eclipsed by the impact on
human life, including two lives lost in the Area and
far more across the City and region.

The flooding in Lower Manhattan was
intensified by the fact that high tide at the
Battery occurred at roughly the peak of the
Superstorm Sandy storm surge, meaning
that the surge was building on top of the
highest base water levels. Had the storm
surge arrived six hours earlier or six hours later,
flooding likely still would have occurred, but
would have been significantly less extreme in this
location."*In addition, the prevailing winds shifted

I-11 Community overview

to a direction that pushed more water directly
through the Narrows and into the Upper Harbor,
increasing the volume of water entering into the
constrained topography, leading to yet higher
levels of storm surge coming over the various
seawalls and bulkheads at the waterfront edge.
Because the Upper Harbor is relatively sheltered
and the shoreline is generally guarded by those
seawalls, the buildings within Lower Manhattan
experienced water flowing in and around them,
but did not experience the direct wave action that
severely impacted the waterfront neighborhoods
of Queens, Brooklyn, and Staten Island that
suffered the most structural damage to buildings.

Flooding in the area principally affected the
low-lying areas adjacent to the shoreline,
typically within two to three blocks from the
shore. In certain cases, particularly in the lower-
lying areas adjacent to Canal Street on the west
side, flooding extended farther inland once water
overtopped the bulkheads, covering adjacent
areas based on local topography. Flooding in
Battery Park City was more limited because
the neighborhood was constructed at a higher
elevation, but water entered from both the north
and south of Battery Park City along West Street
(Route 9A), which led to significant flooding of
the World Trade Center site, including the Port
Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH) tunnels into New

 

Superstorm Sandy rattled the west side, seen

at top at Christopher Street Pier. Damage was
extensive to retail businesses throughout the

Focus Area, including in the South Street Seaport
Historic District (bottom). Sources: courtesy of Robert
Woodworth (top); courtesy of Pasanella & Son Vintners
(bottom).
Jersey. Some other areas hit hardest by flooding
include Alphabet City, portions of the Lower East
Side, the South Street Seaport, Water Street,
and high-density housing, including public and
subsidized housing, adjacent to the East River
between the Brooklyn Bridge and the Manhattan
Bridge.

In addition to the direct damage caused
by flooding, which was concentrated at
the shoreline, the entire area lost electrical
power and steam, due to both preventative
shutdowns of certain portions of the electrical
grid and the failure of other portions of the
grid, due to flooding of critical facilities. One
exception to this was Battery Park City, which,
as noted above, was spared significant flooding
due to its higher elevation and maintained power
because it receives its electrical supply from an
area transmission substation in Brooklyn that was
not impacted by Sandy.

In addition to impacts’ on electrical
systems, Sandy led to major damage to, and
shutdown of the area’s steam system and
telecommunications systems. The shutdown
of the steam system led to a loss of heat and
hot water to many buildings, posing a danger
to residents and business owners as cooler
weather approached. The loss of steam required

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Subway stations suffered serious damage from Sandy, including South Ferry station. A blackout engulfed
Lower Manhattan (below). Sources: Flickr user MTAPhotos (Metropolitan Transportation Authority/Patrick Cashin)
(top); Flickr user Dan Nguyen (bottom). Both licensed under Creative Commons.

many property owners to install portable boilers
and generators mounted on trailers around
Lower Manhattan as commercial and residential
buildings were reoccupied leading to quality of life
issues for residents. The loss of communications
had varying impacts on both residential and
commercial buildings, particularly as many
businesses could not move back into their offices
until they had phone and internet access, and
critical community-based organizations (CBOs)

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

found it difficult to coordinate relief efforts without
reliable communications.

High-rise buildings lost water pressure,
elevator service, and security systems, though
this did not result in any major fires or other
public safety hazards. In high- and mid-rise
buildings, many residents found themselves
trapped during and after Sandy due to power
outages that caused the failure of electrical and
mechanical systems. This disproportionately
affected vulnerable populations, including
seniors and tenants of public housing, who were
stranded with limited access to vital services.
These outages also forced many people to leave
their homes for extended periods of time after the
storm.

Damage to transportation infrastructure was
great. Estimates of damage to the City’s overall
transportation infrastructure exceed $8 billion,
with most of that damage concentrated in Lower
Manhattan due to the density of transportation
assets.

In advance of Sandy, the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority (MTA) shut down the
City subway system due to the risk of flooding
and possible loss of electricity and damage
to mechanicals. After Sandy made landfall,

salt water damaged important electrical and
communications equipment, including signal
relays that prevent train collisions. Among the
most severely damaged subway assets was the
South Ferry 1 train Station—a loss that will require
multiple years to repair. Other damaged assets
include the World Trade Center PATH station and
the Montague Tunnel, which connects the R train
to Brooklyn. The Holland Tunnel to New Jersey,
the Battery Park Underpass of the Franklin D.
Roosevelt (FDR) Drive, and the Hugh L. Carey
Tunnel to Brooklyn were fully flooded, the latter
taking over three weeks to fully reopen.

Sandy also resulted in temporary shutdowns of
the Staten Island Ferry and private ferry services,
and damaged the surface—and in certain cases,
the underground structure—of many streets in
the inundation area, including Water Street, West
Street and the FDR Drive.

Storm damage from Superstorm Sandy was
more pervasive and long-lasting in the Planning
Area than during Hurricane Irene and Tropical
Storm Lee. During Hurricane Irene, a mandatory
evacuation order was issued for significant
coastal portions of New York City, including
portions of the Planning Area, and the entire MTA
bus, subway, and commuter rail system was shut
down preemptively. Hospitals and other medical

facilities were also evacuated and a state of
emergency was declared. While portions of the
Meatpacking District suffered flooding, most of
the Planning Area experienced minimal damage,
with the World Trade Center site escaping flooding
damage due to efforts by construction workers
to install temporary floodproofing structures.
Because Tropical Storm Lee followed a path that
brought it significantly to the west (inland) of New
York City, the Planning Area was spared from any
major impacts, as compared to locations such as
Binghamton and the Susquehanna River Valley.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Recovering from the storm

Lower Manhattan required _ significant
immediate and long-term recovery efforts,
focused both on the physical assets in
the area and the people who live there.
Approximately 950 residential buildings with more
than 40,000 units were impacted by the flooding."%
The most immediate need was to begin restoring
power and heat, which enabled residents whose
homes were otherwise undamaged to return.
Given that Sandy occurred in late October, heat
was a critical issue. Portable generators were
introduced across the area to provide electrical
power to apartment buildings, commercial high
rises, medical facilities and government offices.
While these generators helped many buildings to
reopen once the flood damage was addressed,
they created ongoing noise and pollution.

In addition, much of the damaged
infrastructure needed to be restored and
repaired. Although the majority of the subway
system was back in operation within a
week or less, many of the long-term repairs
took weeks and months, and some will
stretch out over years. Similarly, repairs to
telecommunications systems took several months
in certain cases. This was particularly the case
as old copper telephone lines were replaced with
fiber optic lines, which are more efficient, provide

 

Businesses, organizations, and governmental entities immediately got to work to repair streets and
infrastructure in Sandy’s wake. Source: Courtesy of the Alliance for Downtown New York.

greater bandwidth and will be more resilient to
future storms. As Con Ed restored electrical
power and steam supply, many buildings were
able to return to normal service. In other cases,
significant repairs were required to the internal
electrical systems before the buildings could be
reoccupied.

Businesses in Lower Manhattan’ were
also profoundly impacted by the storm.
Approximately 6,500 businesses were directly
impacted by flooding, with over 10 times as
many indirectly impacted by the resulting loss
of power.'* In particular, many ground floor small
businesses were impacted by flooding—resulting
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

in loss of below and above ground inventory,
equipment and _ fixtures, while many larger
businesses were forced to evacuate their space
due to lack of power, water and communications.
In the case of smaller businesses, their limited
capitalization made it challenging to recover
from the damage, particularly since it took
many weeks or months for these businesses
to reopen, if they were able to reopen at all.
Larger financial and commercial businesses
were typically better positioned to survive the
loss or suspension of operations, because they
had the financial resources to resume operations
quickly, relocate operations to another location,
or weather suspended operations. However, due
to the importance of many financial companies
to the regional, national, and global economy, the
temporary shutdown of those businesses had a
significant impact. A number of major commercial
corridors were impacted for significant periods
of time—in many cases for weeks or months—
including, but not limited to, Water Street, the
South Street Seaport, and Avenue C in Alphabet
City.

In the midst of this recovery, a number of
community-based organizations (CBOs)
mobilized to help residents—including
vulnerable populations such as_ seniors
and public housing tenants—to recover in

1-15 Community overview

 

Sandy left many CBOs with extensive damage to office and community facilities. Source: Courtesy of Two

Bridges Neighborhood Council, Inc.

both the short and long terms. CBOs were
critical in helping residents, small businesses,
and community facilities to recover by providing
technical assistance, financial assistance, and
supplies. These CBOs were among the first

organizations to assist victims of Sandy in Lower
Manhattan. One key lesson learned from Sandy
was the importance of these organizations in
creating and sustaining community resiliency,
especially for vulnerable populations.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

@

inundation map

Superstorm Sandy

Figure I-6

 

 

 

 

 

[<3
MN 3-6ft
ME 6-121
Mm > icf
=> Water Movement

Sandy Surge Levels

a
~~
sa
¢
o
an
a
£
=
2
a
3a
o
<
o
Qa
Qa
o
=
~
o
=

wave action, Lower Manhattan
experienced inundation from

surge, leading to significant

building and infrastructure
impacts including power outage

and subway shutdown.
Source: FEMA Modeling Task Force (MTOF)

damange, along with secondary
Hurricane Sandy Impact Analysis

While perimeter bulkheads
provided protection against

Miles

              

0.5

      

rs

“I tots Leet LY
0.25

ESS jac: Sie

whe

     

   

Haale WHOL’
sHHUNB E22
Se ANGAENED) tee BSE AN:

HE

\

\!
ib

                         

   

i
aD
pol

fi

 

EOE MUE eee!
ane ial a
DDGNUIIOOEDS! Dees Sea eles
| cc I 6a a
pn SiS Szeeat aaa emt

ht a toe ee rs on
sO) sseece ss se sacs az
ane seed aa ores ee TANG D OEE

Go mee
nn ft eA i ee
wees aes | (102 aoe

< SHS / Av
VA QS Save aN 6

ISS Ss Son pe Se

3,

    

    

 

 

Community overview |-16
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Critical issues

Many critical resiliency issues came _ to
light in the wake of Sandy and its recovery,
highlighting the need to assist those most
at-risk. Planning Committee members and
Lower Manhattan residents echoed this focus,
recognizing the opportunity for the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Plan to
fill gaps where critical issues could be better
addressed.

Addressingresiliency across Lower Manhattan
requires a long-term focus, the collaboration
of a large number of governmental and
nongovernmental entities, and_ significant
capital investment. The challenge of creating
a more resilient Lower Manhattan is a daunting
one, given the scale, complexity and diversity
of the Planning Area’s neighborhoods, buildings
and infrastructure. Recognizing this essential
challenge, the Planning Committee sought to
carve out a role for its Community Reconstruction
Plan that was complementary to existing recovery
and resiliency initiatives, and addressed critical
needs for the Community, which were not being
met.

While considerable public and _ private
recovery activities are underway, the long-
term resiliency of many segments of the
population still needs to be addressed. Major

infrastructure providers and __ large private
entities which operate in the area have a variety
of well-funded initiatives underway to improve
the resiliency of their assets in Lower Manhattan.
However, there remains a need for support to
local residents, small businesses and others to
ensure that they are better protected when the
next severe weather event or other emergency

occurs.

Specifically, vulnerable populations require
better protection from the deleterious impacts
of future disasters. The elderly and disabled
populations, as well as limited-English proficient
speakers, among others, faced significant
challenges in accessing basic essential resources
during Superstorm Sandy —food and water,
medications, heat, and power—as well as access
to basic information about available services.
Given that community-based organizations
(CBOs) serve these populations on a daily basis,
the Planning Committee and Community have
recognized that the protection of these vulnerable
populations is contingent upon ensuring that local
CBOs are better prepared, staffed and resourced
to respond during the next emergency and ensure
continuity of service.

In addition, a lack of awareness about
available resources hampers the efforts of

 

Community members with mobility challenges are

particular vulnerable during and after emergency
events.

residential owners and small businesses
to recover from Sandy and strengthen the
resiliency of their assets. Many local community
members, building owners/managers, tenant
associations, and small businesses reported a
lack of understanding about how to increase the
long-term resiliency of their assets, as well as
around existing technical and financial resources
and programs. Outreach and _ educational
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Future Conditions: dealing with a changing climate

Climate change is a real and significant concern
for New York’s coastal communities. Two impacts
of climate change have the most bearing on the
future risk to New York’s coastal communities
from future storm events and flooding: (1) Sea
Level Rise and (2) increased frequency and
intensity of storm events. On March 31, 2014,
the International Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) released Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation and Vuinerability, reiterating the risk
to coastal communities across the globe and
assigning a high confidence that risks from
extreme weather events and of sea level rise
will continue to increase in the future due to
climate change. Closer to home, the New York
Panel on Climate Change (NPCC) continues to
look at the potential risks presented to New York
City in light of climate change. In their Climate
Risk Information 2013, ” the NPCC made the
following projections for 2050:

activities are required to increase awareness of
key resiliency issues, and assistance is required
to guide building and business owners and
others through the identification, selection, and
implementation of resiliency improvements.

Similarly, many building and business owners

e ~=Sea Level will increase between 7 and 31
inches with a mid-range projection of 11
to 24 inches.

e The annual chance of today’s 100-year
storm (which is a 1% chance) will increase
to between 1.4 and 5.5% with a mid-range
estimate of 1.7 to 3.2%.

e Flood heights associated with a 100-year
storm event will increase between .6 and
2.6 feet with a mid-range projection of .9
to 2.0 feet.

e = Precipitation (rain/snowfall) will increase

by 1 to 15% with a mid-range projection
of 5to 10 %.

These projected changes all increase the extent
and likelihood of flooding in New York’s coastal
communities.

suffer from a lack of financial resources to
undertake operational and capital resiliency
improvements. Small businesses, cooperatives,
and other ownership entities often lack the equity
to invest in these improvements and/or may not be
able to obtain financing to support capital plans.
Additional financial assistance is required to help

these parties “close the gap” in their efforts to
pay for essential resiliency improvements.

Residents and _ businesses’ along the
coastal edge remain concerned about the
future impacts of flooding. The community
consistently voiced considerable concern about
how flooding could be prevented in the future,
given the level of impacts sustained during Sandy.
While the community understands the magnitude
of the challenge, which requires comprehensive
flood protection for extensive portions of the
coastline, they believe that the Lower Manhattan
NYRCR Plan should help support initial phases to
build toward a more flood-protected edge. These
critical issues frame some of the basic needs for
ensuring a more resilient Lower Manhattan. The
“Assessment of needs and opportunities” section
of the following chapter delves into these issues,
suggesting a series of key interventions under the
Lower Manhattan NYRCR Plan.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Community vision

Afirstkey objective of the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction planning process was to
establish overarching short-term and long-
term resiliency and recovery goals for Lower
Manhattan. Setting targets and aspirations for
the future helps to think beyond the current state
and begins to paint the picture of a more resilient,
sustainable Community. By looking at assets and
needs, and then setting goals and a vision, the
Community can then begin to devise strategies
to reach those goals.

Goals help define particular objectives that
the Community hopes to achieve over the
short- and long-term. They can range from
small, simple goals to much more complex
multi-pronged ambitions. Overall, they are
action-oriented and aspirational in nature. Over
the course of the first few Planning Committee
meetings and the first Public Engagement events,
the Lower Manhattan community voiced a variety
of short-term and long-term goals to enhance
their resiliency, summarized in the adjacent table.

These goals also informed a Community
vision, an overarching umbrella statement that
encapsulates a collective sense of purpose and
direction and maximum potential for the future.
Like the goals on this page, the Lower Manhattan
Community’s vision statement was established
based on Planning Committee discussion and
input at the first Public Engagement Event.

Short-Term Goals (2-5 years)

¢ Meet the needs of vulnerable populations in the
area

* Increase the capacity of CBOs to help residents
prepare for, respond to, and recover from
emergencies

e Increase the capacity of CBOs to meet the
specific needs of vulnerable populations in the
area

¢ Improve coordination and communication among
CBOs and agencies involved in emergency
preparedness, response, and recovery

* Develop a comprehensive network of resilient
recovery and supply distribution centers

e Plan a pilot resilient neighborhood
communications system for coordination among
CBOs, government agencies, residents, and
businesses

e Increase the resiliency of small businesses in
the most flood-prone areas

* Incorporate stormwater management and wave
attenuation strategies in the most flood-prone
waterfront open spaces

e Increase access to local, resilient, and high-
quality healthcare options and access to
pharmacies

Long-Term Goals (5-10 years)

e Ensure effective coordination and
communication systems in emergency
preparedness, response, and recovery are in
place

* Sustain the mixed-use, liveAwork character of
Lower Manhattan

e Ensure the resiliency of small businesses
throughout the Planning Area

e Ensure the resiliency of high-rise subsidized
housing developments throughout the Planning
Area

e Expand affordable housing stock and increase
resiliency

¢ Provide redundart, resilient transportation,
energy, and telecommunications infrastructure
options

* Strengthen coastal flood protection, particularly
for East River neighborhoods

e Expand the open space and recreation facilities
in the area
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Through the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction
Plan, the Lower Manhattan
Community aims to improve
the capacity and readiness
of all community members
to prepare for, respond to,

and quickly recover from
severe weather-related events;
to address needs currently
unmet by existing rebuilding
and resiliency efforts; and to
support the vital and diverse
Character and history Of LOWED cnimniy embers branstormed a community vison at Pube Engagement
Manhattan. rvent

   

{}

Community overview |-20
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Relationship to regional plans

Regional perspectives

Lower Manhattan infrastructure

Lower Manhattan plays a critical role in the
region’s infrastructure, particularly in terms of
transportation, so the failure of infrastructure
systems in this area has a regional impact on
mobility and economic activity. Transportation
infrastructure in Lower Manhattan creates
important connections between the boroughs
and New Jersey. Transit assets in the area include
19 of the City’s 22 subway lines, the PATH Train to
New Jersey, and ferry service to Queens, Brooklyn,
Staten Island, New Jersey and Westchester. Major
road infrastructure includes highways such as
the West Side Highway (9A) and FDR Drive, and
tunnels and bridges including the Hugh L. Carey
Tunnel (formerly the Brooklyn Battery Tunnel),
the Holland Tunnel, the Brooklyn Bridge, the
Manhattan Bridge and the Williamsburg Bridge.

Because most of the City’s subway lines travel
through Lower Manhattan, the flooding and
loss of electricity that led to the shutdown of the
subway system after Sandy had major impacts
on mobility throughout the region. In particular,
residents in and out of Manhattan were unable to
reach employment centers in Lower and Midtown
Manhattan, as well as other key destinations.
This led to the deployment of the “bus bridges,”

with dedicated, non-stop routes connecting
Downtown Brooklyn and the Williamsburg Bridge
Bus Plaza to Midtown Manhattan until subway
service was restored. Similarly, the shutdown of
the two tunnels connecting Lower Manhattan to
New Jersey and Brooklyn inhibited the movement
of people and goods, not only within this
Planning Area, but also throughout the region.
Ensuring a resilient, secure and dependable
transportation network is essential to sustaining
Lower Manhattan’s ability to serve as an economic
engine and hub for the region.

Global business hub

As the home of the United States’ financial
industry and a highly diversified employment
center, Lower Manhattan plays a critical
role in the local, regional, national, and
global economy. In addition to the well-known
financial services and banking firms that are
headquartered in Lower Manhattan, there are
myriad other business entities and employers
in Lower Manhattan, including those that help
support the global financial industry, municipal,
state, and federal offices, and a diverse range
of other businesses, not-for-profit organizations,
and cultural institutions. More than half a million
workers living throughout the Tri-State Region
commute to Lower Manhattan,'® which includes
the Financial District, the fourth-largest central

 

Lower Manhattan is home to Wall Street, the world’s
financial center. Source: Flickr user kosmolaut, licensed

under Creative Commons.

business district in the country.'®

Planning for the resiliency of Lower Manhattan
is therefore critical to notonly the regional
and global economy, but also for the local
residents, small businesses, and community
institutions that give the Planning Area so
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Figure I-7: Lower Manhattan as a regional transportation hub |
i ml a Vy
| ee L CI Planning Area
j | ee = Bridges & Tunnels
re A —— NY Ferry Line
osetia] "= Major Highways

++ NJ Transit/PATH Lines
~————- Amtrak Lines

++ LIRR Lines

++. MetroNorth Lines

—— MTA Subway Lines

Source: New York City OpenData; USDOT
National Transportation Atlas Database

 

 

 

 

 

Community overview |-22
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

much of its character, culture and diversity. As
seen in the aftermath of both September 11th and
Superstorm Sandy, the suspension of business
operations in Lower Manhattan has substantial
impacts on economic activity, as well as the
sustained employment of residents in the region.
Some Lower Manhattan businesses were able to
reopen within a week of Sandy, once power and
subway service were restored, but others took
longer to reopen, due to more extensive building
damage. After September 11th, some businesses
had developed emergency plans and were in a
better position to handle the impacts of Sandy
through backup data centers and alternative
employee reporting locations. Nonetheless,
comprehensive resiliency planning for the area as
a whole is critical to economic resiliency.

Scalable solutions for the region

The Planning Committee and public have
emphasized a strong interest in pursuing
projects and strategies through the NY
Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Program that are scalable and applicable to
surrounding areas. The density and diversity
of the Lower Manhattan Planning Area represent
common conditions in other parts of New York
City, in particular Manhattan. As such, resiliency
challenges and solutions that are explored for the
Lower Manhattan Planning Area have regional

relevance. There is great potential for Lower
Manhattan resiliency strategies and lessons to be
broadly replicable, which is an important point that
will underlie much of the future discussion and
analysis of needs and strategies. For instance,
efforts to strengthen community emergency
response coordination may serve as a model for
densely-populated locations throughout urban
centers.

Existing plans, studies, and
projects

The Planning Committee expressed explicit
interest in using the NYRCR Program process
to fill gaps and address needs that are
not being covered in existing recovery and
planning work. In order to avoid duplication of
plans and to identify how the NYRCR Program
may best fill existing gaps, the Committee
reviewed past and ongoing plans, studies,
projects and programs in Lower Manhattan and
surrounding areas.

Numerous plans and studies were reviewed that
have been undertaken or are underway in Lower
Manhattan and New York City as a whole, with
an emphasis on the Focus Area. Profiled plans
include the New York City Regional Economic
Development Council’s Strategic Plan, Sandy

recovery plans, as well as other plans around
waterfront access; corridor and neighborhood
improvement, sustainability, and hazard
mitigation.

The analyses and recommendations included in
these plans can contribute valuable information
and ideas to the NYRCR Program planning
process.

A key takeaway from review of existing plans,
studies, and projects that specifically address
Lower Manhattan is that major infrastructure
providers and large private entities that
operate in the area have a variety of well-
funded initiatives underway to improve the
resiliency of Lower Manhattan.

More specific takeaways include:

e The public agencies and private companies
responsible for the area’s infrastructure are
making significant investments to restore
and upgrade their assets, including agencies
like the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority (MTA), and the Port Authority of
New York and New Jersey (PANYNJ), and
companies like Consolidated Edison (Con
Ed), and Verizon. At the same time, capital
projects underway continue to have service
impacts on the area, including short-
and long-term shutdown of systems for
upgrades (such as the ongoing suspension
of R train service under the East River),
increases in rates (as Con Ed amortizes the
costs of system upgrades), and changes
in service (e.g., loss of copper wire phone
service due to fiber optic upgrades).

Sophisticated owners of larger private
buildings in Lower Manhattan have begun
to make their buildings more resilient
independent of any public planning efforts.
Multiple buildings along the Water Street
corridor have begun to install flood wall
systems that can be deployed in the event
of flood risk. In addition, many buildings
have begun to move building mechanical
systems out of basements and onto higher
floors, or to waterproof systems currently
in place particularly if they had to replace
systems damaged by Sandy.

The New York City Housing Authority
(NYCHA) is actively planning to increase the
resiliency of the numerous public housing
developments in the area, particularly
those that have apartments located on the
first floor. These plans aim to better protect
vulnerable populations from future damage
and disruption. To this end, FEMA recently

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

agreed to provide $100 million in funding
to NYCHA to cover the costs of both the
temporary boilers that have been in use
by 110 developments since Sandy, as well
as the purchase of new boilers for these
properties."”

 

The Financial District is a major regional transportation hub. Source: Flickr user The All-Nite Images,
licensed under Creative Commons.

Many of the commercial districts in the
Focus Area have Business Improvement
Districts and other organized entities
that are actively engaged in economic
development and organizational activity in
support of small businesses in these areas.

Community overview 1-24
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

In addition, anumber of key planning studies
with direct linkages to resiliency have either
been completed or are underway:

e Waterfront access and development of
waterfront recreational trails along both
the East and Hudson Rivers have been
extensively studied with considerable
resources currently going toward these
efforts. These amenities contribute to the
livability and character of the Planning Area,
can serve as critical transportation routes
after emergency events, and may present
opportunities for increasing — resiliency
through green infrastructure.

e Numerous corridor plans and studies have
been undertaken aiming to improve the
streetscape, connectivity, and economic
activity in key retail and commercial
corridors in the Focus Area, and in the
greater Planning Area.

Based on a review of existing plans and
initiatives, the Planning Committee recognized
a significant gap for resiliency planning:
supporting community-based emergency
preparedness, with a specific focus on
vulnerable populations throughout Lower
Manhattan. The Committee chose to adopt
this as a priority theme for the creation of the
Lower Manhattan NYRCR Plan, filling a gap in
existing regional plans.

Specific areas of focus for the community include:

e Increasing community resiliency and
supporting existing or new community
organizations that could provide support in
future emergencies.

e Providing additional support for small
businesses that may not have the financial
resources to weather even. short-term
shutdowns.

e Developing cohesive plans and initiatives
for the northern portions of the Planning
Area, such as Alphabet City, particularly
those that fall outside the more traditionally-
defined Lower Manhattan neighborhoods.

e Undertaking a comprehensive study of the
vulnerability of affordable housing and the
potential for increasing its resiliency.

e Promoting effective coordination among
community organizations and government
agencies in the identification and tracking
of vulnerable populations.

*° Crafting emergency response protocols
for addressing the needs of vulnerable
populations.

e Developing a means to deliver distributed
backup power generation to residential
buildings and small businesses, and
provision of telecommunications
redundancy in the event of an emergency.
Lower Manhattan initiatives

Below is a list of relevant major planning
initiatives and projects either planned or
underway throughout the Lower Manhattan
Planning Area.

The Lower Manhattan Development
Corporation (LMDC). Formed in the immediate
aftermath of September 11th, this organization
has a number of redevelopment plans and
initiatives underway:

e LMDC’s Plan for Lower Manhattan lays out a
range of plans for improving the area following
September 11th, including rebuilding the World
Trade Center site, improving waterfront access
and open spaces, and supporting businesses
and cultural organizations within the area.

e LMDC has pursued improvements on various
corridors and in various sub-areas of Lower
Manhattan, including Fulton Street and the area
surrounding the World Trade Center.

e LMDC also has incentive programs in place
to support businesses in and around Lower
Manhattan. One such program distributes
the New York City Economic Development
Corporation’s Job Creation and Retention
Program funds, which the City of New York’s

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency
(SIRR) proposes to expand to 2017.

The Alliance for Downtown New York (ADNY).
This organization has various plans and policies
in place to assist residents and businesses:

e ADNY has developed a vision plan _ for
improvements on Water Street, focusing on
privately-owned public spaces, which has led
to initial improvements implemented by the
New York City Department of Transportation
and additional improvements being pursued
by the New York City Economic Development
Corporation.

e ADNY’s 2009 Greenwich Street South plan laid
out key strategies for improving the 41 acres
south of the World Trade Center, between
Broadway and West Street.

e ADNY also has created programs around
recovery after emergency events. Offering
immediate assistance after Sandy, ADNY
created a Back to Business small grant
program for ground level retailers located in
Flood Zone A. Through the Back to Business
program, ADNY assigned nearly $1.6 million in
grants to 105 Lower Manhattan businesses.

Additional significant projects and plans in Lower
Manhattan include:

* The Lower East Side Long-Term Recovery
Group (LES Ready!), a coalition of community
groups and institutions that are working
together to enhance coordination and build
capacity in emergency preparedness and
response in Community Board 3 and the
immediately adjacent neighborhoods.

e Rebuild by Design is a design competition
sponsored by the Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding
Task Force and HUD to develop resiliency
proposals for the region impacted by
Superstorm Sandy. With particular relevance
to Lower Manhattan is the BIG U flood
protection strategy. This proposal includes
resiliency plans for the neighborhoods that
line the “U” of Lower Manhattan—from West
54th Street on the west side, south to the
Battery, and up to East 40th Street on the
east side. The plan was developed with local
community input and consists of a variety of
integrated hard infrastructure and community
planning strategies to increase resiliency.
HUD is expected to announce winning design
solutions in spring 2014.

e Regional economic development studies,
including the New York City Regional Economic
Development Council’s Strategic Plan, which
identifies strategies for accelerating job
growth and economic development in the
region. Strategies suggested for encouraging
economic growth in Lower Manhattan—an
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Opportunity Zone—include expansion of
commercial real estate and parks and open
space.

e Hudson River Park improvements and
expansion, including various recreational
amenities, infrastructure improvements, and
expansion and conversion of piers for mixed
uses and open space.

e East River Waterfront improvements and
expansion, providing waterfront access and
recreational amenities for community residents.

¢ The East River Blueway Plan, a community-
based waterfront initiative for the East River
that plans for redevelopment of recreational
amenities, connecting neighborhoods to the
waterfront, and integration of storm surge
resiliency measures into design.

¢ The Chinatown/Lower East Side Special
Zoning District, a proposal by the Coalition to
Protect Chinatown and the Lower East Side
which, if approved, would establish a special
zoning district to preserve the neighborhoods
of Chinatown and the Lower East Side.

Citywide resiliency initiatives

Special Initiative for Rebuilding and
Resiliency (SIRR)

On June 11, 2013, then-New York City Mayor
Michael Bloomberg announced the release of
“A Stronger, More Resilient New York,” which is
the product of the Mayor’s Special Initiative for
Rebuilding and Resiliency and SIRR Report.The
SIRR Report detailed what transpired prior to,
during, and after Sandy, what is the likely risk as
the City faces climate change, and what the City
can do to rebuild post-Sandy, ensuring resiliency
into the future. The SIRR Report contains
actionable recommendations both for rebuilding
communities in the City that were impacted
by Sandy and for increasing the resiliency of
buildings and infrastructure citywide. Broadly, the
SIRR Report lays out numerous citywide initiatives
to improve the resiliency of systems, including
coastal protection, buildings, insurance, utilities,
liquid fuels, healthcare, telecommunications,
transportation, parks, water and wastewater
and other critical networks.

Specific proposed initiatives for Lower Manhattan
include an integrated flood protection system
along the coastal edge, with a first phase targeted
for the Lower East Side and Chinatown.

The report and latest updates on implementation
can be found on the SIRR website:
http://www.nyc.gov/htmi/sirr/.

Future updates to the building and zoning
code

The City’s Building Resiliency Task Force identified
33 recommendations to the City Council. Many
of these recommendations are still in various
stages of review by the Council, but 16 initiatives
have been passed. In addition, the Department
of City Planning’s Flood Resilience Zoning Text
Amendment was approved by the City Council
on October 9, 2013. This amendment applies
to construction in the 100-year floodplain and
modifies zoning to remove barriers to flood-
resistant construction (e.g., increasing allowable
building heights to enable the elevation of
groundfloor uses and mechanical systems).

NYC Recovery Program

The City has also launched several initiatives to
help residents across the five boroughs recover
from the damage caused by Superstorm Sandy.
The City’s “Build it Back” program seeks to assist
homeowners, landlords, and tenants, whose
homes were damaged by Sandy. The NYC
Recovery Program also offers business loans and
grants to small business owners whose spaces
were damaged by Sandy. Most of these recovery
programs support resiliency investments and
will help improve homes and businesses in the
communities within southern Manhattan. More
information on the NYC Recovery program can be
found here: http://www.nyc.gov/htmi/recovery/.
(The State of New York manages both housing
and small business recovery programs outside of
New York City.)

Transportation improvements

The NYC Department of Transportation (NYC
DOT), the MTA, and the PANYNJ recently
released updated and more detailed plans
for upgrading the resiliency of their networks,
including roads, subways, vehicular tunnels, and
communications. Examples include retrofitting
subway entrances and vent grates with closure
mechanisms, installing flood gates and closures
of tunnel entrances, and installing emergency
generators designed to withstand flooding and
other hazards. A number of major projects are
already in design or construction, including the
reconstruction of the new South Ferry Terminal
on the 1 train, the complete rehabilitation of the
Montague tube on the R train, and major retrofits
to the four key vehicular tunnels that serve Lower
Manhattan.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan
FEMA Flood Maps and Flood Risk

Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) describes its assessment of flood risk through flood maps referred to as Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMs). These maps are used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) to set flood insurance rates. Before Superstorm Sandy, FEMA had begun a coastal
flood study to update FIRMs for portions of New York and New Jersey, using improved methods and data to better reflect coastal flood risk. When Superstorm
Sandy hit New York City, the FIRMs in use were based on information from 1983 and inundation extended well beyond what these maps estimated would be the

100-year floodplain.

These final FIRMs will guide new flood insurance rates for homeowners and businesses in the floodplain. FEMA's flood maps do not take into account future
conditions and thus do not factor in potential sea level rise.

National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)

FEMA developed the NFIP in the 1960s to provide
homeowners with flood insurance, which was not
readily available in the private market. Through
NFIP, property owners in participating communities
are able to buy subsidized, government-backed
insurance to protect against flood losses. The
Biggert-Waters Act of 2012 proposed the
controversial repeal of subsidies and other
restructuring in order to make the program more
financially sound. Coupled with the previously
mentioned FIRM map adjustments, this repeal

would result in substantial premium increases
for many policyholders. In a move to bring flood
insurance rate relief to coastal communities in
the wake of Superstorm Sandy, in March 2014,
Congress passed and President Obama signed
the Homeowner Flood Insurance Affordability
Act into law. The law caps average annual flood
insurance premium increases at 15%-18%, and
allows subsidies for insurance rates that are based
on revised flood maps. It also designates a flood
insurance advocate to educate homeowners and

policy holders on mitigation measures that can
help reduce flood insurance rates, and recognizes
among these measures methods for reducing flood
risk that provide alternatives to building elevation
for residential buildings such as attached homes
whose structures cannot be elevated.
a
ONS Do A r
services b d F

s. Source: Courtesy of Two

i

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Description of community assets and assessment of risk

Description of community
assets

To guide the planning process, the Planning
Committee (Committee) developed a
comprehensive inventory of the key assets
located within the Lower Manhattan Planning
Area. The Committee placed particular emphasis
on those assets whose loss or impairment due
to flood and storm events would compromise
essential social, economic or environmental
functions or critical facilities of the community. The
inventory aims to include sufficient information to
assess risk to the assets under current and future
conditions.

Assets include a variety of places and resources
valued by the community. They may facilitate
economic and social activities, or may refer to
critical infrastructure required to support those
activities. Assets may also be part of the built
or natural environment. Some assets are best
described as systems. These are assets that
may fall within or outside the community whose
impairment would affect community assets or
activities: for example, a wastewater system is
made up of multiple components and much of
the network may exist outside the community
itself, but the function of all these parts is critical
to regular community life. The asset inventory

was developed based on a combination of
publicly-available data and community input. The
inventory was organized by the six Asset Classes
below (listed in alphabetical order):

*¢ Economic

e Health and Social Services
¢ Housing

e Infrastructure Systems

¢ Natural and Cultural Resources

Socially Vulnerable Populations

These Asset Classes closely mirror the six
Recovery Support Functions, established
by President Obama in 2011 as part of the
National Disaster Recovery Framework, which is
discussed in more detail later in this document.
All assets inventoried as a part of this process are
of high community value. The process drew from
a series of Public Engagement Events, as well
as an online interactive community asset map
(located at Attp://lowermanhattan.nyrisingmap.
org/), which allowed community members to
comment on key assets and highlight the needs
and issues associated with them. It also allowed
them to add additional or corrected information
about assets and to add missing assets.

Committee and public input determined a list

of key assets of highest community value, with
particular attention to assets serving vulnerable
populations and those most at risk for future
flooding. Given the breadth and size of the Lower
Manhattan Planning Area, risk assessment was
focused on assets in areas of high or extreme risk
of future flooding, defined as the coastal Focus
Area portion of the Planning Area. In cases where
assets were essential to emergency response and
preparedness for serving vulnerable populations
(e.g., hospitals, evacuation centers, etc.), or
were schools or universities, the entirety of the
Planning Area was profiled—that is, all of Lower
Manhattan below 14th Street. While many of
these assets are not at extreme or high risk of
flooding, they nonetheless serve a critical role in
the community, especially during the aftermath of
a disaster. Other assets were categorized to aid
risk assessment and the development of targeted
strategies for improving resiliency to areas most
in need. As Appendix C demonstrates, housing
assets were grouped by Community District, and
economic assets by those commercial corridors
with the highest concentration of commercial
uses. Health and social service and natural and
cultural assets were grouped by location in high
or extreme risk area. For asset categories for
which no assets were located in extreme risk
zones, those categories were omitted from the
risk assessment asset inventory.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

 

Recovery support functions: a framework for a holistic resiliency plan

Throughout the remainder of the NYRCR Plan, six Recovery Support
Functions are used to guide the identification of issues, assist in categorizing
assets and assessing risk, frame needs and opportunities, and organize
resiliency strategies. These functions are derived from FEMA's National
Disaster Recovery Framework (NDRF) developed by President Obama in
2011 and will help coordinate this plan with state and federal programs.
These recovery support functions are:

Natural and Cultural Resources

Natural systems can play an important role in resiliency and

recovery. The ability of natural features to withstand disruptive

events as well as their ability to mitigate damage are addressed
by this function. Cultural resources can play an important role in recovery
through provision of spaces and forums for recovery.

Community Planning and Capacity Building

This function addresses a community’s ability to implement

immediate storm recovery activities and organize long-term

resiliency plans. Formal and informal community networks,
dedicated emergency education and planning efforts, and experience
recovering from past emergency events are characteristics that may enhance
this function.

Economic Development

This function addresses the ability for economic and business
activities to return to normal. Developing new economic
opportunities that result in a sustainable and economically
strong community is a component of this function.

Health and Social Services

©

This function addresses the ability of public health, healthcare
facilities, and essential social services to be restored after a
disruptive event.

Housing

The resiliency of a community’s housing stock is addressed by
this function—including both physical resiliency and financial
health and resources.

Infrastructure Systems

This function relates to local and regional transportation,
water management, utility systems, and the ability of these to
withstand and recover from disruptive events. The economic
development and job creation capacities of these systems are also critical
to this function.

®

 

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Vulnerable populations

The Committee determined vulnerable
populations to be the most important community
asset category for consideration under the plan.
Vulnerable populations are defined here as those
individuals who have limited mobility, limited
communication skills, and/or a limited ability
to control their environment. Seniors, disabled
or home-bound persons, and limited English
proficient speakers were particularly affected
by the impacts of Sandy, as many were unable
to leave their homes or obtain critical support.
While the Planning Committee recognized the
need to address the resiliency of place-based

assets and hard infrastructure, they advanced

the idea that community members themselves
are Lower Manhattan’s most critical asset and
therefore prioritized vulnerable populations and
the organizations and facilities that serve them.

Due to the size of the Planning Area and the
diversity of its neighborhoods, the identification
and tracking of vulnerable populations is
challenging. The map on the following page
provides an initial examination of the potential
locations where vulnerable population reside,
including the distribution of elderly populations
and those living in nursing homes, prisons, and
mental health facilities.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Figure II-1: Facilities serving vulnerable populations

 

 

Women’s Prison Association and Housing
Sirovich Center

Renewal on the Bowery

Jewish Board of Family and
Children’s Services

Bonitas Youth Services

| Planning Area

Lower East Side Coalition

 

1AthStreet

 

Evelyn and Louis Green
Residence at Cooper Sq.
(JASA)

i )
Project Renewal

Village Care Rehabilitation,
and Nursing Center

W 3rd Stree
Bailey House-

CenterLight Healthcare
Comprehensive Care
Center

Salvation Army
Chinatown Corps

Rivington House-

Andrews Hotel

   

“Nal Stray
O)
Manhattan Detention
complex
The Hallmark, wo
Battery Park City o
S
=
&
<

Fulton Street

Houstod

ao

SNUSAY AS.

Street

  

   
  

Focus Area

Facilities Housing or

Housing Development

Housing Works

Cylar House Providing Services to

forunares acess Vulnerable Populations
Facilities Housing

George Daly House © _ or Providing Services to

Vulnerable Populations

Bowery Mission
Transitional Center

Housing Development
Fund

Harry and Jeanette
Weinberg Residence
{JASA)

Third Street
Women's Residence

 

Barrier Free Living

Q Community Access
‘Transitional Housing
Program

Ridge Street Gardens

 

Sacred Heart Convent

Helen’s House

New East Side
Nursing Home

Source: New York City Department of City
Planning, MAP Pluto v13.1; NYRCR planning
committee and public input.

Gouverneur Court

>

y Association for
Rehabilitative
Case Management
and Housing

National Center for
. Palliative Care Innovation
Chinatown Day {under construction)
Care Center
Two Bridges
Metropolitan Senior Residence
Correctional Center

Two Bridges Tower

 

St. Margaret's House

x

IViles wh

 

 

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Housing assets

All housing in the Focus Area was deemed
critical for the NYRCR Plan as these buildings
are at high risk from the effects of hurricanes and
other extreme weather events. According to the
2005-2009 American Community Survey, there
are over 46,000 housing units in the Focus Area,
69% of which are located in buildings with 50 or
more units. Seventeen percent of the housing
units in the Focus Area are further located in
New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) public
housing developments, home to approximately

18,000 residents.'? The public and subsidized
housing along the east side of the Planning Area,
in particular, experienced severe flooding during
Sandy, leaving the residents in need of immediate
assistance. The Planning Committee believes
that protecting these vulnerable residents should
be at the forefront of any resiliency strategy, while
also respecting and responding to the needs of
residents outside of the high and extreme risk
flood-prone zones.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

 

 

         
      
   

 

Figure II-2: Housing assets (subsidized housing) |
= 7
- Campos Plaza Il (NYCHA) Village East Towers
‘ (Mitchell-Lama) |
Campos Plaza | (NYCHA) | Planning Area
Tanya Towers (Mitchell-Lama) Ny caay Focus Area
, es ee Oe ee = “\ Lower East Side Ill Housing in Focus Area

Ea” 6 GES ECS Ged Ed Ee (NYGHA) -

Had a a BE FF eif ) LW Public and Subsidized Housing

Boe a ee As TT ice

Ua - Panes |__| Walk-up Buildings

aS =r mee a (I Large Elevator Buildi

# Be arge clevator Bullaings
West Village Houses = =e | ae Ee \ . wae
o (Co-op) m a Ls at i ia Mixed-Use Buildings

a Lt Vdd Ee ae 44? Ee

me eee eae ee ee Riis Houses I

wy IH a Lt a C8 ee) 8" (NYCHA)

G 5 “+ a Se We See ' & a Lower East Side II

DBO Egg pian === INYCHA)
Hane Wald Houses
Bb {NYCHA)

Lavanburg
Homes.
{NYCHA)

Baruch Houses
{NYCHA)

  
     
  

rT

a
ana Gouverneur Gardens
Ean {Co-op)
Et

. Source: New York City Department of City
ne ciidges Houses Planning, MAP Pluto v13.1; NYRCR Planning
(NYCHA) Committee and public input.

i
ih
Ss
ea?

    

Lands End |
mas ‘Section 8)
— {Section 8)

Lands End II

{Section 8)

Two Bridges Tower
= {Section 8)

Knickerbocker Village
(Mitchell-Lama)

Smith Houses
{NYCHA)

 

 

 

~s

0 0.25 0.5 1
Miles »

 

 

 

Assessment of risk and needs |I-6
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Health and social services assets

The Committee determined that health and social
service assets supporting emergency response
are a priority for Lower Manhattan resiliency
planning. The Planning Committee recognizes
the importance of these assets in helping the
Lower Manhattan community recover from
Superstorm Sandy and be more prepared for
future such events. This is largely due to the
significant role that community organizations,
healthcare institutions and other emergency
responders have played during past emergencies
within Lower Manhattan, including Sandy. Due to

the importance of these assets, the Committee
inventoried all critical healthcare and emergency
response facilities and organizations throughout
the Planning Area, extending beyond the Focus
Area.

The Committee identified priority assets including
New York City Fire Department (FDNY) and New
York City Police Department (NYPD) facilities,
key healthcare centers, the Seward Park High
School evacuation center, and the offices of key
community organizations that played a significant

role in organizing aid and relief services during
the aftermath of Sandy. For instance, Dewitt
Reformed Church served as a staging area for
Sandy recovery, while the Lower Manhattan
Construction Command Center (LMCCC) helped
buildings in Community Board 1 to get their
power restored by connecting building managers
with City agency representatives.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Figure II-3: Health and social service assets (Key emergency response assets)

 

 

FDNY Squad 18.

FDNY Eng 33, Lad 9
NYPD 6th Precinct

Brecht Forum

Community Board 2

University
Settlement

FDNY Eng 24, Lad 5

FDNY Lad 20

Sara Delano Roosevelt
Park Coalition Buildings
(Various Sites)

FDNY Eng 55

Committee Against
Anti-Asian Violence
(CAAAV)

Charles B Wang
Comunity Health Care
Center

NYPD 1st Precinct
Troop A

FDNY Lad 8

FDNY Eng 7, Lad 1
Manhattan Borough
Command

Battery Park City
Seniors’ Group

Battery Park City
Emergency
Medical Office

World Trade Center
Emergency
Medical Office

FDNY Eng 10
Lad 10

Downtown Alliance

NYPD
Lower Manhattan
Center

FDNY Lad 3
FDNY Eng 5

Good Old Lower East Side
(GOLES)

 

Bowery Residents’
Committee (BRC)

NYPD Service Area 4
NYPD Sth Precinct

Community Board 3
FDNY Eng 28, Lad 11
Grand Street Settlement

Dewitt Reformed Church

Seward Park High School
Evacuation Genter

FDNY Eng 15, Lad 18

NYPD 7th Precinct

Henry Street Settlement

Betances Health Center >
Primitive Christian Church
Seward Park

Gouverneur Hospital

  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
 

NYPD EMS Station 4
Hamilton Madison House

Two Bridges
Neighborhood Council

FDNY Eng 9, Lad 6
NYPD 5th Precinct

Chinese Consolidated
Benevolent Association

Hamilton Madison House

Community Board 1

New York Downtown
Hospital

FDNY Eng 6
311 Office

FDNY Eng 4, Lad 15
3

1
Miles iN

 

CL] Planning Area
Focus Area

Emergency Response Assets
@ Key Health Care Center

NYPD Facility
FDNY Facility

Evacuation Center

@oe#esd

Source: New York City Department of City
Planning, MAP Pluto vi3.1; NYRCR Planning

Committee and public input.

 

 

Key Community Organizations

 

5

 

 

Assessment of risk and needs |I-8
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Economic assets

Lower Manhattan is not only a global center for
finance, with more than 100 million square feet of
commercial office space,'* but it is also a growing
hub for the technology and creative sectors.
The reconstructed World Trade Center will fully
restore and expand upon a vital center for global
business. While traditionally the seat of the New
York Stock Exchange and some of the world’s
largest banking institutions, Lower Manhattan
also has a rapidly diversifying economy driving
leasing and job growth. Additionally, an increasing
number of technology and creative companies
have moved into the historic Financial District
area in recent years. The zone south of Chambers
Street is now home to 600 technology companies,
up from 500 only a year ago.'? Key commercial
corridors such as Water Street, Fulton Street,
and Canal Street house businesses both big and
small. The largest commercial building in New

York City, 55 Water Street, is also located in the
area. The area also boasts economic drivers in
the form of tourist destinations, which include the
National September 11 Memorial and Museum,
Wall Street, the Brooklyn Bridge and a multitude
of other assets.

Lower Manhattan is also home to a wide variety of
independently-owned small businesses, clustered
in key commercial corridors and interspersed
in the fabric of its neighborhoods. A number of
these key commercial corridors in the Focus Area,
particularly prone to flooding, include Water Street,
Fulton Street, South Street Seaport and Historic
District, Broadway, Canal Street, Greenwich Street,
West Street, and shops along Avenues C and D.
The Focus Area alone is home to 4,800 businesses
and 3.5 million square feet of retail space.2" In
addition, some of these at-risk areas directly serve

vulnerable populations, such as those located
adjacent to the large, regulated, and subsidized
housing developments along the east side.

Many of the small businesses located near
the key commercial corridors listed above still
struggle to recover from the flooding and damage
that Sandy visited on the area. The South Street
Seaport Historic District and Alphabet City
have been particularly challenged by Sandy’s
flooding. Some of the small businesses in these
areas were forced to shutter their doors and have
still not reopened. The Planning Committee has
identified small businesses as a key asset to be
addressed within the Community Reconstruction
Plan, as many remain challenged to both recover
and prepare for future potential severe weather
events.
 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Figure II-4: Key economic assets

 

 

     
   
  
   
     
    

   

’ ‘
_ — Planning Area
LL ee ees eee Se i ee FF3] Focus ae
Meatpacking ‘ ed Ee Be BAYA 7 Se) a ocus Area
Pee ; s ames — aay 5 fee , Major Economic Assets and
Ac g Eee) eas as mee a tyt Commercial Corridors
OG aK EE Te ee a nA a Focus A
f OPS USS FT Ar “I in Focus Area
OXON 1s es A
= aaa =F Ces = Major Economic Assets
SCAT — <.2ae ss es ee ee ri HO roc Aree
Se BA) te ver ES ¢ 3 EL nb oe
oe, Y | i i] Rear ae Major Commercial Corridor
ei Cain : ' ae = — BE 4 * aS in Focus Area
St. John’s Center 1 Y H Fi | Po ron tect aay EE Ag (Avenue G, Canal Street,
WEE WONBaoe ate x
Cc he 1 ‘

  
  
     

aces UMRDU ET sae
sath wa LH TTT
ie soa LEO
World Trade Center oe : —& japage a
s !
A SEA
World Trade Center SZ 2 aa ae iS
orld Trade Cente wet Oe ES a av *
“~<_ 4. <4
Brookfield Place > Ne Sa ra os 4
ae
Pier A 1 a im
oe Te, &
a = 1m ¥
a
o— 4ax
LJ

South Street Seaport

a
i
<
'

ey,

  

4 5 and Seaport Historic District
Seen see
Saiaycre/

em a.

Wall Stan
i i = ay
y v New York Stock Exchange

55 Water Street

0 0.25 0.5

 

Source: New York City Department of City
Planning, MAP Pluto v13.1; NYRCR Planning
Committee and public input.

1
Miles »

 

 

 

 

 

Fulton Street, Wall Street,
Water Street)

 

 

 

 

 

Assessment ofriskand needs [I-10
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

©

Infrastructure systems assets

Lower Manhattan’s critical infrastructure systems
serve not only the residents and visitors of the
community, but the New York City metropolitan
region as a whole. With many systems located
near bulkhead lines in the Focus Area, critical
infrastructure assets at high or extreme risk to
flooding are numerous. This risk is magnified
when considering that these assets are either
responsible for transporting people in and out
of Manhattan or providing the Lower Manhattan
community with running water and _ electrical
power.

Key transportation assets include six passenger
ferry terminals, five major subway interchanges,
the Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH) train
terminal, five regional bridges and tunnels, and
two major regional highways. New York City’s new
bicycle sharing system, with stations throughout
the Planning Area, is also a transportation asset.

Additionally, the Planning Area houses numerous
Con Ed substations that are critical to providing
power to the Lower Manhattan community. For
example, the well-documented failure of the 13"

Street Substation during Superstorm Sandy gave
way to power loss for the entire Planning Area,
save Battery Park City. While the City of New York
and its respective agencies and organizations
have numerous plans and financial resources
in place to protect these critical infrastructure
systems assets, they are nonetheless recognized
in this plan as key assets to the Lower Manhattan
community.
 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Figure II-5: Infrastructure systems assets

@

 

 
 
    
    
    

  

=
-” 13th Street
: Substation
(Gon Edison)
- . | Planning Area
=n L Train Tunnel
=r. WA] Focus Area
ey
5 one Infrastructure Systems
bye in Focus Area
it : Ry , ; Transportation Systems
ST = = pen Street Utility Systems
ONT eH A= = ne Pass ME iy sy
GY Vj Eee Sn We LE 2
oe AER te Boe ee a eed ene “
Eo O6s As Ss we GES ET = ah
1% DERE Sy TTI Neots S Williamsburg
West Street Zz u a
Truck Route wag =~ nage
(Route 9A) i

Holland Tunnel

Leonard Street
Substation
(Gon Edison)

140 West Street
Verizon Exchange

World Trade Genter
PATH Station

Battery Park City
Ferry Terminal

Hugh L. Garey Tunnel

Verizon Switching
Facility

Whitehall Station and
Subway Tunnels

Battery Park
Underpass

 

  

0 0.25 0.5 1 *
: 1 Miles »

 

 

        
 

Gherry Street
2 Substation
(Gon Edison)

South Street .
Truck Route

Source: New York City Department of City
Planning, MAP Pluto vi3.1; NYRCR Planning

Manhattan Bridge Committee and public input.

Brooklyn Bridge

South Street Substation
(Gon Edison)

2 Pier 11 / East River
Ferry Terminal

Downtown Heliport

Governors Island Ferry

 

 

Staten Island Ferry -
Whitehall Ferry Terminal

 

 

 

 

Assessment ofriskand needs [I-12
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

@)

Natural and cultural assets

Lower Manhattan features a wealth of parks,
open spaces, privately-owned public spaces, and
cultural facilities, many of which are located in
the Focus Area, home to over 100 acres of open
space. Battery Park, in the Focus Area, served as
a key staging ground for recovery services during
the aftermath of Sandy, providing ample room for
agencies such as FEMA and the National Guard
to tend to, and provide services for, those in need.
The various park spaces within Battery Park City
are also a natural and cultural asset during post-
emergency situations.

Other parks are essential community assets,
providing open space, recreational activity, and
light and air. These parks also provide a variety
of environmental benefits, such as stormwater
absorption, and can provide a protective border
to mitigate flooding impacts on interior land.
These include East River Park, Hudson River
Park, the ball fields within Battery Park City, and
the East River Esplanade, all of which were heavily
affected by Superstorm Sandy. The quality of life
in the community was directly impacted by the
damage caused to these public spaces and the
duration of their closures. Additionally, numerous

performing arts centers, museums, and other
arts centers exist within the Focus Area. These
facilities serve as assets not only for their public
facilities (theaters, galleries, or studios) and their
role within the community, but also for their
potential capacity to serve as a gathering space
or community hub in the event of an emergency.
 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Figure II-6: Natural and cultural assets

@

 

 

=
wo
ra Lower East Side | Planning Area
Be Boe PS oe on ee Community Gardens FE Focus Area
Grae Em EGS ms = |
eS EAA Gas CE eee East River Park Natural and Cultural Assets
oA = Sed Ma a x in Focus Area
Sau ~~ ¥ Natural and Cultural Assets
Westbeth SS rat - in Focus Area
Artists’ Housing and == nae i a 5S ==?
Center for the Arts nae a oe a
i Se SS Wer ESS 7H BE BS BS
Hudson River Park joe cae RIE Ee
: = by 1 oe : .
Pier 40 ai gpa 4 a we ynneenue! iG *
] % Sis
PETE ARAL ee OP ss
r Hee "a it ancen =" ye
ME AAA we Wiehe rect ; mu .
: Baeee ua eels ons Renee oe
al oe PO ETIIST  eRY |
= = pote RK
COTTE DOR
'
Pier 25 Cais) tH mt i\ | 6 se os AW
Xx 7 = a & Dative
Battery Park City Ballfields ‘ ee A » AA “4
= Ot
Ato C4 s
Nelson A. Rockefeller Park ‘I a = =n Re >. Pier 42 Park
Teardrop Park * Woe in | Ob 4 (under construction) Branning MAP Pluto iat: NYRR Planning
Poets House £ Samay g° Pier 35 Eco-Park Committee and public input.
Irish Hunger Memorial o 5 i : ae a4 & m
» a el Se * East River Esplanade
Brookfield Place Plaza y on i, a
hs New Amsterdam Market
)

National September 11
Memorial & Museum

Skyscraper Museum

Museum of
Jewish Heritage

Battery Park

    
 
      

 

   
 

   
      
 

 

South Street Seaport Museum

South Street Seaport
Historic Vessels

 

 

 

~s

1
Miles »

0.25 0.5

 

 

 

Assessment ofriskand needs [I-14
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Schools and universities

Lower Manhattan is home to a large number of
pre-K, elementary, and secondary schools, both
public and private, as well as universities and
colleges, including New York University, Pace
University, and Borough of Manhattan Community
College. Recognizing that the thousands of
school-aged children of Lower Manhattan
neighborhoods spend the majority of their days
within schools, the Committee determined these
facilities to be one of the most important asset
categories for this community. Local schools need
to have effective emergency preparedness plans,
clear lines of communications with emergency
responders and parents, and viable evacuation
protocols.The organized and orderly evacuation
of these schools during the aftermath of a severe

weather event or other emergency is crucial for
avoiding tragedy. Local schools and universities
also serve as centers for the community, and
their ability to recover following emergency
events is paramount to the functioning of the
community at large. Additionally, the dormitories
of the larger universities house large numbers
of undergraduate students who may need
assistance in the aftermath of a storm. As an
example, Pace University’s Maria’s Tower houses
about 550 first-year students in a single building,
a quarter of Pace’s approximately 2,000 students
living on campus.”°
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Figure II-7: Schools and universities |

 

 

   
   
        
     

 

   
  
   

—
-
‘ The East Village
Gommunity School cy ,
. Ga a = y “eng Ne
B™aY PZRISSS SEN HEA AGRE FSS SE BP) Es ere = \ Manhattan Korean School FocusArea
“X44 anid Baad Eee lt ae OF iB six Educational Facilities
sot Ges qt te ss [HID Public Schools (K-12
A ca en feo _ a -
SAME Er) Te ed OE Gecani EEN A uPle Schools (12)
ANS oa ins =u Gems" Oe FS i Private Schools (K-12)
New York University AXXO EE Ey aan 1s Se ET eal
Washington Square $4 i am he SS Ss PX. ip a i Post-Secondary Schools
Campus BOG VX PR Girls Prep
eens Py itt qn es Ber] 5" Re EE Lower East Side
wad we aq oe i= Wl eee i ee Elementary School
sod Ge UMNE SAM BN OWN ee vac EMBL |
a = Bard High School
ws Zs iON BH i q wai ¥ E Early College

ey ay
Ht
aml
=

need
HUMANE
ee Ete

|---|
=
aR
a
ae
s

-
ROS
* Ss
Borough of Manhattan gS a 0 x, <A
Community College y i CA €9

Stuyvesant High School
Shuang Wen School

(PS 184) . .
Source: New York City Department of City
pe eee eee nce 234) Planning, MAP Pluto v13.1: NYRCR Planning
The Yung Wing School Committee and public input.

St. John’s University (PS 124)

Manhattan G: ii
anhattan Gampus Jacob August Riis/

Manhattan Academy of
Technology
(PS 126)

Borough of Manhattan

Gommunity College :

Pace University
Pace Plaza

. Bl hool
Battery Park Gity School ue Schoo!

(PS/IS 276)

 

 

 

~s

1
0.25 0.5 Miles »

 

 

 

Assessment ofriskand needs [I-16
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Assessment of risk to assets and systems

Future risk

With its location in Upper New York Harbor,
Lower Manhattan remains at risk from
future coastal storms, although a number
of factors—in particular, tide cycle and wind
direction— must be aligned to result in damage
and devastation on the order of what occurred
during Sandy. Along the east side, this risk is
exacerbated by the fact that the East River is
not truly a river, but rather a tidal strait, part of a
tidal estuary, and subject to tidal surges from two
waterways (Upper New York Bay or Long Island
Sound). The risk of coastal flooding will continue
to increase with rising sea levels. Significant
portions of the Lower Manhattan Planning Area
lie in high-risk zones, according to New York State
Department of State (NYS DOS) risk analysis; the
area that is at extreme risk is limited due to the
general presence of bulkheads and seawalls that
lessen the direct impact of wind-driven waves.
Given its tall buildings, location at the “prow” of
Manhattan, and large bridges crossing the East
River, the area is also vulnerable to wind damage
from storms.

The assessment of risk to specific assets or
systems of assets in a community produced
important information that helped guide the
Planning Committee’s decisions about needs,

 

 

Assessing risk

Risk, in this context, is the potential for an asset to be damaged or destroyed in a future storm
event. The assessment of risk to assets or systems of assets in a community produced important
information to evaluate needs and opportunities and help guide Committee decisions about
resiliency strategies and projects. The NYS DOS developed a risk assessment tool that is aimed
at understanding flood risk to community functions to support this process. The tool assigns each
asset a risk score by evaluating three factors:

e Hazard: the likelihood and magnitude of future storm events

e Exposure: the local topographic and shoreline conditions that tend may increase or decrease
the impact of coastal hazards

e  =Vulnerability: the capacity of an asset to return to service after a storm, taking into account
its material strength relative to the coastal hazard as well as its regenerative capacity

Collectively, hazard, exposure, and vulnerability determine the risk that an asset could be damaged
or destroyed by a coastal storm event. This analysis identifies which assets within the Community
are most at risk from future storms in comparison to other assets. Further, it allows potential projects
to be evaluated by their ability to reduce risk to assets. For access to the NYS DOS Risk Assessment
Tool and additional information how to use it, see: hitp://stormrecovery.ny.gov/resources-0

 

opportunities, strategies, and projects.

 

infrastructure assets, several key commercial

Assets at risk

The Lower Manhattan assets in the NYS DOS
High and Extreme risk zones are classified
as the Lower Manhattan Focus Area. This
includes affordable and public housing, other
housing serving vulnerable populations, critical

corridors, and emergency response facilities
and headquarters of community organizations..
Many assets in the NYS DOS High and Extreme
risk zones that were severely affected after
Sandy are at risk from future disaster events.
Sandy damaged hundreds of homes and small
businesses, especially on Lower Manhattan’s
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

@

 

Figure II-8: Assessment of risk to assets

| Planning Area

fiaal

acu
FBG UHORGEGE
D3 ec ff

ye

gaat
BRAGA

LU eases

Mast

 

 

Assessment of Risk

to Assets

     

e a”
~*~
ew ee Ee

iyi

 

 

 

(Risk Score 6-23)
(Risk Score 24-53)

High Risk

Moderate Risk
Planning, MAP Pluto v13.1; NYRCR Planning

Committee and public input.

Zz
2
3
=
o
—E
Cc
o
Q-
o
a
2
2
<
£
é
Zz
2
2
5
oO
no

  

Weg ieee
ead Reine eee
my ce
Al i
=~

0.5

0.25

 

  

             

a

\
BE aa

Law

Rene:

il
TT
di

Er
rte

Sue hl ararigs,

ua
a
> oJ

ay aPaGHUEOREANAO
48 eae
A

SEs

  

  

S

   

Miles

 

 

Assessment ofriskand needs [I-18
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

east side, and many have yet to be repaired and/
or reopened. Those assets at greatest future risk
include vulnerable populations and those living
in subsidized and public housing, the majority of
whom reside on the east side as well as Hudson
River Park, Battery Park, and parks along the
East River.

Lower Manhattan is also home to numerous
large infrastructure, economic, and government
assets, but because the owners of these assets
are already developing and implementing specific
resiliency measures for them, the Planning
Committee has chosen to focus on assets and
populations that have fewer internal resources.

Risk

The assessment of risk to specific assets or
systems of assets in a community produces
important information to help guide Planning
Committee decisions about projects and priorities.
NYS DOS established a quantitative methodology
for evaluating risk, which also takes into account
storm and flood risk, shoreline conditions, and
the innate vulnerability of each asset to damage
and/or service disruptions Specifically, the NYS
DOS Risk Tool assigns a risk score to each asset
by evaluating three factors:

e Hazard: the likelihood and magnitude of

future storm events

e Exposure: the local topographic and
shoreline conditions that may increase or

decrease coastal hazards

e Vulnerability: the capacity of an asset to
return to service after a storm, taking into
account its material strength relative to the
coastal hazard as well as its regenerative
capacity

Collectively, hazard, exposure, and vulnerability
determine the chance that an asset could be
damaged or destroyed by a storm event (i.e.,
“risk”). This risk assessment identifies which
assets within the community are most at risk in
comparison to other assets, as discussed in this
section.

Systems at risk
The following key systems are at risk in Lower
Manhattan:

Health Care and Social Services Delivery: Sandy
caused a health care and social services delivery
crisis in Lower Manhattan. Many vulnerable
populations and people in need of immediate
healthcare were left unattended — due to a lack
of resources, inability to travel to health/social
services centers, or their needs being unknown
to emergency workers. Lower Manhattan is home
to many vulnerable populations, defined here
as those individuals who have limited mobility,

limited communication skills, and/or a limited
ability to control their environment. This includes
senior citizens, those with limited mobility,
children, and those people living in subsidized
or public housing, making health care and social
services a key system that needs to be protected
from future risk.

Emergency and other communication systems:
Emergency response coordination and resilient
communication systems will be of critical
importance to Lower Manhattan in the event of
a future disaster. The ability for these facilities
to maintain operations and coordination during
and after future disasters is integral to the Lower
Manhattan community’s resiliency during a storm.
With dozens of New York City Fire Department
(FDNY), New York City Police Department,
(NYPD) and community organizations within the
Planning Area—along with one major hospital
—emergency and communications systems
are at risk of ceasing operations in the event of
another damaging storm. In addition, the inability
of smaller community-based organizations and
even individuals to communicate during and after
the storm reduced the ability of the community to
respond to critical needs, particularly among the
most vulnerable populations.

Infrastructure Systems: Lower Manhattan is
home to a large number of infrastructure systems,
including transportation, electrical, steam, and
telecommunications. Failures in any of these
systems can impair mobility, communications,
public safety, and economic activity, while
a failure of the electrical system can cause
cascading failures in many of the systems. In
certain cases, these systems serve not only
Lower Manhattan, but other parts of the city
as well, so failures in these systems can have
impacts beyond the planning area. Protecting
these assets from storm-related impacts lowers
the risk of direct damage to these systems, but
also of downstream impacts on other systems
and populations.

This analysis of risk has been used to inform the
definition and prioritization of projects, particularly
those that protect assets from flooding. A
subsequent section discusses how some of this
Plan’s Proposed and Featured Projects reduce
the risk to assets identified here. A more detailed
description of the Risk Assessment Methodology
can be found on the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (VYRCR) Program website, and
the output from the Risk Assessment Tool is
included in this document as Appendix B.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Assessment of needs and opportunities

As part of the NYRCR Plan process, the
Lower Manhattan Community identified key
resiliency needs and opportunities. Community
members spoke about what they need to
be safe and sustainable in the face of extreme
events, emergencies and the impacts of
climate change. The process also identified
key opportunities to address the gaps in the
community’s collective resiliency to such events,
thereby making Lower Manhattan stronger for the
future.

The needs and opportunities discussed here
reflect the first-hand experiences of Planning
Committee members and Lower Manhattan
residents, along with their combined knowledge
of risks, challenges, unmet demand and
untapped potential across the neighborhoods of
Lower Manhattan. At the first Public Engagement
Event, the Community reported on the greatest
resiliency needs facing Lower Manhattan.

Based on input from public outreach activities, the
Planning Committee prioritized among the various
resiliency needs and opportunities in Lower
Manhattan, with a distinct focus on emergency
preparedness to support vulnerable populations.
This prioritization formed a framework for guiding
the Planning Committee in the development of

the NYRCR Plan’s key strategies and the projects
that will enact them.

Protection for vulnerable
populations

A critical need cited repeatedly by the
Planning Committee and the broader public
is the protection of vulnerable populations
throughout Lower Manhattan. Vulnerable
populations include individuals who have limited
mobility, limited communication — skills, and/
or a limited ability to control their environment.
Approximately 12.5% of the population in both
the Planning Area and the Focus Area is over
65 years of age—a community that may face
particular challenges during an emergency due to
limited mobility and lack of access to information.
Residents noted the importance of enhancing
current efforts by state and city governments to
develop an online registry of vulnerable individuals
in order to target support to these populations
first before an emergency event is anticipated to
Additionally, health facilities which serve
vulnerable populations should have backup
power to ensure continuity of care throughout
emergency events.

occur.

Limited-English proficient (LEP) speakers
represent another vulnerable population who
face significant barriers inaccesstoinformation
around preparedness, response, and recovery
procedures and resources. According to the
2005-2009 American Community Survey, 13% of
adults in the Planning Area and 15% of adults in
the Focus Area report speaking English “not well”
or “not at all.” Community-based organizations
(CBOs) present an opportunity for conducting
outreach to these populations, capable of
developing and disseminating culturally- sensitive
information in multiple languages.

Low-income residents of Lower Manhattan
form another vulnerable population, with nearly
17% of residents across the Planning Area
earning below the Federal poverty line. These
residents may face limited relocation options in
the event of an emergency and additionally may
not be able to afford neither repairs to businesses
or homes, nor medical care in the event of injury. It
is important that emergency preparedness-related
information and services are free or very low-
cost to be accessible to low-income residents,
and that targeted outreach to these populations
is conducted to ensure they are aware of these
resources.
Given that local community-based organizations
serve many of these vulnerable populations
on a daily basis, the Planning Committee and
public emphasized the opportunity to provide
support to these populations by strengthening the
coordination and continuity of CBO activity during
emergency events.

Improved coordination and
communications during
emergencies

CBOs played a_ significant role in the
Sandy recovery effort, despite often limited
resources. CBO services provided a necessary
complement to much of the critical emergency
response services provided by governmental
agencies. Many of these organizations have
a long and deep history in Lower Manhattan,
particularly in Chinatown and the Lower East
Side. With extensive, neighborhood-based
service networks, many of these organizations
provide vital outreach, educational programming,
and health and social services to the community.
Several organizations also provided critical food,
water and medical aid.

Community members emphasized a need

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

CBOs need greater financial, technical, and labor resources to continue to offer the critical services they
provided after Superstorm Sandy. Source:Courtesy of GOLES.

for better upfront planning and coordination
among these CBOs and local, State, and
Federal emergency response entities. Effective
emergency response is dependent upon pre-
planning among CBOs to establish and coordinate
their operations, but also with governmental
agencies to better define roles, protocols for
information sharing, and ensure that critical
systems are up and running during emergency
events. The presence of a well-coordinated set

of CBOs provides the opportunity to identify and
reach key populations, deliver essential supplies
and services, and increase residents’ overall
emergency preparedness.

Lower Manhattan residents also specified a
need for improved communications options
during and after emergency events. Amid the
power outage, which engulfed the majority of the
Planning Area, residents described difficulties in
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

receiving information from emergency response
agencies and organizations, and in tracking down
relatives, friends, and pets. Community members
identified a need for information hubs that have
dedicated space for locating loved ones, and
for such information to be easily accessible to
those who may not have access to computers or
cellphones. Community membersalsocitedaneed
for greater access to comprehensive resiliency
information, as well as improved outreach in
advance by emergency response agencies and
organizations on emergency preparedness,
response, and recovery procedures. A range
of existing facilities to serve as information and
resources hubs - and CBOs ready to staff and
operate those facilities - provide a significant
opportunity to address these needs.

Access to key support services
during emergency events

Lower Manhattan residents noted a need for
CBOs to have access to sufficient funding,
training and supplies to serve constituents
both during and following emergency events.
In order to conduct vital door-to-door outreach
to vulnerable populations, CBOs cited a need
for greater funding to support staff and volunteer

recruitment and training, as well as improved
communications systems. They described
difficulties in coordinating relief operations
with partner organizations, communicating
with employees and volunteers, and accessing
databases with information on constituents and
vulnerable populations post-storm.

Many CBOs active in response to Sandy
continue to provide resiliency programming to
their constituents, but report that resources are
stretched thin and, with additional support, they
could be more effective in their response during
the next emergency event. Continuity of service
for a strengthened and better-coordinated set of
CBOs could help to bring timely essential services
to thousands more people during the next severe
weather event.

Physical support spaces and
infrastructure to enhance
community-based emergency

response activities

CBOs require improved facilities, backup
power and communications systems to serve
populations in need during emergency events.
After the storm, Lower Manhattan residents lacked

basic information about resources and services,
such as where to find medical services, food,
supplies, working ATMs, or cell phone charging
stations. Without power, food, and hot water,
community members sought a place where they
could access these services and find temporary
respite from flooded or powerless apartment
buildings. CBOs coordinated these relief efforts
despite often limited space, sometimes renting
additional storage areas for supplies, and
distributing food, water, and services from relief
stations set up on sidewalks outside. These
organizations not only helped distribute physical
supplies, but also provided critical information to
residents. On the Lower East Side, this included
thousands of volunteers who deployed throughout
the community.

Furthermore, flooding and power outages
rendered many local CBOs unable to effectively
serve their everyday populations. Local CBOs
recognized the opportunity to continue being an
effective resource for constituent populations
during emergency events, by ensuring backup
power, redundant communications systems and
resilient computer data storage and access to
CBOs so that they can remain operable during
emergencies and bounce back more quickly.
 

Building owners need funding and technical

assistance to enhance building resiliency. Source:
Wikimedia Commons author Joel Raskin, licensed
under Creative Commons.

@e® ©

Access to information for capital
and operational resiliency
improvements

Across residential, commercial and institutional
sectors, private owners and stakeholders
require clear, accessible information related
to recovery and emergency preparedness.
Outreach and educational activities are required
to increase awareness of key resiliency issues,
and assistance is required to guide building
owners, business owners and others through the

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

identification, selection and implementation of
resiliency improvements.

Within the residential sector, building owners,
ownership entities, and tenant associations
need information about how to access existing
resources and plan for emergencies. Facing a
lack of information and support, small business
retailers in Lower Manhattan need targeted
education and technical assistance in order to
improve both operational and physical resiliency.
Since Sandy, many small business owners
have attempted to apply for loan assistance
but experienced difficulties in navigating the
application process and providing necessary
evidence of pre-storm business operations when
much of that documentation was destroyed during
Sandy. Additionally, small business retailers lack
information about the types of measures they can
undertake to mitigate future flood damage. It is
particularly important that some of this information
be delivered to small business retailers via door-
to-door outreach, given that many operate sole
proprietorships, maintain small staff sizes, work
long hours on-site, and otherwise cannot easily
leave their place of business to access services.

Financial resources for
residential building resiliency
improvements

Housing stock along Lower Manhattan’s edge
faces particular vulnerabilities to storm damage,
and building owners need support to undertake
upgrades in order to enhance the resiliency of
residential buildings. A substantial proportion of
the area’s housing is located in the extreme- and
high-risk zones: according to NYC Department
of City Planning PLUTO data, 27% of housing
by built area (and 29% of housing by number
of housing units, according to the 2005-2009
American Community Survey) is in areas of high
flood risk.2’ This includes a large proportion of the
public and subsidized housing in the community,
putting its low-income, senior, and disabled
residents at heightened risk of injury.

Throughout the entirety of the Planning Area,
power outages plagued residents, especially
those in high-rise buildings. Forty-four percent of
the housing units in the Planning Area are located
in high-rise buildings of 50 or more units.”? Power
outages resulted in the loss of stairwell lighting
and elevator systems in these buildings, making
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

evacuation difficult and dangerous. In addition,
water service to upper floors was interrupted, and
many buildings suffered from sewer backflow.
Lastly, given that many of the area’s buildings are
large elevator apartment buildings, mechanical
systems can be costly to floodproof or elevate.
Building owners and managers recognized that
incentives and financing can help fill critical gaps
to get key resiliency upgrades implemented and
operational, keeping their buildings and tenants
safer during the next severe weather event.

Resources and guidance for
small business resiliency
improvements

Small businesses, especially ground-floor
retailers, are vulnerable to storm damage. Lower
Manhattan has a rich and varied assortment of
small businesses that face the risk of significant
impacts from severe weather-related events.
Inundation during Sandy resulted in significant
inventory losses for many local retailers, and
power outages meant that business owners
were unable to operate credit card machines
and make transactions. With mold damage
worsening significantly after the storm, retailers
hurried to remediate the worst damage, but

many businesses nonetheless remained closed
for weeks or months as they struggled to find
funding to replace lost inventory and to clean
flooded basements and commercial spaces.
These impacts continued through the holiday
season, preventing many small business owners
from recouping major losses during the retail
industry’s busiest time of the year.

The needs of small business owners vary,
depending on the type of business, whether
the business owner is a tenant or owner of the
space and location. The Planning Committee
has prioritized addressing the needs of ground-
floor small-business tenants, who are particularly
vulnerable.

Increasing the resiliency of small businesses to
operate during emergencies and bounce back
sooner is not only an opportunity to keep the
economy active but also to deliver key resources
and services—food, medication, supplies—to
Lower Manhattan residents during and following
emergency events.

O®®

Improvements to local
stormwater management
systems

Community members have described problems
related to sewer backflow and stormwater
flooding in locations throughout the Planning
Area and indicated that improvements both in
drainage infrastructure and stormwater capture
were necessary. Sandy exacerbated the types
of sewer backflow that occur even after regular
rain events and are caused by high levels of
stormwater entering and exceeding the capacity
of the combined sewer system. Reducing the
amount of water entering the sewer system
through stormwater capture can ameliorate these
issues during both extreme and normal rain
events. Residents also cited a need for increased
permeable surfaces throughout the Planning Area
to absorb rainwater and mitigate flooding. For
example, in Community Board 3 alone, 95% of
the surface is impervious.” The public noted the
opportunity for the NYRCR Program to study local
stormwater issues and fund projects that serve
as scalable models for stormwater mitigation.
 

There are high concentrations of impervious
surfaces throughout the Planning Area, particularly
in Community Board 3 (top). Redundant energy
options are needed to avoid power disruptions
(bottom). Source (bottom): Flickr user Timothy Krause,
licensed under Creative Commons.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Protection from coastal flooding

Community members highlighted the importance
of improved coastal flood protection, particularly
in highly flood-prone areas exposed to surge,
such as the east side neighborhoods of Alphabet
City and the South Street Seaport Historic
District and the west side neighborhoods of
the West Village and Tribeca. The community
highlighted the need for protection strategies that
are both comprehensive and strategic, and that
protect the populations that are most vulnerable
to impacts from these types of events. While
comprehensive coastal flood mitigation requires
significant capital and coordination among a
variety of public and private entities, the public
recognized the opportunity for the NYRCR
Program to help fund design activities that serve
to establish a vision for, and advocate on behalf
of, potential flood protection improvements.

OOO®

Resilient, dependable
transportation and utility systems

Residents highlighted the = community’s
vital need to improve the resiliency of the
telecommunications infrastructure and building
infrastructure in Lower Manhattan. Community
members’ experiences during Sandy relayed
the need for resilient power sources for wireless
networks (WiFi and cell phone), as well as building
infrastructure. Because many buildings lost
heat during and after Sandy, residents also
cited the importance of more resilient steam-
heating systems in buildings that are vulnerable
to flooding. Federal, state, and local government
agencies, along with private utilities, are leading
a number of ongoing initiatives to protect the
infrastructure of Lower Manhattan; however, more
localized networks would also support resilient
communication in Lower Manhattan. There is
also an additional need to provide redundant
transportation options in the event of an
emergency. For example, bus service should be
extended if subway or ferry service is disrupted.

Assessment ofriskand needs [I-26
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

How does identifying needs and opportunities help to define projects?

The projects in this plan were developed through the following Community-based process, starting with identifying assets and risks, as well as needs and

opportunities:

Resiliency needs and opportunities were
brainstormed through extensive public
engagement. Needs were discussed in the
context of reducing short and long-term risk and
increasing the resiliency of assets, systems, and
people. Opportunities to build off of existing
community strengths were also identified.

With a thorough, baseline understanding of the

Opportunity

  

Opportunity

Opportunity

Communhity’s resiliency needs and opportunities,
the Committee identified overarching strategies
to address the most critical needs in the
community, and to take advantage of existing
opportunities. Public input guided the refinement
of these strategies.

In order to implement strategies, the Committee
identified specific projects. These projects

Strategy

 

Strategy

Strategy

 

directly address the needs and opportunities
identified at the beginning of the process.

PROJECT

  
 
 

PROJECT

  
   

 

ll-27 Assessment of risk and needs

 
    

CBOs set up supply distribution networks in the wake of

Superstorm Sandy. Source: Courtesy of GOLES re
— a
= 7 ‘ —_ =
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Reconstruction and resiliency strategies

Lower Manhattan’s assets, needs, and
opportunities inform a series of strategies
for increasing both the social and physical
resiliency of the community. These strategies,
developed by the Planning Committee and
prioritized through community input, address the
critical needs of Lower Manhattan communities
to recover from the impacts of Superstorm
Sandy (Sandy) and be better prepared for the
next severe-weather event. The strategies
provide a framework for the key Proposed
Projects to be funded under the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Plan, as
well as the Featured Projects and Additional
Resiliency Recommendations for which the plan
advocates.

This section provides an overview of the
overarching high-level strategies identified by
the community as critical to its future. For each
strategy, the report indicates the applicable
Recovery Support Functions (see box on page
ll-2). The following chapter then describes the
specific projects recommended by the Planning
Committee in order to carry out these strategies.

@ ® &

Community Planning Natural & Cultural Infrastructure
& Capacity Building Resources

Health & Housing
Social Services

Economic
Development

 

Proposed and Featured Projects

Proposed Projects are projects that the
Planning Committee has proposed for funding
through their Community’s allocation of
CDBG-DR dollars.

Featured Projects are innovative projects
that may require additional funding sources for
implementation, and for which the Committee
has recommended funding an initial phase of
implementation.

 

 

 

Improve emergency
preparedness through enhanced
coordination and planning

Coordinated response during and_ after
emergencies is a top priority in Lower
Manhattan and relies on a_ robust
organizational network. In the wake of
Superstorm Sandy, the community cited
the critical need to bolster its emergency
preparedness network, including improved
coordination among emergency _ service
providers and community-based organizations
(CBOs), and increased access to information
and communication options. These needs
should be addressed twofold: (a) by supporting
the capacity of CBOs to coordinate across
communities, through the designation of aseries
of community-based emergency preparedness
coordinators to aid in emergency preparedness
education and emergency response, and (b)
through the creation of comprehensive local
community emergency preparedness plans to
formalize support networks, information and
service protocols, as well as allocate resources
effectively within emergency response networks.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

In addition, the Lower Manhattan Planning
Committee recommends the _ continued
support and investment in initiatives that
increase citywide emergency preparedness
capacity, including through the development
of a vulnerable-populations database.
Please see Section V-1, Additional Resiliency
Recommendations, for more information.

Table III-1: Improve emergency preparedness, coordination, and capacity (Proposed and featured projects)

 

Estimated Proposed or Regional
Projectname — Short project description cost Featured Project projecty/n)
This project would create: (a) one or more local community emergency preparedness $1.5 million Proposed N

coordinators and (b) local emergency preparedness programs and plans, throughout the to $2 million Project
Planning Area.

 

 

 

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Ensure community-based
organization (CBO) capacity
to deliver key services to local
populations during emergency
events

CBOs played a central role in Lower
Manhattan in the aftermath of Sandy,
but require additional human and capital
resources to ensure their ability to respond
effectively to future emergencies. CBOs are
vital assets to Lower Manhattan neighborhoods
due to their deep knowledge and history of
providing daily services to the communities in
which they work. They benefit from having on-
the-ground experience, locally-based volunteer
networks for conducting door-to-door outreach,
and familiarity with the location and needs of
vulnerable populations.

In many cases, responding CBOs distributed
essential supplies to vulnerable populations
in the Planning Area. Many, however, did so
without adequate facilities or clear coordination
with other responders, and their communities
lacked key basic resources such as power,
heat, and food. These needs suggest a strategy
of funding a network of brick-and-mortar
establishments well-distributed throughout the
Planning Area where community members may
go to access essential emergency services. These
“resource/recovery centers” would be hardened
locations offering emergency support services

that were sorely lacking during Sandy: charging
stations for cellphones and laptop computers,
running water and showers, hot food, heating and
cooling, and non-urgent medical care. Resource/
recovery centers would also support community
resiliency by offering educational and outreach
programs to educate community members and,
in particular, vulnerable populations, about using
the resource/recovery center network in the event
of an emergency. In addition, resource/recovery
centers would coordinate with City agencies
to augment their efforts both in preparation for,
and during, a crisis. These activities would be
led by staff coordinators, hired and trained to
conduct program development, outreach, and
communication across the network.

In addition, CBOs in Lower Manhattan
vary in size, breadth of programs, and
neighborhoods served, and thus their own
respective resiliency needs may also differ.
Based on this analysis of needs, the Committee
has proposed to provide funding to CBOs and
coalitions of CBOs to expand their capacity to
respond to and recover from emergency events,
resuming their normal operations quickly and with

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

limited negative impact on the communities they
serve. Conversations with CBO staff, Planning
Committee members, and the public suggest a
strategy of funding to support the following:

e Leveraging and building capacity of
existing CBO coalitions that are engaged in
emergency preparedness

e Hiring and training of staff to conduct
outreach, administer programming,
coordinate with agencies, and develop and
distribute materials

Business continuity planning
Resilient communications systems

Backup power for offices and facilities

Table III-2: Ensure CBO capacity to deliver key services to local populations during emergency events (Proposed and featured projects)

 

Estimated Proposed or Regional
Project name Short project description cost Featured Project project (Y/N)
Community resource/recovery center and CBO grant program (Proposed). $10 million Proposed Project N

This project would fund: a) a network of hardened community resource/
recovery centers, to be based out of existing community facilities and
organizations; and b) grants to provide technical and financial assistance
programs to CBOs to implement the functions of the community
emergency preparedness plans.

 

 

to $12 million

 

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Strengthen the resiliency of
existing residential buildings

Residential buildings, especially those
situated in extreme and high-risk flood zones,
are acutely vulnerable to damage and must
be strengthened against flooding. There exists
a need to make residential building owners,
managers and tenants aware of key resiliency
resources, such as_ existing technical and
financial assistance programs. This need can
be addressed through the development of an
information and assistance center which offers
guidance to building owners, managers, and
tenants’ associations around applying for these
programs. Such a center could additionally

offer design and technical services, such as
audits of residential buildings, to address the
lack of knowledge around appropriate resiliency
measures and lay out a program of potential
measures tailored to the particular building.

Since such measures are often capital-intensive,
public input has indicated it is also important to
offer financial assistance in the form of grants or
incentives. The Planning Committee also has
prioritized serving those buildings that house
the most vulnerable; therefore, eligibility criteria
for building owners who participate in these

programs would prioritize owners of subsidized
housing for low-income populations, seniors,
and/or the disabled.

In addition, the Lower Manhattan Planning
Committee recommends’ the _ continued
investment in citywide initiatives that increase
the resiliency of both residential buildings
and residents. Please see Table V-I, Additional
resiliency recommendations, for more information.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Table III-3: Strengthen the resiliency of existing residential buildings (Proposed and featured projects)

 

Estimated Proposed or Regional
Project name Short project description cost Featured Project — project (Y/N)
This project would fund: {a) the creation of a resiliency information assistance $3.5 million Proposed Project N
to $7 million

center for residential building owners, tenants’ associations, and managers,
as well as (b) technical assistance and individual counseling and (c) financial
assistance for improving the resiliency of residential buildings.

 

 

 

 

Reconstruction and resiliency strategies III-6
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Empower small businesses to
become more resilient

Small businesses face a particular set
of operational and building related risks
and often lack the technical and financial
assistance necessary for mitigating these
risks. The Planning Committee has prioritized
the needs of small business tenants, especially
ground-floor retail tenants, who are most
vulnerable to flood risk during storms. Outreach
to retailers identified the need for advice on
ways to protect inventory, proactively engage
in business continuity planning, and migrate
records to cloud-based data systems, which may
help to mitigate a business’s risk from flooding.
Owners of commercial buildings also need

to better understand the measures they may
undertake to improve tenant spaces, such as
elevating mechanical systems, installing backup
power, and flood-proofing basements. In order to
improve access to information around resiliency
measures, the Planning Committee has identified
a proposed project to fund the creation of an
information and assistance center, which would
provide needed technical assistance. Additionally,
the center could provide design and technical
services, such as audits of commercial spaces,
to assist business tenants in understanding the
menu of measures they can undertake to enhance
resiliency.

In addition, the Lower Manhattan Planning
Committee recommends’ the _ continued
investment in citywide initiatives that increase
the resiliency of small businesses, including
expanding incentive programs, and by
extending education and technical assistance
to at-risk businesses. Please see Table V-l,
Additional resiliency recommendations, for more
information.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Table III-4: Empower small businesses to become more resilient (Proposed and featured projects)

 

Estimated Proposed or Regional
Project name Short project description cost Featured Project project (Y/N)
This project would fund: {a) the creation of an information and assistance center $2.25 million Proposed Project N
that would connect ground-floor and below-grade small business retailers to $3.75 million

with existing programs and resources, as well as offer technical assistance

for improving the resiliency of operations and retail spaces, and (b) financial
assistance to help small businesses pay for technical audits and recommended
resiliency upgrades.

 

 

 

 

Reconstruction and resiliency strategies III-8
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

O®)

Improve stormwater capture
and retention

During storm events, severe local flooding can
occur due to the limited capacity of the combined
sewer system within the Planning Area, leading to
combined sewer overflows into New York Harbor.
Rather than addressing this issue through cost-
intensive infrastructure measures over the long-
term, the Planning Committee has prioritized the
potential implementation of short-term stormwater
management strategies that will increase
stormwater capture and reduce the volume of
water entering the combined sewer system,
which can reduce combined sewer overflows and
the resulting impacts on water quality and the

environment. Stormwater capture measures may
include efforts to increase the concentration of
permeable surfaces in the Planning Area through
increasing natural groundcover, permeable
paving, and bioswales, and measures to increase
the resiliency of community gardens. Bioswales
are vegetated areas adjacent to the street right-
of-way that allow water from the street to infiltrate
into the soil, thereby reducing the volume of water
entering the storm sewer system.

In addition, the Lower Manhattan Planning
Committee recommends the adoption of green

infrastructure in the Planning Area. Green
infrastructure generally refers to a variety of
designs and approaches, such as bioswales,
green and blue roofs," permeable gutters, and
rain gardens, which increase the volume of water
that infiltrates into the ground, rather than entering
the storm sewer system. Please see Table V-l,
Additional resiliency recommendations, for more
information.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Table III-5: Improve stormwater capture and retention (Proposed and featured projects)

 

Regional
Estimated Proposed or project
Project name Short project description cost Featured Project (Y/N)

This project would fund: {a) a study to examine feasibility, costs and benefits, and $2 million Proposed Project N
potential sites for a high-impact implementation program of various stormwater capture
and retention approaches in the Planning Area, followed by (b) the implementation of
recommended scalable pilot projects.

This project would fund the construction of a one-acre artificial wetland on a $1 million Proposed Project N

currently unoccupied portion of land in East River Park near Corlears Hook.

 

 

 

 

Reconstruction and resiliency strategies IIl-10
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

OOO”

Protect edge neighborhoods
from coastal flooding

The Lower Manhattan coastline remains
vulnerable to widespread flooding during
storm events. The majority of the East River
bulkhead line, as well as areas just north of Battery
Park City on the west side, remain at risk of
flooding. During Superstorm Sandy, many of the
upland neighborhoods also experienced flooding,
impacting apartment buildings, commercial office
buildings, retail shops, community gathering
spaces such as community centers, gardens, and
local parks. Housing for vulnerable populations
was also significantly impacted, including, but not
limited to, the West Village Houses, Independence
Plaza, Jacob Riis Houses, and Knickerbocker
Village. Strategies to provide flood protection
include permanent and deployable walls, earthen
and armored berms, and other measures to
attenuate wave action and/or block the entry of
floodwaters. Priority is placed on identifying
particularly low-lying areas where floodwaters
entered during Sandy, strategic interventions
that can protect large areas with relatively limited
construction, and sites where there is potential to
protect the greatest area within limited budgetary
constraints.

In addition, the Lower Manhattan Planning
Committee recommends _ that _ coastal
protection measures. relate to Lower
Manhattan communities’ respective needs
and character. Please see Table V-|, Additional
resiliency recommendations, for more information.

Advocate for the long-term

resiliency and dependability
of transportation and utility

infrastructure.

The resiliency of the Planning Area is inherently
tied to the reliability of transportation and
utility services during future emergency
events. During Sandy, the residents and
businesses that experienced flooding were also
subject to the added complication and difficulty
arising from resultant power outages and
compromised telecommunications networks.
Furthermore, areas that escaped harm from
flooding nonetheless suffered from risk due
to inoperable fire-safety systems, elevators,
heating, plumbing, and communications systems

that resulted from widespread power outages.
The Lower Manhattan Planning Committee
identified the need to better plan for resiliency
and redundancy of transportation and _ utility
services, but recognized that the costs of many
of these investments are far in excess of funds
available through the NYRCR Program planning
process. In addition, there are already a series of
governmental agencies and utilities addressing
resiliency matters.

The Lower Manhattan Planning Committee
recommends that governmental entities
continue to advocate for the short-, medium-,
and long-term resiliency and dependability
of transportation and utility infrastructure for
the benefit of the entire City, including Lower
Manhattan. Please see Table V-l, Additional
resiliency recommendations, on page V-3 for
more information.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Table III-6: Protect edge neighborhoods from coastal flooding (Proposed and featured projects)

 

Estimated Proposed or Regional

Project name Short project description cost Featured Project project (Y/N)

This project would support the first phase of implementation of a system $2 million Proposed N

of berms and adjoining deployable flood barriers at Battery Park, for Project

protection against a 500-year flood event, as well as conceptual design

for future phase(s) of work to the east and west of the Phase 1 project

site.

This project would entail the next phase of implementation as well as $1.8 million Featured N

conceptual design for future phase(s) of work to the east/west of the to $3.4 million Project

berm. If part of a larger comprehensive group of projects to the west (at

Battery Place) and east (Coast Guard land), this project would protect

against a 500-year flood event.

This project would fund a feasibility study and conceptual design for a $750,000 Proposed N

targeted strategy for protection of the lower West Street area against a Project

100-year flood event, proposing strategies at sites to the north and south

of Battery Park City.

 

 

 

 

Reconstruction and resiliency strategies IIl-12
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table III-7: Protect edge neighborhoods from coastal flooding (Proposed and featured projects)

 

Estimated Proposed or Regional
Project Name Short project description cost Featured Project project (Y/N)
This project would fund the implementation of a targeted strategy for $9 million Proposed N
protection of the lower West Street area against a 100-year flood event, Project
proposing strategies at sites to the north and south of Battery Park City.
This project would fund a feasibility study and conceptual design for $2 million Proposed N
a series of multipurpose flood barriers for protection of the east and Project

west sides of Lower Manhattan against a 100-year flood event, using
measures such as a raised greenway, berming, and deployable walls.

 

 

 

 

lll-13 Reconstruction and resiliency strategies
 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Implementation-—Project profiles

The Proposed and Featured Projects in the Community emergency Community resource/recovery
following pages are those projects that the preparedness program centers and CBO grant program
Committee, with input from the community, has IV-3 Iv-9

prioritized for funding with its CDBG-DR allocation
of up to $25 million. This section describes each
project and the potential costs and benefits
that would result from each project if funded.
In addition to preliminary cost estimates,?° the
project profiles discuss the projects’ potential
benefits:

« Health and social benefits

"Economic benefits, including potential
job creation”®

 

= Environmental benefits

* Ability to reduce future risk Residential resiliency and Small business resiliency and
education program education program
Finally, the descriptions describe relevant IV-19 IV-27

implementation factors, including the likely
timeline and the governmental jurisdiction for
implementation of each project.

 

 

IV-1 Implementation-Project profiles
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Stormwater capture and retention Wetland creation at East River Park Berming and deployable walls at
study IV-39 Battery Park
IV-33 IV-43

 

Targeted flood protection strategy | Coastal protection study for east
for lower West Street and west side
Iv-49 IV-59

 

Implementation-Project profiles IV-2
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Project
Overview

Recovery
Support Functions

oe

Health &
Social Services

Community Planning
& Capacity Building

Cost
$1.5-2M

Health & Social Benefits

HIGH

Economic Benefits

MEDIUM

Risk Reduction

MEDIUM

Timeline (years)

1 2 3

So

STRATEGY: IMPROVE EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS THROUGH ENHANCED COORDINATION AND

PLANNING

Community emergency
preparedness program

Proposed project

To improve local coordination in emergency preparedness, response, and recovery
efforts, this project would establish a Lower Manhattan-wide community coordinator
and staff to serve as a central coordinating entity among community-based
organizations (CBOs) and governmental agencies in emergency preparedness

planning and implementation.

Local community emergency
preparedness coordinators

The emergency preparedness coordinator would serve as a
community-wide advocate, watchdog and coordinator for
both publicly- and privately-led resiliency efforts in Lower
Manhattan. The manager would track the allocations and
expenditures for both publicly- and privately-led resiliency
efforts, and as community advocate, report on those
efforts to the community at large.

The manager and coordinators would be embedded
within local organizations selected through a competitive
process to administer the program. Organizations may
either designate existing staff or recruit new staff to serve
as the coordinators.

Acting as a resource for both government agencies and
local residents, administrating organizations would act as
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

CBOs like Two Bridges Neighborhood Council hosted meetings with residents after Sandy to deliver important updates about neighborhood response and recovery
efforts. Source: Courtesy of Two Bridges Neighborhood Council, Inc.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

acentral repository of resiliency information and resources,
both by communicating with governmental emergency
preparedness agencies including the New York Office of
Emergency Management (NYC OEM), the New York State
Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Services
(NYS DHSES) and Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), and by helping to disseminate that
information to the community, using the hub-and-satellite
network of resource/recovery centers throughout the area.
Armed with this resiliency information, administrating
organizations would develop educational and volunteer
training programs.

Finally, these organizations would also seek private
and public funding to increase the overall pool of funds
supporting resiliency in Lower Manhattan, as well as
bolster and sustain the coordinator positions beyond the
initial two-year funding period.

Community emergency
preparedness plans

Coordinators would spearhead the creation and execution
of community emergency preparedness plans, community-
driven plans to buttress the efforts of NYC OEM and other
public agencies during emergencies, using the following
planning elements:

e Emergency protocols
e Chain of communication

e Established distribution networks, in coordination
with the resource/recovery

e Vulnerable populations preparedness programs (e.g.
voluntary registries, access to medications during
emergency events)

e¢ Best practices to fill preparedness gaps (e.g. creation
of a “buddy system” for vulnerable community
members)

e Potential expansion of NYC OEM’s Community
Emergency Response Team (CERT) programs

Cost estimate
$1.5-2 MILLION

Project Component Cost Estimate

 

Staffing $800,000

to $1,300,000

 

 

 

Programming and Outreach $400,000
Technical assistance and planning services $300,000
TOTAL $1,500,000

to $2,000,000

This project would allocate $1.5 to $2 million for this
project over a two-year period. Of this amount, staffing
for four positions (one program manager and three local
coordinators) is expected to cost approximately $800,000
to $1,300,000 for the two years. Of the remaining amount,
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

$400,000 would be allocated to programming, outreach,
and program administration, and approximately $300,000
would be allocated to outside technical assistance and
planning services to support the program.

The conceptual-level cost estimate was developed based
on assumptions for current staff salaries and benefits and
programmatic costs. Cost estimates would continue to
be refined as more information is developed about the
project. Additional funds could be allocated to support
any of the staffing, outreach and technical assistance
activities described herein.

Benefits

While this project in and of itself would not reduce flood
risk, it would bolster the resiliency of community members,
especially vulnerable populations.

Health and social benefits

HIGH

By preparing community members, especially those
most at risk among vulnerable populations, a community
emergency preparedness plan would help Lower
Manhattan community members find access to resources
and information and better withstand extreme conditions
during an emergency. Multilingual neighborhood-based
coordinators would help deliver information to populations
with limited English-speaking capacity.

For the entire community, creating a series of programs
related to resiliency and an established set of protocols for

coordination during an emergency would reduce risks to
health and safety following a disaster.

Vulnerable populations, such as seniors and physically-
impaired residents, stand to benefit the most, given that
they are most likely to need information and assistance
in times of emergency, yet less likely to have reliable and
convenient access to critical supplies and services.

Economic benefits

MEDIUM

The community emergency preparedness program is
likely to support a full-time program manager, as well as
three local recovery coordinators, each embedded in a
community organization or local Community Board office,
over the course of two years. Additionally, one of the
goals of the recovery coordinator and staff is to leverage
other public and private funding sources to increase the
overall pool of funds supporting resiliency efforts in Lower
Manhattan, as well as extend the tenure of these positions
beyond the two-year funding window.

Cost-benefit analysis

There is substantial need for enhanced coordination
among the wide number of CBOs, local neighborhood
associations, government agencies, utilities, public and
private planning agencies, and regulatory bodies that
provide emergency services or information across the
Planning Area. The $1.5 to $2 million cost of this project
is modest when considering the potential to benefit the
approximately 314,000 people who live in the Planning
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Area, and particularly, the nearly 39,000 people who are
over 65 years of age.

Risk reduction

MEDIUM

The community emergency preparedness program would
reduce risk to Lower Manhattan residents by providing
a coordinated set of widely-distributed educational and
preparedness materials, and program staff who would
ensure the execution of community-driven emergency
preparedness plans in coordination with, and support of,
relevant government agencies during emergencies.

Timeframe for implementation

@
0 1 2 3

Once the project has been formally initiated, it would take
approximately one to two years to implement. The length
and format of the selection process are the key issues that
could most dramatically affect the timeframe.

Project implementation would begin with a competitive
bidding process, inviting local organizations meeting
certain criteria—including those mentioned above—to
apply to participate in this program. This process would
take into account existing conditions, emergency planning
efforts, organizational capacity, and other community
characteristics. After selection, each organization would

need to identify an emergency preparedness coordinator
within the organization, or as a new hire. It is estimated
that this process—from initial analysis to the release of
the solicitation—would take approximately three to six
months. Implementation of the emergency preparedness
program would be covered by Community Development
Block Grant - Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding
for two years. After this time, organizations would need
to identify other sources of funding to maintain the plan
and coordination networks, or absorb the costs into their
existing budgets. However, the cost of maintenance
is likely to be significantly less than the initial $1.5 to $2
million in startup costs allocated here.

Regulatory requirements

It is anticipated that no regulatory review would be needed
for the execution of this project. However, the New York
City Office of Emergency Management (NYC OEM) and
the New York State Division of Homeland Security and
Emergency Services (NYS DHSES) must be consulted
in implementing this project to ensure coordination with
citywide and statewide emergency preparedness efforts.

Jurisdiction

The project woud be located in Lower Manhattan. While
the development of community emergency preparedness
plans would be a community-based initiative, NYC OEM
could help direct the process.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Implementation-Project profiles IV-8
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Project
Overview

Recovery
Support Functions

® &

Health & Infrastructure
Social Services

Community Planning
& Capacity Building

Cost
$10-12M

Health & Social Benefits

HIGH

Economic Benefits

MEDIUM

Risk Reduction

HIGH

Timeline (years)

0 1 2 3

STRATEGY: ENSURE CBO CAPACITY TO DELIVER KEY SERVICES TO LOCAL POPULATIONS DURING

EMERGENCY EVENTS

Community resource/recovery
centers and CBO grant program

Proposed Project

This project would fund:

(a) A network of hardened community resource/recovery centers, to be based out of
existing community facilities and organizations; and

(b) Grants to provide technical and financial assistance programs to community-
based organizations (CBOs) to implement the functions of the community emergency

preparedness plans.

Community resource/recovery
centers

This project would fund the creation of community
resource/recovery centers, which would house the
coordination of emergency services following a disaster
and facilitate emergency preparedness coordination
across community-based organizations (CBOs) in advance
of an event. Funding would be used for the following:

e Installation of backup power
* On-site capital improvements

e Initial staffing costs

Community resource/recovery centers are similar to New
York City Office of Emergency Management’s (NYC OEM)
Disaster Assistance Service Centers (DASC), but would
be smaller in scale and community-driven. Community
resource/recovery centers are not evacuation centers
or shelters, which NYC OEM already operates during
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Community resource/recovery centers would offer non-urgent medical care and other essential services to community members. Source: Flickr user Billy Brown,
licensed under Creative Commons.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Hub sites would ideally feature large, flexible spaces capable of providing a diverse array of services
to large numbers of community members. Source: Flickr user San José Library, licensed under Creative
Commons.

disasters to direct people to a safe, dry place to stay ona
temporary basis.

The proposed resource/recovery center network would
be a “hub” and “satellite” model. The hub would be a
large community space where logistics, communications,
and supplies can be managed and distributed. The hub
would serve as the primary neighborhood contact for NYC
OEM and would coordinate with smaller satellite locations
throughout the community that would provide additional
distribution of supplies and information.

The resource/recovery center network model provides
built-in redundancies and cooperation across local CBOs.
Under the guidance of the local Community Emergency
Preparedness Plan, the resource/recovery center network
would formalize collaboration among hub and satellite
sites. This format also allows organizations with different
expertise and resources to contribute important relief
support. For example, a CBO that has strong relationships
with a segment of the population within the community
might serve as a satellite site, while a CBO with a large
facility and staff might serve as the hub.

The hub and satellites would offer both physical
and programmatic resources for communities after
emergencies. The hub, as the central coordination, relief,
and distribution site, would have back-up power and
develop programming to support coordination across
multiple satellite sites and with citywide response and
recovery efforts. Physical resources and programming
at satellites may vary by location, but generally, satellites
would also have back-up power, in order to support the
resource/recovery center network following acute events.
The array of services to be provided at both hub and
satellites would include:

e Access to food, water, heating and cooling, and
basic supplies

e Access to power and charging stations for cellphones

e Information about both citywide emergency
response activities and local efforts

e Non-urgent medical services (e.g., first aid, mental
health services);
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

* Social services (e.g., legal or financial counseling,
food stamp aid, childcare); and

e Translation services (based on community needs).

Resource/recovery centers would be housed within
existing buildings and organizations that provide year-
round community services. A competitive process could
select eligible sites and participating organizations based
on an analysis of existing efforts in the community,
organizational capacity, facility capacity and proposed
services. The building that houses the resource/recovery
center hub should meet certain physical requirements,
described below, developed from Lower Manhattan
Planning Committee discussions and criteria for siting
DASCs and Red Cross Hurricane Evacuation Shelters.
One or more satellite sites could serve a supporting role to
the hub and would not necessarily need to meet all of the
criteria below, since they would not be providing the full
set of services that a hub would provide.

¢ Capacity for reliable source of power and heat/
cooling

* Capacity to be made Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA)-accessible

e Potable water system
e Restrooms with showers

e Large space on ground floor

There are also important geographic considerations when
selecting a hub site. Resource/recovery center hubs would
be located outside of the high and extreme flood risk
zone, yet close enough to it in order to be able to serve the
communities in areas with the highest risk. They should

be located in proximity to: (i) vulnerable populations; (ii)
an evacuation route or a road with quick, reliable access
to the route; and (iii) commercial centers and corridors.
The hub and satellite sites should be easy to access from
the street. A parking lot or outdoor space would also be
preferable to act as a service or assemblage area.

Based on needs identified by the Lower Manhattan
Planning Committee, the ideal resource/recovery center
host organization for both hub and satellite sites would
exhibit the following characteristics:

e Year-round service to local vulnerable populations
impacted by Sandy

e Active in post-Sandy response effort

e Along history of community engagement and strong
community ties

e Regular community programming and capacity to
provide emergency programming

e Demonstrated ability to conduct outreach to
vulnerable populations

* Capacity to provide social and/or health services

e A long-term occupancy agreement or ownership of
the building

e Abusiness continuity plan
e Financial stability

e Ability to fund the purchase of basic emergency
supplies and equipment, such as radios or push-to-
talk phones, or fuel for emergency generators

A program manager would be embedded within the hub
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Grants would enable CBOs to continue to offer services

to community members in emergency events, including
hot meals. Sources: GOLES (top); Two Bridges Neighborhood
Council, Inc.

host organization. To ensure rapid response and effective
coordination during an emergency, the program manager
would maintain regular contact and coordination with
satellite sites, local CBOs, NYC OEM and other city
agencies. The program manager could also oversee
disaster preparedness-related programming, such as
trainings and practice drills, “Know your neighbor” events,
and outreach to vulnerable populations. This capability
would be supported initially with Community Development
Block Grant Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funds for a
part-time program manager for two years to build capacity
and coordinate activites across the network. After two
years, the hub organization would be responsible for
supporting the employee on an ongoing basis, although
responsibilities after the two-year period could possibly
change based on organizational need.

CBO capacity-building grants

CBOs would play a key role in the resource/recovery center
network, both as potential hub and satellite locations and
as community-based partners for the network. To this
end, this project would create a flexible grant program
for CBOs to bolster existing or in-development resiliency-
related programs and to participate as hubs or satellites
within the community resource/recovery center network.

As CBOs’ needs, populations served, and missions vary
throughout the Planning Area, the grant program would
allocate funding to a wide array of eligible activities that
enhance the resiliency of CBOs and their ability to serve
the community during emergencies, ensuring their ability to
communicate effectively with the resource/recovery center
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

network and public agencies, and maintain operations in Cost estimate
order to continue serving the most vulnerable members of
the community $10-12 MILLION

Grants would be allocated for both capital

, . . . Project Component Cost Estimate
expenditures and operational expenses, including:

 

Community resource/ $3,750,000 to $7,625,000

e Resiliency staff and training, volunteer recruitment
recovery centers

 

e Multilingual outreach and education

e Vulnerable populations identification and tracking; CBO grants Se hoe

e Business continuity planning TOTAL $10,000,000 to $12,000,000

 

e Professional consulting services to support disaster
planning The proposed project would allocate $10 to $12 million to

the development of a resource/recovery center network

e Building and systems hardening (e.g., fixed back-up
and CBO grant program.

generators)

¢ Redundant communication networks (¢.g., WiFi Resource/recovery centers would require funding to

networks, microgrid development) that provide cover two types of expenses: capital and operational.
back-up options to increase overall reliability

* Community-wide emergency communications  ° Capital to provide redundant power supply, harden
networks within the Community Emergency the physical structure, and make communications
Preparedness Plan redundant. Costs include a fixed generator and fuel

storage tank, building upgrades, storage areas for

e Expansion of CBO geographic reach to meet needs

supplies.
of underserved areas Pp

* Operating support to build the host organization’s
capacity to provide year-round emergency
programming, conduct outreach, host a full-time
program manager, and to deploy resources during
an emergency.

e Protocols for coordination with emergency response
agencies and CBOs
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

While the costs for required capital improvements depend
upon the specific selected sites, capital costs for a hub
with 10,000 square feet of usable space could range
from between approximately $350,000 to $1,000,000.
Upgrades to a satellite site in a 2,000-square-foot facility
could cost $200,000. Key costs for facility improvements
would likely include fixed back-up power and fixed
communications infrastructure. The exact costs may
vary widely, depending on how many facilities ultimately
participate in the resource/recovery center network, the
physical characteristics of those buildings and sites, and
the programming offered at each site.

Costs for a program manager and emergency
preparedness programming at the hub could also vary
widely, depending on the availability of funds and the
needs identified in the community. The annual cost of
the program manager and emergency preparedness
programming (plus overhead) could cost around $275,000,
for a total project costing $625,000 to $1,275,000 or more
for both capital and operational costs over the course of
two years. Funding to support programming and outreach
at satellite sites could cost approximately $40,000.

Estimates based on generic building types within the
Planning Area suggest at least six hubs could receive
funding for capital and operational costs, or two per
community district. For six hubs, the total cost of the
resource/recovery center network would range between
$3.8 million and $7.6 million.

CBO grants could range in size, but each might cover
installation of a fixed generator and fuel storage tank,

redundant communications infrastructure, salary and
benefits for one additional full-time staff person dedicated
to emergency preparedness programming and outreach,
and business-continuity planning services. A CBO grant
might allocate a little over $400,000 to the organization
for these activities. The balance of the project, with
a total allocation of up to $12 million, would provide
approximately $2.4 million to $8.3 million in CBO grants,
and could therefore provide 5 to 15 direct grants to CBOs,
depending on size and scope.

CBOs could receive grants to support their role as a
satellite site, or for stand-alone capacity-building not as
part of the network. In addition, because a priority of the
Lower Manhattan Planning Committee is flexibility in grant
allocations, CBO grants could fund specific initiatives.

After two years, the organizations with new program
managers or staff persons would be responsible for
supporting the salary (with a potential decrease in time
commitment after resource/recovery center ramp-up
during the first two years), as well as programming and
maintenance costs on an ongoing basis.

It should also be noted that the operation of resource/
recovery centers would likely require identifying additional
funding sources to purchase supplies, including
emergency radios, batteries, and food.

The conceptual-level cost estimate was developed based
on current unit pricing and typical soft cost assumptions.
Cost estimates would continue to be refined as more
information is developed about the project.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Benefits
Health and Social Benefits

HIGH

By bolstering a number of existing buildings to serve as
resource/recovery centers, this project would improve
the ability of community organizations to operate during
an emergency. The network would coordinate and share
information about the location and availability of social
and health services and may also provide on-site medical,
legal, counseling, and other services.

For the entire community, formalizing a network of
locations to provide relief supplies and support services
would reduce risks to health and safety following a
disaster. Specifically, resource/recovery centers would
reduce the risk of:

e Sickness, discomfort, or injury related to lack of
access to non-urgent medical attention, food, water,
heat, and other necessities

e Emotional or psychological distress

e Displacement of children, relatives, and friends who
might need to relocate to receive services

Vulnerable populations such as seniors and physically-
impaired residents stand to benefit the most, given that
they are most likely to need assistance, yet less likely to
have reliable and convenient access to critical supplies
and services. Assuming the Lower Manhattan Planning
Area boundary as the catchment area, the resource/
recovery center network would specifically benefit the
following vulnerable populations:

e Low-income residents: Approximately 24,070
households (16.8% of total in 2005-2009) live below
the federal poverty line?”

e Limited English Proficient (LEP) speakers:
Approximately 57,244 residents (12.4% of the
population in 2005-2009) speak English “not well”
or “not at all”2®

* Senior population: Approximately 38,943 residents
(12.4% of the population in 2010) are over the age
of 657°

e Additional vulnerable populations, including those
who have limited mobility, limited communication
skills, and/or a limited ability to control their
environment.

When considering the Lower Manhattan Focus Area (high
and extreme flood risk zone) as the catchment area, the
resource/recovery center network would benefit the
following vulnerable populations:

e Low-income residents: Approximately 9,261
households (21.8% of total) live below the federal
poverty line °°

e Limited-English proficient residents : Approximately
14,214 residents (15% of the population) speak
English “not well” or “not at all”

* Senior population: Approximately 12,759 residents
(12.5% of the population) are over the age of 65°

The project would also increase the operational capacity
of CBOs to provide services during emergency events.
Emergency plans and back-up power would allow these
organizations to continue to operate in the wake of
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

emergency events, thereby reducing business interruption.
Further, the funding provided by this program would
increase the capacity of CBOs to conduct emergency
preparedness outreach and planning, and increase their
ability to support their constituents overall.

Economic Benefits

MEDIUM

The resource/recovery center network is likely to support
a full-time employee embedded in a CBO to help plan and
build organizational capacity at hubs and across satellites
over the course of two years. Capital expenses associated
with hardening community centers would also create
a small number of temporary jobs for construction and
installation of resiliency building improvements.

Additionally, by protecting vulnerable populations, an
emergency resource/recovery center supports diverse
and thriving neighborhoods, which helps improve quality
of life.

The resource/recovery center network would likely
have a net-neutral or potentially net-positive impact on
local government spending. The network would require
agencies to coordinate during emergency events. The
network could incrementally reduce government costs of
emergency response and recovery in the future.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
This project would have broad public benefits and serve
vulnerable populations—two key priorities of the Lower

Manhattan Planning Committee. A Lower Manhattan
resource/recovery center network would reduce overall
risk to the well-being of residents— especially vulnerable
populations—and provide critical health and social
services. In addition, the project would benefit the
community year-round due to increased capacity and
coordination among CBOs participating in the network.
The reduced vulnerability of all Lower Manhattan residents
justifies the relatively modest cost of implementing this
project.

The benefits of the project would be sustainable beyond
the two year CBDG-DR funding period so long as
participating organizations dedicate modest resources to
maintain emergency equipment, update emergency plans,
and maintain communication with the other resource/
recovery center network locations as well as the City.
There are no apparent negative externalities associated
with the proposed project.

Risk Reduction

HIGH

A resource/recovery center network and CBO grant
program would reduce the vulnerability of participating
CBOs and help to ensure business continuity. More
importantly, the network would reduce risk to Lower
Manhattan residents by providing publicly-accessible
back-up power, a centralized source for information,
social and support services, and more secure emergency
services due to the redundancy inherent in a network of
resource/recovery centers.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Timeframe for Implementation
@

0 1 2 3

Once the project has been formally initiated, it could take
approximately one to two years to implement. The key
issues that could most dramatically affect the timeframe
are: (i) the length and format of the selection process,
and (ii) physical challenges that may emerge with building
resiliency improvements.

Project implementation would begin with a competitive
bidding process, inviting local organizations meeting
certain criteria—including those mentioned above—to
apply to participate in this program. This process would
take into account existing conditions, emergency planning
efforts, organizational capacity, and other community
characteristics. It is estimated that this process—from
initial survey of existing conditions to the release of
the solicitation—would take approximately four-to-six
months. Subsequently, a program manager must be hired
and implementation of capital improvements must begin.
Depending on the scope of the work, this construction
phase could take up to six months. Allocation of CBO
grants may occur on a rolling basis, but would begin with
the competitive bidding process described above.

Regulatory Requirements

It is anticipated that no regulatory review would be needed
for the execution of this project; however, NYC OEM and
NYS Department of Homeland Security and Emergency
Services (NYS DHSES) must be consulted in implementing

this project to ensure coordination with citywide emergency
preparedness efforts. Should alterations to a building be
proposed, permits and approvals could be required from
NYC Department of Buildings (NYC DOB).

Jurisdiction

The resource/recovery center network would be located
in Lower Manhattan and the development of the network
would fall under the jurisdiction of City agencies. Because
the sites would provide relief, and not function as formal
shelters or evacuation centers, they would not be subject
to FEMA regulations.
Project
Overview

Recovery
Support Functions

Cost
$3.5-7M

Health & Social Benefits

HIGH

Economic Benefits

MEDIUM

Risk Reduction

HIGH

Timeline (years)

0 1 2 3

Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

STRATEGY: STRENGTHEN THE RESILIENCY OF EXISTING RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS

Residential resiliency and education

program

Proposed Project

This project would fund: (a) the creation of a resiliency information assistance center
for residential building owners, tenant associations, and building managers, as well
as (b) technical assistance and individual counseling and (c) financial assistance for
improving the resiliency of residential buildings.

The goal of this project would be to help property owners
fully understand the physical and financial risks facing their
buildings, to help them make more informed decisions
about resiliency investments, and to provide financial
support to make these investments.

Resiliency assistance information
center

The education program would offer residential property
owners information on resiliency best practices in a

publicly-accessible format. A resiliency information
clearinghouse would be created in the form of a
website, manual or physical information center to serve
as a one-stop. shop for all resiliency information. The
clearinghouse would also provide resources for accessing
the education and technical assistance programs. The
resiliency information assistance center would be owned
and maintained by a citywide agency or community-
based organization (CBO) administrator, and would
contain information developed by qualified counselors
and auditors, including sample counseling documents
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

  

 

 

i"
Optional: Replace mechanical equipment eet en
and relocate to new mechanical penthouse |s*4n«

 

 

 

 

 

Optional: Construct new lightweight
addition above existing roof

 

 

 

 

 

Relocate electrical equipment to
above design flood elevation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Flood vents

 

ES] =] SS] eS)
Ee] FS] Ge]
Fe] ES] Eel

 

 

 

 

Rewire electrical components
at ground level

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reconfigure water and natural gas piping

 

 

 

pose

 

Use only flood damage-resistant
materials below first floor

 

 

 

 

Fill in basement per FEMA guidelines

 

 

 

Measures to enhance resiliency for walk-up and large elevator buildings include floodproofing ground floors and elevating mechanicals to upper floors. Source: Arup
and Architecture Research Office, as part of a report for FEMA and the NYC Housing Recovery Office.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Use only flood damage-resistant
materials below first floor

 

 

 

 

  
 
  
 
  
     
 
 
    

 

Provide means of egress
at second floor above
design flood elevation

Remove residential units, laundry and
bathrooms at ground level and replace
with storage or access

 

 

 

 

 

 

Relocate gas and electric
meters to above design
flood elevation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Dry floodproof walls around boiler room
at least 2’ above design flood elevation

 

 

Retrofit elevator shaft and components
per FEMA-NFIP requirements

 

 

 

 

 

Reinforce boiler room walls below grade with pilasters.
Reinforce base slab to support hydrostatic loads.

 

 

 

Flood vents

Measures to enhance resiliency for walk-up and large elevator buildings include floodproofing ground floors and elevating mechanicals to upper floors. Source: Arup
and Architecture Research Office, as part of a report for FEMA and the NYC Housing Recovery Office.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

(insurance claims, financial statements, etc.) and sample
assessments and audits. This information would be made
available to the general public.

General education would cover information on the

following topics:

e Identifying common insurance pitfalls and loopholes

e Avoiding potential rebuilding, insurance or financial
scams

¢ Obtaining and understanding flood insurance
e Financing for needed building repairs
e Remediating mold

e Understanding resiliency retrofits, including elevating
and floodproofing building mechanicals, installing
backflow prevention device, etc.

e Identifying products, providers and reasonable costs

Resiliency information could be delivered in the following
forms:

e Print or online resiliency design guidelines, outlining
general costs and benefits of retrofits

*¢ Online courses
e Introductory, in-person courses

e Monthly speaker series covering different resiliency
topics

Because of the broad nature of these educational

materials, opportunities would be explored to partner

with other NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Program communities or organizations to create materials
that could reach building owners throughout the City. If
costs can be shared by multiple communities, the balance
of Lower Manhattan’s budget for this program could be
reallocated to counseling and technical and financial
assistance.

The project would also include local multilingual outreach
and education around building resiliency, including
extensive door-to-door outreach in eligible housing
developments throughout the Focus Area to assess
needs, distribute educational materials on resiliency best
practices, and advertise services offered by the center.

Technical assistance and
counseling services

The second component of this program, technical
assistance, provides two types of services to
residents: counseling and physical building audits. The
technical assistance/individual counseling program would
be offered as an_ individualized tool that is tailored to
help high-need property owners. Qualified auditors and
counselors would be responsible for carrying out this
component.

Technical assistance includes the following services:

e Assessing storm damage to residential properties

e Identifying potential retrofits to mitigate against future
storm damage, which for multifamily properties
could include
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

e Installation of backup power source (e.g., on-site
generator)

e Installation of check valve (e.g., sewer backflow
preventer)

e Elevation and protection of mechanical systems

e Floodproofing of ground-floor spaces

Individual counseling includes the following services:

e Flood, homeowner and property insurance, financial
management, and _ individually-tailored rebuilding
and resiliency support for property owners

e Management of rebuilding, resiliency and recovery
issues for building managers

e Legal support and representation when necessary

Financial assistance
A financial assistance program would increase aid by
offering grants and incentives to building owners and
ownership entities to implement select building resiliency
measures (or percentage thereof).

Priority would be given to multifamily buildings in high-
and extreme-flood risk areas that house vulnerable
populations. These include: limited-equity cooperative
developments; subsidized rental housing for low-income
populations; and/or residences for the elderly, disabled,
and homeless. The Planning Committee also prioritized
providing support to tenants’ associations, co-op boards,
owners, and building managers.

Cost estimate
$3.5-7M

Project Component Cost Estimate

 

 

 

Resiliency assistance information center $600,000
Audits and individual counseling $1,100,000
Financial assistance program $1,800,000

to $5,300,000

 

Total $3,500,000

to $7,000,000

This proposal would allocate $3.5 million towards the
three project elements. As previously mentioned, there
are already citywide organizations administering similar
programs and providing funding to local CBOs to provide
housing education, counseling, and technical assistance
in New York City neighborhoods. To leverage existing
expertise and maximize the impact of available Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG-DR) funding, this
project should build off of existing programs. The funding
could pass through a citywide organization involved in this
work, but would ultimately be allocated to locally-based
organizations that would administer education, technical
assistance, and counseling within the Planning Area.

Of the $3.5 million allocation, the general education
program is expected to cost approximately $600,000.
Another $1.1 million of the funds allocated for this project
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

program of comprehensive building upgrades is expected
to cost $300,000-$350,000 for a walk-up building
(approximately six units on average for the purposes of this
analysis) and $950,000 to $1,050,000 for a large elevator
apartment building (approximately 150 units on average
for the purposes of this analysis). A sample program of
select measures (e.g., backup power) is expected to cost
$100,000 to $150,000 for a walk-up building and $600,000
to $800,000 for a large elevator apartment building.

The conceptual-level cost estimate was developed based
on current unit pricing and typical soft cost assumptions.
Cost estimates would continue to be refined as more
information is developed about the project.

 

This project may provide funding for measures such as the installation of fixed backup generators,
to supply power in the event of an outage. Source: Flickr user Jemimus (Robert), licensed under Creative
Commons.

would subsidize audits and individual counseling, with
audit costs anticipated to range from $5,000 to $10,000
for a walk-up building and $10,000 to $15,000 for a large
elevator building, or more, depending on the size of the
building and scope of audit.

The remaining $1.8 to $5.3 million of the funds would
support grants and financial incentives through the
financial assistance program. Funding would go toward
covering a portion of the costs (e.g., 10-20%) of a
program of comprehensive or select measures. A sample

Implementation-Project profiles |IV-24
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Benefits
Health and social benefits

HIGH

Through reducing risk to their homes, this project
would benefit low-income and/or senior and disabled
populations who reside in housing developments

in the extreme- and high-flood risk areas. Without
improvements to these buildings, residents face risk

of injury and inability to evacuate due to ground-floor
flooding and power outages which impact hallway and
stairway lighting as well as elevator banks. Efforts to
address these concerns would reduce risk to vulnerable
resident populations.

Economic benefits
Ws)

The proposed program would give building owners the
tools to protect economic assets, and avoid significant
repair costs in the future. Additionally, repairs may
potentially bring down insurance premiums, which could
be passed along to tenants. The program could provide
building owners and their tenants with financial security.

Enhanced resiliency of the residential building stock could
additionally help to preserve or improve neighborhood
economic conditions and prevent decline caused or
exacerbated by worsening housing conditions. Helping
the community achieve a more stable financial outlook can
promote diverse and thriving neighborhoods and improve

residents’ quality of life, which are both outcomes in line
with the New York City Regional Economic Development
Council’s Strategic Plan, which seeks to increase the
commercial growth and overall real estate value of Lower
Manhattan.

Cost-benefit analysis

The general education resources offered by this program
could benefit any residential property owner in the
Planning Area looking for resiliency information. Further,
because this program could benefit property owners
citywide, funding for this could be contributed from other
sources or from other NYRCR Program communities. This
portion of the project could reduce risk to properties in the
Focus Area through enabling owners, ownership entities,
and property managers to make resiliency improvements,
and thereby would reduce risk to the residents living in
these residential buildings.

The benefits of the project would be sustainable beyond
the two-year CBDG-DR funding period so long as the
implementing agency dedicates modest resources to
extend staff positions and the technical and design services
offered. There are no apparent negative externalities
associated with the proposed project.

Risk reduction

HIGH

This project would help property owners make more
informed decisions about how to best protect their
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

properties from future flooding. If building owners choose
to implement the suggested flood mitigation measures,
the retrofits would help protect the community’s residential
housing stock, from future damage and protect the
residents of those buildings.

Timeframe for implementation

@
0 1 2 3
Project implementation would begin with the identification
of a non-profit organization to administer the project by
awarding direct grants to local organizations to provide
individual counseling and to contract with qualified
auditors. Once the administering entity has been selected,
it would take approximately six months to launch the
program, which includes the selection process for
identifying service providers and establishing program
parameters.

The administering entity would begin a competitive bidding
process that would invite neighborhood organizations
such as Community Development Corporations (CDCs)
and CBOs who meet certain criteria, to apply to
participate as service providers in the program. The
selection of service providers would take into account
whether the organization has a history of providing similar
services to the community, their proximity to the Focus
Area, and overall organizational capacity. It is estimated
that the selection process would take approximately four
to six months or may be completed on a rolling basis by
neighborhood.

In addition, the administering entity would begin a
separate competitive bidding process for the services
of engineering and technical-services firms who can
provide resiliency audits to owners of eligible buildings.
Alternatively, this bidding process could be undertaken
concurrently with the selection of the administering entity
to reduce the overall timeframe of the program ramp-up
process.

Finally, the administering entity would, working with the
selected provider organizations and firms, determine the
parameters for eligibility of building owners in accessing
free or subsidized audits and develop guidelines and
materials for education and outreach.

Regulatory requirements

It is anticipated that no regulatory review would be
needed for the execution of this project. The New York
City Department of Buildings (NYC DOB) may be involved
on a discretionary basis to oversee or certify building
resiliency audits. Certain elements of outreach and
intake programming would require coordination with
the New York City Department of Housing Preservation
and Development (NYC HPD) and other public agencies
that administer various residential resiliency financial
assistance programs.

Jurisdiction

The Proposed Project would be deployed in Lower
Manhattan and would fall under the jurisdiction of New
York City.
Project
Overview

Recovery
Support Functions

W)

Economic
Development

Cost
$2.25-3.75M

Economic Benefits

HIGH

Health & Social Benefits

MEDIUM

Risk Reduction

HIGH

Timeline (years)

2 3

So
=

Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

STRATEGY: EMPOWER SMALL BUSINESSES TO BECOME MORE RESILIENT

Small business resiliency and
education program

Proposed Project

This project would fund (a) the creation of an information and assistance center

to connect ground-floor and below-grade small business retailers with existing
programs and resources, as well as offer technical assistance for improving the
resiliency of operations and retail spaces, and (b) financial assistance to help small
businesses pay for technical audits and recommended resiliency upgrades.

Information and assistance center

The small business resiliency information and assistance
center would provide an intake counseling service,
“help desk” support, business resiliency and continuity
planning technical assistance, multilingual outreach, and
access to audits of businesses and buildings to identify
and recommend resiliency improvements. The “help
desk” would provide design and technical assistance
to business owners, while the intake counseling services
would help participants to navigate the application
process for financial assistance programs, such as
federal and city grant and loan programs. In order to
attract small-business participants, the program would

also include extensive door-to-door outreach in multiple
languages to eligible small businesses throughout the
Focus Area to assess needs, distribute educational
materials on resiliency best practices, and advertise
services offered by the center.

Technical audits and subsidized
upgrades

The project would also offer free technical audits and
subsidize recommended resiliency upgrades for eligible
small-businesses in order to help to identify, recommend,
and pay for the following types of measures:
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

 

Ef

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

s*

@ BACKWATER VALVE @ BILCO ACRYLIC CAP Ww PUZZLE PLANTER @ TEMPORARY BARRIER
1Unit (_ diameter} =$ 00 tunit(_ Wx _Dx_H} =$ 00 4unit(_Wx _Dx_H) =$__.00 Junit(_Wx _Dx_H) =$___.00
Installation =$ 00 Installation =$ 00 Installation =$ 00 Material = Aluminum

Installation =§ 00
TOTAL =$_ 00 TOTAL =$_ 00 TOTAL =$ 00 TOTAL =$___.00

pit ol pe

@® SUSPENDED CEILING @ RELOCATE UTILITIES

RAISED PLATFORM
Tunit(_ Wx _Dx_H} =$ 00 # Of Units

=$ 00 tunit(_ Wx _Dx_H) =$ 00

Material = Wood Installation =§$ 00 Material = Wood
Installation =§$ 00 Installation =$ 00
TOTAL =$ 00 TOTAL =$. 00 TOTAL =$ 00

Small business resiliency measures may include elevation of inventory and installation of a sewer backflow preventer. Source: Cooper, Robertson & Partners and HR&A Advisors.

Implementation-Project profiles IV-28
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

e Business resiliency measures, including:

«Business continuity planning and business
disaster preparedness planning

« Elevating or flood-protecting business equipment
and inventory

« Elevating or flood-protecting data systems

» Data management solutions through the use of
cloud-based storage

e Building resiliency measures, including:
« Elevating mechanical systems
« — Installing backup power
«  Flood-proofing buildings
«Structurally reinforcing wood-framed buildings
« Backflow devices to prevent sewage backup

: Additional improvements such as
efficiency and health and safety measures

energy

Cost estimate
$2.25-3.75 MILLION

Project Component Cost Estimate

 

Information and assistance program $850,000

 

$1,400,000 to
$2,900,000

Technical audits and subsidized upgrades

 

TOTAL $2,250,000 to

$3,750,000

This project would allocate $2.25 to $3.75 million to create
an information and assistance center for small businesses,
targeted at ground-floor small-business retailers. Of this
amount, staffing, outreach, marketing, and administration
of the information and assistance program are expected
to cost approximately $850,000. The remaining $1.4 to
$2.9 million of the funds allocated for this project would
subsidize audits, design services and recommended
upgrades. Assuming that a sample audit of a commercial
space may cost between $2,000 and $5,000, the funding
allocation could support 280 to 700 audits, in addition to
the amount that may be support resiliency upgrades.

Upgrades to commercial spaces for tenants are estimated
to cost in the range of $5,000-$20,000 per commercial
unit, including measures such as installing a backflow
valve, relocating an electrical panel box, and applying
water-resistant wall coating.

This conceptual-level cost estimate was developed
based on current unit pricing and typical soft-cost
assumptions. Cost estimates would continue to be refined
as more information is developed about implementation of
resiliency measures.

Benefits
Economic benefits

HIGH

This project would help prevent future business closures
and job losses related to flooding, blackouts and other
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

severe-weather events, for the approximately 3.5 million
square feet of retail space within the Focus Area.°?
Additionally, this project implies the creation of a modest
number of temporary jobs to support the implementation
of resiliency measures. Through reducing risk, the project
would help to preserve the economic health of commercial
corridors in flood-prone areas, aligning this project with
the New York City Regional Economic Development Plan’s
objectives for Lower Manhattan, which seeks to grown the
commercial diversity and value of the area.

Health and social benefits

MEDIUM

As discussed above, by promoting business continuity
during and after an emergency, this project would ensure
access to critical supplies that community residents rely
on local retailers to provide. Improving the ability of small
businesses to function during emergencies would result in
increased local access to needed supplies like batteries
and flashlights, drinking water, and food supplies, as well
as providing continued access to key services such as
ATMs.

Cost-benefit analysis

While not all small businesses in the Planning Area would
receive technical audits under the program, the small
business resiliency and information center can reach a
very broad array of small businesses in the Planning Area.
The information center has the potential to be replicated
with additional funding throughout the Planning Area and
elsewhere in New York City. The wide reach of the project

justifies the relatively modest cost of implementing this
project.

The benefits of the project would be sustainable beyond
the two-year CBDG-DR funding period so long as the
implementing agency dedicates modest resources to
extend staff positions and the technical and design services
offered. There are no apparent negative externalities
associated with the proposed project.

Risk reduction

HIGH

Small business retailers provide essential amenities, as
well as employment opportunities to community members
throughout the Planning Area and citywide. During and
after emergency events, small business retailers further
serve as a Critical lifeline for supplies. Both in preparation
for and in the aftermath of an emergency, it is important
that residents be able to access ATMs, food, medicine
and water, and other basic needs often provided by local
small-business retailers. Promoting business continuity
can help ensure continued access to these items during
emergencies, thereby reducing risk to the local population.

Timeframe for implementation
@

0 1 2 3

Project implementation would begin with the identification
of a public agency or creation of a non-profit organization
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

to administer the project on a citywide basis. To reduce
overall administrative cost, the project may be established
through a citywide entity—either a public agency or
nonprofit organization—acting in multiple communities
citywide with overall responsibility for the program. If a
non-profit organization administers the program, it would
be selected through a competitive bidding process.

Once identified, the program administrator would
solicit proposals in order to award direct grants to local
organizations to provide educational services and
contract with engineering or technical-services firms to
provide audits. The program administrator would begin
a competitive bidding process that would invite local
business assistance organizations, such as merchants’
associations or business improvement districts, who meet
certain criteria to apply to participate as service providers
in the program. The selection of service providers would
take into account whether the organization has a history
of providing similar services to the community, their
proximity to the Focus Area, and organizational capacity.

It is estimated that the selection process would take
approximately four to six months to launch the program,
which includes the selection processes for identifying
service providers and establishing program parameters.

Regulatory requirements

It is anticipated that no regulatory review would be needed
for the execution of this project. The NYC Department of
Buildings (NYC DOB) may be involved on a discretionary
basis to oversee or certify building resiliency audits.
Certain elements of outreach and intake programming
would require coordination with New York City Economic
Development Corporation (NYC EDC) and other public
agencies that administer various financial assistance
programs geared at small businesses.

Jurisdiction
The program would be located in Lower Manhattan and
under the jurisdiction of the City of New York.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Figure IV-1: Economic assets and major commercial corridors

a

 

:
BB

ned
BRSOGH

ss

Hanvi

ED
ad

  

Boe
Pry
num

Emaar
fil

a

muy
aa
a

SIHDEG
ia

| =]

     
  
   

   

=
wi

 

ncey

BE ci ma Fire} oh i .---+=+ Major Commercial Corridor in Focus Area
a pene a0 a 5 5 i Wis,
nee at
en .

    
      

a
Pees ECE

il
Naas

 

 

| f 3] Focus Area

Major Commercial Corridor
Zones in Focus Area
Avenue C

i
| Avenue D
[J canal street
x

Water Street

[] West Steet

[|_| Parcels within Major Commercial Corridor

 

a
Economic Assets

ett \ Mas Sas
ey een BEIT economic Assos

Source: New York City Department of City
Planning, MAP Pluto v13.1; NYRCR Planning
Committee and public input.

 

 

 

~s

0.25 0.5 1
Miles »

 

 

Implementation-Project profiles IV-32
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Project
Overview

Recovery
Support Functions

e &

Natural & Cultural —_ Infrastructure
Resources

Cost
$2M

Environmental Benefits

MEDIUM

Health & Social Benefits

MEDIUM

Economic Benefits

LOW

Risk Reduction

MEDIUM

Timeline (years)

So
NS
S
oO

STRATEGY: IMPROVE STORMWATER CAPTURE AND RETENTION

Stormwater capture and retention

study

Proposed Project

This project would fund (a) a study to examine the feasibility, costs and benefits for
various high-impact stormwater capture and retention approaches in the Planning
Area, followed by (b) the implementation of recommended scalable pilot projects.

Phase 1: Stormwater mitigation
study

Phase 1 of this project would perform a study of potential
stormwater capture and retention strategies to be applied
within the Lower Manhattan Planning Area. This would
include identifying areas of highest need within the Planning
Area, such as neighborhoods with a high concentration of
impervious surfaces (e.g., Community District 3, at 95%°9)
and areas where there are community-reported chronic
drainage issues. The study would examine feasibility,
costs, benefits, and impacts of potential stormwater
capture measures; develop proposals for governmental
interventions to incentivize stormwater capture and
retention; and suggest potential pilot projects.

The Lower Manhattan Planning Committee also identified
the opportunity to partner with and leverage the existing
community gardens located within the Planning Area.
Many community gardens serve as centers for community
gatherings, but were significantly damaged during
Superstorm Sandy. The study, therefore, would identify
ways to incorporate the network of community gardens
into implementation projects, including through the
construction and improvement of stormwater capture
systems at these important community facilities, as well
as the implementation of additional resiliency upgrades,
such as solar power and improved physical facilities.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

     

 
   

| TYPICAL COMMUNITY GARDEN AREA

 

PROPERTY LINE

COLLECT SURFACE
RUNOFF

DOWNSPOUT CONNECTIONS

  
    

 

INFILTRATION LAYER

SUBGRADE
NOTE:
INFILTRATION LAYER DEPTH AND MATERIAL VARIES AS
PER DESIGN CAPACITY FOR STORMWATER RUNOFF
COLLECTION AREA.

   

 

DESIGN FEASIBILITY PENDING CONFIRMATION OF
SUBSOILS AND/OR DEPTH OF BEDROCK.

 

A stormwater collection system could increase the stormwater capture capacity of the large number of community gardens in Alphabet City. Other measures that
may be examined by this project include bioswales. Sources: Flickr user edenpictures (top left); Flickr user NYC DEP (bottom left). Both licensed under Creative Commons.

Implementation-Project profiles IV-34
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Phase 2: Stormwater mitigation
pilot projects

Phase 2 would implement targeted piloting strategies that
are identified in Phase 1 as having the highest feasibility
and potential impact. This may include:

e Measures such as bioswales—landscaped elements
to remove silt and pollution from surface runoff water
—and permeable paving in areas with poor drainage
and nonporous surfaces

e Improvements in and around community gardens
and pocket parks to enhance area stormwater
capture capacity and strengthen the resiliency of
these community assets

Implementation considerations
Potential implementation for the Phase 2 pilot strategies
may additionally involve coordinating with large-scale
municipal or private property owners in Lower Manhattan.
For example, the New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA)
owns and operates large-scale properties on Lower
Manhattan’s east side, where there is a high percentage
of impermeable surfaces. Single-owner properties may
represent more feasible pilot implementation projects
to mitigate the effects of flooding, as compared to the
complexity of working with multiple private property
owners.

Potential implementation of Phases 1 and 2 would begin
with the identification of an administrating entity who
would procure the feasibility study and oversee pilot project

development. Both phases would likely occur through a
competitive grant program for which interested parties
may apply. The program may also help to supplement
the NYC Department of Environmental Protection (NYC
DEP)’s existing Green Infrastructure Grant Program, which
provides incentives to private property owners to
incorporate green infrastructure onto their properties.

Cost estimate

 

 

 

$2 MILLION
Project Cost
Component Estimate
Phase 1: Stormwater mitigation study $500,000
Phase 2: Stormwater mitigation pilot projects $1,500,000
Total $2,000,000

The Phase 1 study is a contract cost estimated at
approximately $500,000, based on prior studies similar in
scope and intent. This would fund a study of the range
of feasibility and applicability issues noted earlier, to
determine if and how stormwater capture and retention
strategies would be applied within the Planning Area.
The Planning Committee envisions more than one pilot
project being implemented in the Focus Area in order to
best evaluate effectiveness. A preliminary cost estimate
for Phase 2 pilots is $1.5 million, based on typical
implementation costs, bringing the total project cost to
approximately $2 million.

The conceptual-level cost estimate was developed based
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

on current unit pricing and typical soft cost assumptions.
Cost estimates would continue to be refined as more
information is developed about the project.

Benefits
Environmental benefits

MEDIUM

Whilethis projectis expected to have modest environmental
benefits in the short-term, it could pave the way for a more
comprehensive strategy of addressing Lower Manhattan’s
stormwater flooding issues, with resulting benefits to water
quality and sustainability. The majority of surfaces in Lower
Manhattan are impervious, causing serious environmental
concerns, not only from a storm resiliency standpoint,
but also from a long-term sustainability standpoint. This
project would begin to address a serious environmental
problem in the area.

Health and social benefits

MEDIUM

This project would benefit residents, employees, and
business owners. It would protect marine habitats and
expand recreational opportunities throughout the Planning
Area by mitigating combined sewer overflows, which pose
significant public health and environmental risks when
untreated sewage from waterways floods onto streets, into
waterways, and into buildings and basements. Stormwater
capture measures would likely provide particular benefit to
residents and community members on the east side, where
there is a particularly high concentration of impervious

surfaces and community gardens.

From a regional perspective, combined sewer overflows
significantly impact the quality of New York City’s
waterways, impacting dissolved oxygen content and
marine habitat. A study and pilot implementation of
effective stormwater management practices can help
advance a scalable model for replication across the city
and region, potentially leading to further improvements
that contribute towards positive impacts on area water
quality.

Economic benefits

me) ]

This project is expected to produce some modest
economic benefits, mostly related to construction and
operations jobs associated with the pilot implementation
of protection measures in Phase 2.

Cost-benefit analysis

Given the site-specific nature of pilot implementation, the
greatest value of this project is not in the project itself, but
in the long-term benefits that it may provide, as a model
for a larger-scale stormwater capture and retention best-
practice strategies for Lower Manhattan in the future.
Given the $2 million price tag of this study and associated
pilot projects, and the level of near-term economic and
health and social benefits, the costs are somewhat high
as compared to the level of benefit provided in the short-
term. Nonetheless, many stormwater improvements can
help beautify the public realm, ranging from bioswales and
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

other greenery in residential areas to improved community
gardens and key open spaces.

In the long-term, this project could serve as a catalyst
to address Manhattan’s issues of impervious surfaces,
with future benefits far outweighing the upfront costs of
funding this Proposed Project. In addition, the short-term
ancillary benefits of this project, including community
landscaping, reduction in impacts from less intense
storms, and improvements in public health and recreational
opportunities, make this an important project within the
Planning Area.

Risk reduction

MEDIUM

As a study, Phase 1 may not lead to any direct risk
reduction, though pilot projects implemented through
Phase 2 are anticipated to provide some level of risk
reduction associated with minimizing localized flooding.
The degree to which these measures are able to mitigate
localized flooding depends largely on the size of the
catchment area, quantity of rainfall, and, in the case of
bioswales, the functionality of existing sewage systems
and soil types.

Should the pilot projects prove effective, this project could
pave the way for a large-scale stormwater strategy in
Lower Manhattan, creating pockets of “soft” surfaces to
counteract what is now one of the most impervious areas
of New York City.

Timeframe for implementation

®
0 2 4 6
Once the subrecipient organization has been determined,
Phase 1 of this project could begin within six months, while
Phase 2 would take anywhere from three to five years,
depending on the scope of the projects identified in Phase
1 and the identification and coordination of appropriate
partners.

Regulatory requirements

While the Phase 1 study would not have any regulatory
requirements, the stormwater capture and retention
projects identified for implementation during Phase 2
would require review and approval of agencies such as
NYC DEP and NYC Department of Transportation (NYC
DOT).

Jurisdiction

Jurisdiction over this project’s proposed initiatives would
depend on the types of initiatives implemented in Phase
2. If entailing improvements to street infrastructure and
community gardens, agencies with jurisdictional authority
would include NYC DEP, NYC DOT, and New York City
Department of Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR). Any
measures proposed for residential properties—either
publicly owned by NYCHA or privately-owned—would
also need to coordinate with those owners.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

 

Figure IV-2: Depth of flooding

 

   

 

     
   

  

   

ii ie ea pees meee ley el Gees on ee cn eg
TITS cred FESR ERR ER NA EES EES Ed (2 Ee
“ie STE =
gh SCN gp tS |
BO Gy, (So ES SS ee Ee
BOG Gg rm aa ee eo
Wee cs hh SS See
DINXK CAT APE i
4,9. Y= Set eS eae Wa RES HL BL Ec es
Gc 7 tise
Wa 8 oo '7-4 TUNES BI ON oe ee ee GULL Oe
BE erdA oS BT Sag nGauue!
¢ oe ¥ a ea =
Rescunl maiAUANTS Ga uu +
Sea HTT er
WObea rs 2 REL rane (OO IBSE Se Beuee oe
Peat. Saige ai (/i00 a ence aa ao"
rue Eee nena 8 Soe
mar ee ‘J % AX 4
Su SiINUe 3 ag
52 A Od Se ma OW oy * a
ae
(jens) Ore
Say eng
0 i ee es
t= = —
een Ae
\ Y >
‘* 3 0 0.25 0.5

 

a

Anticipated Depth of Flooding
(100 year storm)

HE > vice

HE ¢ -8.29 feet

[ 3-529 tect

[J 1-299 teet

[J 0-.99 feet

Limit of Coastal Floodplains
s--~ 0.2 PCT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD HAZARD
—— 1 PCT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD HAZARD

--= Limit of moderate wave action (1'-3' waves)

Source: FEMA Preliminary Flood Hazard
Data New York City OpenData. 1 Foot Digital
Elevation Model (DEM)

 

 

 

~s

1
Mile »

 

 

Implementation-Project profiles IV-38
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Project

Overview

Recovery

Support Functions

Natural & Cultural

Infrastructure

Cost
$1M

Environmental Benefits

MEDIUM

Health and Social Benefits

Risk Reduction

Timeline (years)

So

LOW

LOW

STRATEGY: IMPROVE STORMWATER CAPTURE AND RETENTION

Wetland creation at East River Park

Proposed Project

This project would provide funding to create a constructed wetland in East River

Park at a new composting facility.

This project would support the creation of a one-acre
constructed wetland in East River Park, at a site where
a local community group plans to construct a new
composting facility in a currently-unoccupied portion of
land near Corlears Hook. This project would also establish
a precedent for softening Lower Manhattan’s bulkhead
line with wetlands. The project includes the following
components:

¢ Composting windrows,** which allows for large-
volume composting;

e §=6Artificial wetland, meadow, and pond; and

e Outdoor classroom and shade structure.
The composting facility is expected to produce 75 tons
of finished compost per year, which can be returned as

fertilizer for the urban landscape. Replacing an impervious
surface with an absorptive one, this project would also

provide additional stormwater capture capacity for the
immediate area.

Cost estimate
$1 MILLION

This project would provide approximately $1 million to
cover the unfunded construction costs for the project.

Project component Cost estimate

 

 

 

 

Unfunded programming costs $10,000
LES Ecology Center funding $350,000
NYRCR contribution: Unfunded $1,000,000
construction costs

TOTAL $1,360,000
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Fem PSA rl
esse ment tase
are returned as
(aim (Laem cme UT

: yee ena Wee Esters)

: Outdoor Classroom and
East River Park PV Panéls aM ste eee
ete oN

*
* \

Rees AN

4

eer)
Cy
a

Geld ne

Pape ery

MeienT -
oe
a

%. F
estan)

The project would entail composting windrows; a constructed wetland; and an outdoor classroom and shade structure. Source of conceptual rendering: Courtesy of
LES Ecology Center.

Implementation-Project profiles IV-—40

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Benefits
Environmental benefits

MEDIUM

This project would provide multiple environmental
benefits: it would host the Lower East Side Ecology
Center's composting operations and clean runoff from
the composting system, as well as expand the Center’s
environmental educational offerings. The Lower East Side
Ecology Center is a not-for-profit organization which runs
community-based recycling and composting programs as
well as environmental education programs. In addition
to these benefits, the project would also capture a small
amount of stormwater for the immediate area.

Health and social benefits

LOW

This project would provide recreational benefits to
community members through increasing the amount of
public open space in the area. In addition, educational
programming would provide an opportunity for community
members to gather and learn about sustainability best

practices.

Cost-benefit analysis

The costs of this project are relatively low, when considering
the substantial environmental and educational benefits it
would provide for the community. Additionally, the wetlands
could serve as a precedent for how to soften Lower

 

Current site conditions at East River Park. Source: Courtesy of
LES Ecology Center.

Manhattan's bulkhead line while providing co-benefits to the
community. As a potentially scalable project, the benefits of
this project outweigh the cost.

Risk reduction

LOW

The risk reduction of this project is negligible, given the
site’s relatively small size. However, future replication of
this project along the Lower Manhattan bulkhead line could
provide additional opportunities for stormwater absorption
and wave attenuation, if appropriately scaled.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Timeframe for implementation
Qe

0 2 4 6

The project is currently planned, and the conceptual design
for this project is already underway (subject to input and
approval from NYC Department of Parks and Recreation
(NYC DPR)). Therefore, once funding and necessary
approvals are secured, implementation could begin in the
short term, within two to three years.

Regulatory requirements
The project must obtain the approval of NYC DPR and the

New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
(NYS DEC). This may also involve the USACE and Coastal
Zone Management (CZM) consistency concurrence (NYS
DOS). The project team should also coordinate with local
community organizations.

Jurisdiction

This project falls within the jurisdiction of NYC DPR, which
controls East River Park, and input and approval from NYC
DPR is required for the project to be implemented.

Implementation-Project profiles |V-—42
Project
Overview

Recovery
Support Functions

Natural & Cultural
Resources

Infrastructure

Cost
$2M

Economic Benefits

LOW
Environmental Benefits

LOW

Risk Reduction

HIGH

Timeline (years)

0 1 2

Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

STRATEGY: PROTECT EDGE NEIGHBORHOODS FROM COASTAL FLOODING

Berming and deployable walls at

Battery Park

Proposed Project: Funding toward the implementation of Phase 1
Featured Project: Conceptual design and implementation of future phases

This Proposed Project would allocate $2 million in funding toward the construction
of Phase 1 of a system of berms and adjoining deployable flood barriers at Battery
Park. A Featured Project would entail the implementation of additional flood
mitigation measures as part of Phase 1, as well as the conceptual design and
implementation of future phases to expand flood protection to the east and west of

the Phase 1 project site.

The Proposed Project would allocate $2 million in funding
towards the construction and implementation of Phase 1
of a flood protection strategy within Battery Park.

The Featured Project entails the implementation of
additional flood mitigation measures as part of Phase 1, as
well as the design and eventual implementation of potential
future phases of the Battery Conservancy and the NYC
Department of Parks and Recreation’s (NYC DPR) flood
protection strategy for Battery Park, providing protection
against a 500-year flood event. The phases outlined below

provide a key link and critical first step in protecting the tip
of Lower Manhattan, employing flood protection strategies
that would eventually link to similar strategies to the west
within Battery Park City and Pier A, and to the east at
the U.S. Coast Guard facilities and the Whitehall Ferry
Terminal. This strategy is located at a critical connection
point for any integrated flood protection strategy along
Lower Manhattan’s bulkhead line and seeks to provide
the first link in what the Planning Committee hopes to be
a comprehensive chain of resiliency.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 
 
 

 
 

Deployable West Nee retell
Side Strategy ; DRED)

    
     

BATTERY MARI-
TIME BUILDING

STATEN ISLAND FERRY
TERMINAL

 
 
 

CASTLE CLINTON

BATTERY GAR’
RESTAURANT

 
 

Deployable Barrier
TT] i

  

Structure as Bari

This project proposes berms and walls as part of a larger flood protection strategy for Battery Park. Source: Courtesy of The Battery Conservancy/Rebuild by Design
“BIG U” Team.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

io teeeren st ih
sqiyrue

a a 5

<y
5

Hs}

 

Berms can function as attractive landsccape features. Source: Mathews Nielsen Landscape Architects,

PC.

Phase 1: Berming and deployable walls

Phase 1 of this strategy specifically includes the
construction of berms through the Battery Lawn and
Bosque, supplemented by deployable floodwalls across
key pedestrian access points to ensure that safe access
to the park’s interior is maintained whenever a 500- year
storm surge event is not imminent. The berm would be
approximately 600 feet in length and five-to-six feet high at
its tallest point. The berm would either be an unreinforced
landmass with a permeablecore, an unreinforced landmass
with an impermeable core, or a reinforced structure with

an impermeable core, depending on the desired lifespan
and efficacy of the measure. The deployable walls would
be approximately 90 feet in length and four feet high at their
tallest point, respectively. The berm would be a permanent
intervention while the deployable floodwalls, supported by
permanent foundations, are only put in place in the event
of a storm. These interventions would be located mostly
outside of the 100-year floodplain, but within the 500-
year floodplain. The berm segment in the Bosque lies
within the 100-year floodplain and would help protect the
New York City Department of Transportation (NYC DOT)
Battery Underpass vents in that location. The Proposed
Project would allocate funding towards the completion
of this phase, while the Featured Project would implement
the strategies outlined here. It is anticipated that the
Battery Conservancy would raise the additional funding
required to construct and implement Phase 1.

Future phases: Conceptual design for an east
side strategy

In order to provide meaningful comprehensive flood
protection, the interventions in Phase 1 need to connect to
further interventions outside of the floodplain, as stipulated
inthe Featured Project. The Battery Conservancy and NYC
DPR have developed preliminary concepts of what these
phases might entail, including re-envisioning the restaurant
and Coast Guard buildings to serve as a robust flood
barrier incorporating visitor amenities and integrating with
a berm/levee systems along Battery Place, connecting to
high ground in Battery Park City. Further design is required
to advance these concepts.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Cost estimate
$2 MILLION

The $2 million allocation would help complete Phase 1,
covering 45% to 71% of the funding needed to construct
the berm and adjoining flood barriers, depending on the
type of berm put in place.

$1.8-$3.4 MILLION

Project Component Cost Estimate

 

 

 

Berm and floodwalls $2.8 million
to $4.4 million

Conceptual design for further phase(s) $1 million
TOTAL $3.8 million
to $5.4 million

Phase 1 Options: $2.8 million-$4.4 million

e Unreinforced landmass with permeable core and
deployable floodwalls: $2.8 million

e Unreinforced landmass with impermeable core and
deployable floodwalls: $3.2 million

e Reinforced structure with impermeable core and
deployable floodwalls: $4.4 million

Depending on the desired level of protection, it is estimated
that Phase 1 could cost in total between $2.8 and $4.4
million. Additionally, engineered design of subsequent
phases necessary to connect the overall strategy with
similar flood protection strategies to the east and west of
Battery Park is estimated to cost $1 million. In total, the
cost for construction of Phase 1 and design of subsequent
phases could cost an estimated $3.8 to $5.4 million. Given
that the Proposed Project would allocate $2 million in
funding towards this total, the final cost for the Featured
Project is estimated between $1.8 to $3.4 million.

The conceptual-level cost estimate was developed based
on current unit pricing and typical soft cost assumptions.
Cost estimates would continue to be refined as more
information is developed about the project.%”

Benefits

This discussion of benefits is focused on the benefits of
the Featured Project, as the Proposed Project may carry
no benefits besides allocating a significant amount of
funding towards the construction and implementation of
the Featured Project.

Economic Benefits

LOW

The Featured Project, the completion of Phase 1, would
generate modest direct economic benefits, including
generating a small number of temporary construction
jobs.*® Once linked to flood protection strategies to the
east and the west of the project site, however, the Featured
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Project would provide indirect flood risk reduction for key
economic areas of Lower Manhattan, such as the many
office buildings along the northern border of State Street.

Environmental benefits

LOW

The berming involved in the Featured Project would be
designed so as not to detract from the existing aesthetic
appeal of the park and add to it wherever possible. The
design of these projects should be careful to avoid any
negative environmental impacts, including the removal
of any existing trees. Besides creating a “new look” for
portions of Battery Park, it is not anticipated that this
project would provide any additional environmental
benefits.

Cost-benefit analysis

The main benefit of the strategy of the proposed and
featured projects lies in their role as a critical first step in
what may one day be a comprehensive flood protection
strategy integrating Lower Manhattan’s diverse waterfront
properties into a continuous line of defense that also
improves the visitor experience at one of New York
City’s most visited tourist sites. While the benefit of this
strategy relies on alignment with the strategies of other
organizations and sites, it nonetheless helps advance
the Battery Conservancy and NYC DPR plans for building
comprehensive flood protection. The proposed and
subsequent featured project would provide an important
precedent that might serve as a suitable pilot project for

similar projects in the Focus Area. Taking all of this into
consideration, the modest cost of this pilot strategy is
well worth the scalable precedent it provides in protecting
Lower Manhattan from future storm surge without
sacrificing the current appeal of existing assets.

Risk reduction

HIGH

While the Proposed Project carries with it no risk reduction
benefits, it is nonetheless a necessary first step in a future
integrated flood protection strategy for the tip of Lower
Manhattan, and eventually, the Lower Manhattan bulkhead
line in its entirety. The Featured Project, once linked to
flood protection strategies to the east and the west of the
project site, would provide flood risk reduction in the event
of a 500-year storm to the key economic assets located
on the interior.

Timeframe for implementation

@
0 1 2 3
Once all necessary funding is secured, final design of
Phase 1 of the featured project would be completed within
6 months, with construction completed within one to two
years after that time. Once funding is secured for future
phases, the design of these phases is anticipated to be
completed after one year. Overall, the full construction of
this project and all of its phases is anticipated to take three
to seven years.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Regulatory requirements

The featured project is required to meet the regulations
and standards of the NYC DPR. Additional review and/or
requirements may need to be coordinated with New York
State Historic Preservation Office.

Jurisdiction

The featured project falls under the jurisdiction of NYC
DPR, and input and approval from NYC DPR is required for
the project to be implemented.
Project
Overview

Recovery
Support Functions

Health & Community Planning
Social Services & Capacity Building

@ ©

Infrastructure Economic
Development
Cost
$750,000

Economic Benefits

HIGH

Environmental Benefits

MEDIUM

Health & Social Benefits

MEDIUM

Risk Reduction

HIGH

Timeline (years)

4 6

So
NS

Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

STRATEGY: PROTECT EDGE NEIGHBORHOODS FROM COASTAL FLOODING

Targeted flood protection strategy
for lower West Street

Proposed Project: Feasibility study and conceptual design

Featured Project: Implementation

The Proposed Project would fund a feasibility study and conceptual design for a
targeted strategy that would protect the West Street area south of Harrison Street
against a 100-year flood event, using interventions at the southernmost edge of
Hudson River Park and the northern edge of Battery Park along Battery Place.
The Featured Project is the implementation of the strategy, which could ultimately
provide comprehensive flood protection for this area around lower West Street.

Proposed Project description

The Proposed Project would determine the feasibility
and lay out the initial design of a flood protection
strategy, consisting of both permanent and deployable
interventions, to protect the lower portion of West Street
from flooding during a 100-year storm. This would be
achieved by strategically placing these interventions at the
north and south ends of Battery Park City — specifically, at
the southern end of Hudson River Park (North Site") and

the northern edge of Battery Park and along Battery Place
(South Site?) so that each intervention would “tie” into
areas of higher ground (i.e., outside the floodplain).The
maps at right Figures IV-3 and IV-4 depict the elevations
and related flood hazard at each location. This strategy
would leverage Battery Park City’s elevated bulkhead line
as an effective existing barrier to prevent flooding from the
west. As a result, the introduction of a relatively limited
Figure IV-3: West Street elevation map

Ml Potential Area of Intervention
Approximate Existing Grades
Mm 201-4
Mm 401-6
6.01'-8"
8.017-10°
10.01°-12
Me >12.01

North Site

South Site

tn

     

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Figure IV-4: West Street floodplain map

LEGEND
ll Proposed Flood Barrier
Ml Potential Area of Intervention
Floodplain
wme= 0.2 PCT Annual Chance Flood Hazard
— 1 PCT Annual Chance Flood Hazard
Ml -V-zone (subject to wave action >3’)
A-zone / 100 year floodplain
500 year flood plain

+ Limit of moderate wave action
(1’-3? waves)

414, Base Flood Elevation

   
  
 
 
  
  
  

North Site

~
South Site t

Implementation-Project profiles IV-50
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

set of flood protection structures would result in the
protection of a substantial area that is home to a number
of economic assets and neighborhoods which together
comprise millions of square feet of land area, homes,
businesses, and infrastructure.

North site:
Southern end of Hudson River Park

At Project Site 1, the Proposed Project would fund the
feasibility and initial design study of a combination of
permanent and deployable flood walls and a landscaped
berm at the southern end of Hudson River Park, a
vulnerable low point in Lower Manhattan, at an elevation
at six to eight feet above sea level.

It is at this point where floodwaters entered Lower
Manhattan during Superstorm Sandy and travelled south
down West Street, inundating critical assets such as the
World Trade Center project site. Flood protection strategies
at Project Site 1 in Hudson River Park may include the
following components:

e Landscaped berm

e Raised height of retaining wall at the site’s existing
basketball court

e Deployable walls to adjoin berm and retaining wall

South site:
Northern end of Battery Park along Battery Place

This component of the Proposed Project would fund the
feasibility and initial design study of a flood protection

strategy along the northern edge of Battery Park
extending northwest along Battery Place and into Battery
Park City. This strategy would be designed to extend to
both the east and west outside of the 100-year floodplain,
at a minimum. The study would recommend and design
connections to existing and planned flood protection
strategies overseen by other organizations, such as the
Battery Park City Authority’s plans to protect Pier A and
the Battery Conservancy’s plans for Battery Park, as
discussed earlier in this plan.

Cost estimate
$750,000

Proposed Project

Feasibility and conceptual design $750,000

This Proposed Project would fund the feasibility and
conceptual design of the Featured Project at an estimated
contractual cost of $750,000. The value of this contract
would vary depending on its scope.

Featured Project

Implementation $8.4 million

The construction of the project components outlined here
is estimated to cost $8.4 million in total. The estimated
costs for the implementation phases of the flood
mitigation strategy are set forth below:
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Project Component Cost Estimate

 

 

 

Hudson River Park construction $3.9 million
(berming, deployable barriers, and

retaining wall)

Battery Park City construction $4.5 million
(deployable barriers)

TOTAL $8.4 million

The conceptual-level cost estimate was developed based
on current unit pricing and typical soft cost assumptions.
Cost estimates would continue to be refined as more
information is developed about the project.

Benefits

This Proposed Project provides a critical first step in
determining strategic interventions and projects that
could provide significant reduction of flood risk and
other associated benefits for specific areas of Lower
Manhattan. While the Planning Committee recommends
allocating funding towards the study of potential, long-
term comprehensive coastal flood mitigation strategies
for the entire Planning Area (see project description for
“Coastal protection study for east and west side”), this
project would specifically examine the feasibility and
provide the initial conceptual design for a more targeted
strategy that, if implemented, would increase the resiliency
of key assets, address medium- and long-term risks, and
balance costs and benefits.

Economic benefits

HIGH

The Proposed Project provides no economic benefits
beyond the value of the study’s contract. The Featured
Project, however, would yield high economic returns.
First, by protecting a key economic corridor along Lower
Manhattan’s west side, the implementation of this project
would save many businesses the cost of pursuing flood
protection strategies privately while also potentially raising
the real estate value of the properties the project would
protect. The construction cost of this project is significantly
lower than the cost of damage to building systems in large
office buildings similar to those located along West Street,
which could cost in the hundreds of millions of dollars.

The implementation of this project would also create a
moderate number of construction jobs. In addition, this
project could spur additional investment by governmental
agencies and third parties in additional large-scale
infrastructure investment into Lower Manhattan and the
many temporary and permanent jobs that investment
might create.

Environmental benefits

MEDIUM

While the Proposed Project provides no environmental
benefits in and of itself, the implementation of the Featured
Project’s flood mitigation strategy would protect critical
local natural assets, including the parks within Battery
Park City and near West Street, from future severe weather
events. Parks such as the Battery Park City ballfields and
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-5: North Site elevation map

\

   
 

Chamber St'

IV-53 Implementation-Project profiles

 

LEGEND

fmm Proposed Flood Barrier

Approximate Existing Grades
mm 2.01-4
mm 4.01-6
fm =«6.01’-8"
8.01’-10°
fmm =10.017-12’
mm =>12.01

LEGEND

(@m_- Proposed Flood Barrier

wes (0.2 PCT Annual Chance
Flood Hazard

1 PCT Annual Chance
Flood Hazard

mame V-zone (subject to
wave action >3’)

A-zone / 100 year
floodplain

500 year flood plain

44 Base Flood Elevation
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Figure IV-7: North Site plan

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

=! Zz
aoe CS
6 | » 9 es ©
[=]
° |}
Nae : = ; =
SE] ° PSS SSshssy
——
] | |
ee —_ jt
= = = — oe LL

    

—

\

 

 

 

KEY MAP

7-3 1/8
1-10 1/4
4'-10 1/4"

TOP OF WALL EL 14.85

a
P|
f ee J 73.00

ELEVATION

 

LEGEND

 

 

10'-4 5/8”

HN Concrete Barrier Wall
[55 Deployable Flood Wall

 

 

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-8: North Site plan

(3%

    
 

JIE 94 ROW

  

 

2

    

©

ROUTE 9A

  
    

ROUTE 9A

Let eT Open sie 10 LOL ec MSO LLL) 8) SNe HUDSON RIVER PARK

~ a ey
! i. 1
Ss a a
qt ow ~
< a =
oa oe oa

 

LEGEND ELEVATION

HS Concrete Barrier Wall
(5) Deployable Flood Wall

 
  
  

TOP OF WALL EL 14.85
per ol

 

GRAPHIC SCALE
(IN FEET)

 

2 a 10 2 “0

a |

ae

   

Let eT Open sie 10 HUDSON RIVER PARK

     

Ua ae La LOL ec MSO LLL) 8)

ELEVATION W/ FLOOD WALL

IV-55 Implementation-Project profiles
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

West Thames Park are important to the livability and social
resiliency of the communities around West Street and have
served as important places for gathering and recreation.

Health and social benefits

MEDIUM

While the Proposed Project in and of itself provides no
health and social benefits, the implementation of the
Featured Project would provide protection to critical health
and emergency response assets such as the Battery Park
City and World Trade Center emergency medical offices
and the New York City Fire Department (FDNY) Engine
10, Ladder 10. It would also protect the Battery Park City
School (PS/IS 276) and The Hallmark of Battery Park City,
a seniors’ assisted-living residence.

Cost-benefit analysis

The Proposed Project would fund a meaningful investment
towards an achievable medium-term Featured Project, the
implementation of a targeted flood protection strategy for
lower West Street. It therefore offers the potential for a
significant return on investment, measured in terms of risk
reduction benefits and within the context of potential flood
risk-reducing projects in New York City.

By strategically intervening within floodplains along the
west side, this coastal protection project leverages NY
Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) funding, as
a first step towards providing flood protection that would
otherwise cost hundreds of millions of dollars. The concept
at the center of the Proposed and Featured Project is to

create meaningful, measurable protection for a relatively
modest sum when compared to infrastructure projects
that offer a similar level of protection. The value in this
concept is significant, the protection of 62 buildings for a
construction cost comparable to the cost of protecting a
single large office building.

Risk reduction

HIGH

While the Proposed Project carries no risk reduction
benefits, it is a necessary step that would lead to the
Featured Project, the construction and implementation
of feasible and appropriately designed flood mitigation
infrastructure strategies. The future implementation of
the Featured Project carries significant risk reduction
benefits. The conceptual design would set forth a strategy
that, if determined feasible and constructed at its current
level of design, targets specific and strategic locations
vulnerable to storm surge, eliminating the risk of flooding
for approximately 62 buildings and 24.5 million square feet
of built floor area.

The Featured Project would implement a barrier at a
low-lying area of Hudson River Park, providing for flood
protection at a critical point of Lower Manhattan’s bulkhead
line. When joined with flood protection strategies farther
south, near Battery Park, the Featured Project would serve
as a comprehensive flood protection strategy for lower
West Street, from Battery Place to Harrison Street, as well
as for the adjoining neighborhoods and certain nearby
critical assets such as the World Trade Center and Hugh
L. Carey Tunnel entrance.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-9: South Site elevation map

South Cove

Museum of Jewish Heritage

Pier A Plaza

Figure IV-10: South Site floodplain map

Lu
oQ
Sj
\ Fame
>
25
= 2
uw FS
2 &
South Cove = =é
sa
EC x s
Museum of Jewish # a) 4 \
Heritage I «G a &
oy «Se
1 “4 ! K

&
; ‘ | OY
Pier A Plaza “2

   

LEGEND
Potential Area of Intervention
ME Museum of Jewish Heritage
Mim Pier A

West Street
Approximate Existing Grades
MS 2017-4
Ms 401-6"

6.017-8"

8.017-10°

10.017-12°
Mm 12.01’

LEGEND
Potential Area of Intervention

HE Museum of Jewish Heritage
Mim Pier A

West Street
Floodplain
meme 0.2 PCT Annual Chance Flood Hazard
—— 1PCT Annual Chance Flood Hazard
MG V-zone (subject to wave action >3’)
A-zone / 100 year floodplain
500 year flood plain
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Timeframe for implementation
e@

0 2 4 6

The project would begin with the feasibility study, which
would set in motion the final engineering and design
process that would ultimately result in construction. A
preliminary timeline is set forth below:

Proposed Project:

e Feasibility and conceptual design: 1 year from start
of contract

Featured Project:

e 100% construction design and engineering: two

years from completion of conceptual design

e Final construction: one to two years following
completion of 100% construction design

e Total: 4 - 5 years
Regulatory requirements

Both the Proposed and Featured Projects would require
direct coordination with several public agencies and non-
profit organizations, including the following entities:

e Hudson River Park Trust

e¢ Battery Park City Authority

e Battery Conservancy

e New York State Department of Transportation (NYS
DOT)

e New York City Department of Parks and Recreation
(NYC DPR)

e New York City Department of Transportation (NYC

DOT)

In addition, a single agency would likely be responsible for
spearheading the project management of any conceptual
design and/or engineering study under the Proposed
Project. The Featured Project must meet the regulatory
requirements of all involved New York City and State
agencies listed above, particularly in the instances where
flood protection interventions are placed in public open
space and rights-of-way. This may also involve the NYS
DEC, USACE and Coastal Zone Management (CZM)
consistency concurrence (NYS DOS).

Jurisdiction

While jurisdiction is not a factor for the Proposed Project,
execution of the featured project requires the coordination
of all the public agencies and non-profit organizations, listed
above. Hudson River Park Trust is a city-state entity that
oversees the design, construction, and design of Hudson
River Park, where the majority of Project Site 1 resides.
The Battery Park City Authority is a New York State public
benefit corporation with jurisdiction over the 92 acres of
Battery Park City. The Battery Conservancy is a non-profit
corporation aimed at rebuilding and revitalizing historic
Battery Park, a 25-acre public park at the southern tip of
Manhattan, and the Castle Clinton National Monument.
Battery Park is owned and maintained by NYC DPR. The
public rights-of-way for this project would be overseen
by both NYS DOT, which maintains jurisdiction over the
public right-of-way at West Street, and NYC DOT, which
has control over the public right-of-way along Battery
Place and other City streets.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

STRATEGY: PROTECT EDGE NEIGHBORHOODS FROM COASTAL FLOODING

Project
Overview .
accover Coastal protection study for

Support Functions east and west side

@) 2) Proposed Project

Natural & Cultural = Infrastructure
Resources

This project would fund a feasibility study and conceptual design for a series of
multipurpose flood barriers for protection of the east and west sides of Lower
Manhattan against a 100-year flood event, using measures such as a raised

greenway, berming, and deployable walls.
Economic Benefits

The feasibility study would assess flood protection e Review of existing proposals, including the East
Environmental Benefits strategies along the east side under the FDR Drive River Blueway Plan, the Rebuild by Design Big

infrastructure from 14th Street to Montgomery Street U, and the Special Initiative for Rebuilding and
(along the alignment of the East River Blueway Plan) Resiliency (SIRR)

and from Harrison Street to 14th Street on the west side.
The project would focus on the use of raised greenways,
berming, deployable and permanent barriers, and other
interventions that may be adapted to serve a variety of

Health & Social Benefits
HIGH

¢ Coordination with relevant City, regional, State, and
Federal agencies, as well as with key stakeholders
and the general public

Risk Reduction uses e Detailed technical analysis of potential protection
strategies, including (but not limited to) the following
The study would include the following elements: e Raised greenway with a walkway/bikeway atop
Timeline (years) e Deployable flood barriers
e e Analysis of existing and future conditions, including ;
0 1 2 3 flooding history and projections for future risk and ° Permanent flood barriers

damage e Berms
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Figure IV-11: Lower Manhattan Coastal Protection Scenario

a

  
  

 

 

Multiple flood protection strategies have
been proposed for Lower Manhattan which,
when combined, could protect 510 acres of
land inundated during a 100-year storm.
These potential projects include walls,
berms, and multi-ourpose structures that
would protect against flooding while
providing community amenities such as.
bikeways, benches and programmed public
spaces.

 

 
 
  
    
 
  

East River

Neighborhoods
Proposed Project:
Coastal Protection Study

for East and West Side ke NYRCR Proposed or Fea-
** tured Project

 

 
 

Hudson River
Neighborhoods
Proposed Project:
Coastal Protection Study
for East and West Side

acs Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

      
   
      
   
    
    

a4 ‘i =e Other Initiative
i Area protected from
a eR flooding given proposed
vay Sereet
ncey 7
+ =
'

strategies”
Building protected from
flooding given proposed
strategies”

Hi Area projected to flood”

  

“Assumes 100-year storm

Canal Street :
flooding event

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation:

. Source: FEMA Preliminary Flood Hazard
Canal Street Flood Protection

Data New York City OpenData. 1 Foot Digital
Elevation Model (DEM)

>}

West Street / Battery Park City
Featured Project:
Targeted Flood Protection Strategy

for Lower West Street Water Street / South Street Seaport

Other Initiatives:
SIRR Report Multi-purpose Levee
Rebuild by Design “BIG U” Strategy

  
 
 
  
  

 

 

 

 

 

Battery Park
Featured Project:
Berming and Deployable Walls 1 *

at Battery Park : 1 Miles »

  
   

 

 

 

Implementation-Project profiles IV-60
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Based on this technical analysis, a series of potential
coastal protection measures would be identified that
could be implemented along the east and west sides of
the Planning Area, including cost estimates, risk reduction
estimates, construction schedules, and associated
technical analyses.

Cost estimate
$2M

While the eventual construction of comprehensive,
multipurpose flood protection strategies spanning the
length of the east and west sides of Lower Manhattan
would likely cost hundreds of millions of dollars, the
feasibility and conceptual study would cost approximately
$2 million. The Planning Committee recommends
allocating $1 million for an east side study and $1 million
for a west side study.

Project component Cost estimate

 

 

 

West Side coastal protection study $1 million
East Side coastal protection study $1 million
TOTAL $2 million

Benefits
Economic benefits

HIGH

This project would design long-term flood- protection
strategies identified by the feasibility study. On its own,
this project would have no tangible economic benefits;
however, eventual implementation of the project’s
recommendations would protect key economic corridors
along Lower Manhattan’s west and east sides, including
Avenues C and D on the east side and West Street and
Canal Street on the west side. It would also save many
business owners the cost of pursuing flood protection
strategies privately and protect small businesses within
Lower Manhattan that otherwise would not be able to
afford flood protection strategies, such as those in the
Lower East Side and the East Village.

The study and design under this Proposed Project
aligns with the goals of the New York City Regional
Economic Development Council’s Strategic Plan, which
identifies Lower Manhattan as an Opportunity Zone,
and encourages the further development of the area’s
commercial real estate market. Implementation would
also create construction jobs, sustain businesses that
would otherwise suffer during the aftermath of a severe
weather event, and may increase the real estate value of
properties in protected areas.

Environmental benefits

HIGH

This study would lead to the design of more protected and
diversely programmed park space, both within Hudson
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

River Park and East River Park, two of Lower Manhattan’s
largest and most popular natural resources. In some
specific instances, this study would lead to the creation
of additional park space, particularly community assembly
space and walkway and bikeway paths and connections.
The designs for flood protection would also improve
community access to the waterfront and integrate state-
of-the-art sustainability features.

Health and social benefits

HIGH

This study would lead to the design of comprehensive
protection from flooding for Lower Manhattan’s most
vulnerable populations, including the elderly, disabled,
and low-income populations. In particular, the majority of
Lower Manhattan’s subsidized housing developments are
located on the east side, within the 100-year floodplain.
Comprehensive flood protection on both the east and west
sides would also benefit residential owner entities (such as
condo associations, cooperatives, and building owners)
who otherwise would not be able to afford expensive
comprehensive flood-protection building upgrades.

A comprehensive flood protection strategy would
also protect schools, healthcare facilities, community
organizations, and New York City Police Department
(NYPD) and New York City Fire Department (FDNY)
facilities currently located within the 100-year floodplain.
Facilities serving seniors, such as the Two Bridges Senior
Residence on the east side and The Hallmark Battery Park,
a seniors residence on the west side, would be protected
from the risk of flooding during a severe storm as well.

Cost-benefit analysis

For a modest cost, the feasibility study and conceptual
design for needed flood protection in Lower Manhattan
would build on the planning work that has been done to
date, including the Blueway Plan, the Rebuild by Design
BIG U project, and other designs, to result in a conceptual
design. The Committee’s return on investment would
result in a comprehensive study of coastal protection
measures that could lead to infrastructure investments in
the long term.

Risk reduction

MEDIUM

While a feasibility study and conceptual design on their
own provide no tangible risk reduction benefits, should
the proposed study lead to the eventual construction
of multipurpose flood strategies along the proposed
corridors, this project carries significant risk reduction
benefits, providing preliminary comprehensive coastal
protection strategies for the entire Focus Area when tied
with existing or planned flood protection strategies for
Lower Manhattan. This would protect both a large group
of vulnerable residents and a significant value of assets.

Timeframe for implementation
 )

0 1 2 3

While the overall implementation of any recommended
strategies that result from this study is a long-term
endeavor, the study itself is short-term. This project
requires the identification of a single New York State or
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

i ee

a x Fi

 

   

BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) WITH 31”
SEA LEVEL RISE AND 1’ FREE BOARD

ROU ae 3:1 SLOPE BERM ait 3:1 SLOPE BERM esta mse

ELEVATION

GRAPHIC SCALE

(IN FEET)

~» 0 10 20 “0

Strategies for the east side and west side may include berms with recreational amenities. Source: Courtesy of WXY Architecture + Urban Design for the East River Blueway
Plan, with the addition of an elevated bikeway by the Consultant Team (top); Mathews Nielsen Landscape Architects, P.C. (bottom).

 

IV-63 Implementation-Project profiles
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

New York City agency to oversee project management,
including the issuance of a RFP and subsequent selection
of a consultant team to execute the study’s scope, a
process that is likely to take at least a year. Once that
contract is secured, it is estimated that the feasibility study
and conceptual design would be completed 18 months
from the start of contract, divided approximately equally
between study and design.

Regulatory requirements

This project would have no regulatory requirements in the
feasibility and conceptual design phase, but extensive
coordination and approvals would be required from
the agencies listed in the Jurisdiction section below to
construct the recommended improvements.

Jurisdiction

This project, depending on the specific siting of the
interventions, falls under the jurisdiction of the following
agencies:

e New York State Department of Transportation (NYS
DOT)

e Hudson River Park Trust (HRPT)
e Hugh L. Carey Battery Park City Authority (BPCA)
e United States Coast Guard (USCG)

e New York City Department of Parks and Recreation
(NYC DPR)

e New York City Department of Transportation (NYC
DOT)

e New York City Economic Development Corporation
(NYC EDC)

While this study requires a single agency to oversee
project management, any implementation of recommended
strategies would require the coordination of the agencies
listed above along with various community stakeholders.
This may also involve the NYS DEC, NYS DOS and USACE.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-65 Implementation-Project profiles
 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Additional resiliency recommendations

Lower Manhattan’s Proposed and Featured
Projects represent the greatest priorities for
funding with the available NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Program (NYRCR) Community
Development Block Grant-Disaster Relief (CDBG-

DR) funds and other sources; however, Lower
Manhattan’s long-term resiliency also relies upon
the important initiatives detailed below in Table
V-1. These recommendations, if implemented,
would advance the resiliency strategies and

Table V-1: Additional resiliency recommendations

community goals outlined earlier, including
enhancing emergency preparedness, response,
and recovery coordination and _ capacity;
protecting vulnerable populations; and increasing
the resiliency of utilities and transportation.

 

 

 

 

 

Regional
project Estimated
Strategy Project name Short project description (YIN) cost
Improvement and capacity The Planning Committee recommends that the quality and capacity of N NIA
assessment of existing evacuation existing evacuation facilities in Lower Manhattan be evaluated,
center and shelter system in Lower including Seward Park High School. The Committee further
Manhattan recommends that findings from the evaluation lead to actionable steps
to improve the capacity of the system to better accommodate
Planning Area residents.
Determine approach for storage The Planning Committee recommends that the City determine an Y NIA
of area flood barriers, funding of approach for the storage and deployment of flood barriers. This would
deployment activities include identifying and mobilizing the funding to support deployment
Improve emergency activities in the days leading up to a storm.
preparedness
through enhanced Continue and expand The Planning Committee recommends that NYC OEM’s CERT program Y NIA
coordination and Community Emergency be expanded throughout New York City, and that efforts be made to
planning Response Teams (CERTs) ensure there are an adequate number of CERT volunteers in high- and
extreme-flood risk areas in advance of a storm.
Support City’s efforts to expand The Planning Committee recommends that the City continue its efforts Y $500K
the Worker Connect technology to enhance Worker Connect technology with a new Emergency
tool Services Portal. Worker Connect compiles data on vulnerable
populations from City agencies, and a new Emergency Services
Portal would provide information from additional sources, including
nonprofits, as well as expand reporting options and incorporate new
location identifiers, which can have useful implications for tracking and
delivering services to vulnerable populations.

 

 

 

 

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

 

 

 

 

 

Regional
project Estimated
Strategy Project name Short project description (YIN) cost
Support City’s efforts to create The City is currently investigating the creation of an online, voluntary Y $500K to
an Emergency Notification Emergency Notification Contact System based on NYC HPD’s $1 million
Contact System existing tenant contact information system. The Planning Committee
supports the development of this database, which would contain
Improve emergency useful information for application in emergency response and
preparedness recovery efforts, including tenant emergency contact information,
through enhanced information on building systems including presence of backup
coordination and generators, and information on vulnerable populations.
planning Expand opportunities for non- The Planning Committee recommends that the City introduce Y N/A
profit and philanthropic and avenues through which philanthropies and non-profits may
engagement in emergency contribute to recovery efforts. This could include expanded
preparedness, response, and opportunities to donate and volunteer, both to recovery efforts and
recovery to preparedness and response initiatives.
Finalize citywide registry for The Planning Committee recommends that the City finalize the Y >$1 million
elderly and disabled development of a registry of vulnerable individuals.
Implement voluntary registry The Planning Committee recommends the development of a simple, Y <$500K
systems to track vulnerable plug-and-play database for use by CBOs, building
populations and notify them prior owners/managers, small businesses, and others to track
to and during time of event populations. It would also outline a process for data content
management, procedures for contacting vulnerable populations
through various networks (e.g., texting, phone trees, and door-
Protect vulnerable knocking), and procedures for connecting vulnerable individuals
populations with key resources (e.g., food, medicine, and medical attention).
Specific attention would be paid to coordinating with schools and
student populations. Oversight of the database might be linked to
the community emergency preparedness program outlined in
Section IV, in close coordination with NYC OEM and relevant third
parties (e.g., Community Boards).
Develop process for CBO The Planning Committee recommends that the City and CBOs Y N/A

 

coordination with City to track
and serve vulnerable
populations

 

active in emergency response coordinate to identify a process for
tracking and serving vulnerable populations.

 

 

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Regional
project Estimated
Strategy Project name Short project description (YIN) cost
Increase vulnerable populations’ The Planning Committee recommends that pharmacies, home Y >$1 million
access to medications before, health care services, and other facilities serving vulnerable
during, and after emergency populations take measures to ensure backup power and expanded
events inventory of medication before emergency events.
Finalize citywide registry for The Planning Committee recommends that the City finalize the Y >$1 million
elderly and disabled development of a registry of vulnerable individuals.
Develop a pilot program to The Planning Committee recommends that the City develop a pilot Y $500K to
identify and test strategies for public health program focused on protecting vulnerable populations $1 million
protecting vulnerable from the impacts of extreme heat and cold in the aftermath of an
neighborhoods and populations emergency event and associated outages to HVAC and other
Protect vulnerable from health impacts due to systems.
populations extreme heat and cold
Encourage the City and others The Planning Committee recommends that the City require schools Y N/A
to develop resiliency plans for and youth centers to develop resiliency plans. Regulations could
schools and youth centers apply to installing flood protection measures (e.g., deployable flood
barriers) for these buildings and purchasing backup generators, and
could also require schools to develop contingency plans for after-
school programs and for meeting school-year-days requirements in
the event of school closures.
Encourage the City to undertake The Planning Committee recommends that the City offer incentives Y N/A
measures to ensure the to supermarkets and other perishable food retailers which obtain
resiliency of the food supply backup power supply.
Expand the City’s resiliency The Planning Committee recommends that new funding streams Y >$1 million
funding to multifamily owners to become available, or existing funding (e.g., Build It Back Program)
Strengthen the offset cost of resiliency extended, for floodproofing and making upgrades to mechanical
resiliency of upgrades systems in multi-family properties.
existing residential
Require building owners to The Planning Committee recommends that the City require building Y N/A

buildings

 

develop and post emergency
plans for building residents

 

owners to develop and post emergency plans for buildings.

 

 

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Regional
project Estimated
Strategy Project name Short project description (YIN) cost
Advance/increase resiliency The Planning Committee recommends that the building code Y N/A
requirements in building code expand resiliency requirements around elevation of building
mechanicals; installing backup energy systems; limiting ground-floor
uses in extreme- and high- flood-risk areas; and wet- and dry-
floodproofing.
Expand energy efficiency The Planning Committee recommends that energy efficiency Y N/A
incentive programs to include incentive programs also provide incentives for measures that offer
measures that provide resiliency resiliency co-benefits.
co-benefits
Encourage the development of The Planning Committee recommends that the State and City Y <$500K
educational materials for expand existing and/or create new technical assistance programs
building owners purchasing that clarify flood insurance issues for multifamily residential property
property flood insurance owners, by offering one-on-one counseling to building owners,
Strengthen the producing easy-to-read manuals in multiple languages, and widely
resiliency of disseminating other resources online and in print.
ae residential Suggest the legislature offer tax The Planning Committee recommends that the City, State, or Y N/A
uildings : : : : tpt
incentives for property owners Federal government create a tax incentive program for multifamily
that install surge barriers residential property owners that install flood barriers.
Recommend that Congress The Planning Committee recommends that Congress expand the Y N/A
expand disaster recovery fund applicability of FEMA and CDBG-DR funds to cooperative and
applicability to co-ops and condominium developments, putting these funds in the reach of the
condominium properties more than 9,000 units of this type of housing in the Planning Area.
Support and expand design The Planning Committee recommends that design competitions to Y >$1 million
competitions to increase flood explore flood resiliency measures in residential building systems be
resiliency in residential building expanded to produce options for a broad range of building types
systems and scales.
Support purchase of backup The Planning Committee recommends the development of a grant Y >$1 million

 

generators for large residential
developments

 

or financial incentive program targeted to support the purchase of
backup generators for large multifamily residential properties.

 

 

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Regional
project Estimated
Strategy Project name Short project description (YIN) cost
Expand City financial and The Planning Committee recommends that existing City grant and Y >$1 million
technical assistance to small technical assistance programs around small business resiliency be
businesses expanded to offer increased support, especially for food retailers,
which serve a vital function in relief and recovery.

Expand NYSERDA’s existing The Planning Committee recommends that NYSERDA create a Y >$1 million
energy efficiency audit programs special resiliency audit program (e.g., an "Energy Resiliency Audit")
to include a resiliency or new component of an existing energy efficiency audit program to
component apply to commercial properties.
Encourage City to develop The Planning Committee recommends that the City create Y >$500K
educational materials on educational materials guiding businesses through the process of

Empower small : : : .

i property and flood insurance for purchasing business and property flood insurance.

businesses to :
business owners

become more

resilient Establish a tax incentive for The Planning Committee recommends that the City, State, or Y >$1 million
property owners that install Federal government create a tax abatement program for commercial
surge barriers property owners that install flood barriers.
Connect businesses to local The Planning Committee recommends the establishment of resilient Y >$1 million
communications networks to Wi-Fi networks across which seamless EBT and non-cash payment
ensure seamless EBT and non- transactions may be made in the event of power outages.
cash payment options
Support and expand design The Planning Committee recommends that design competitions to Y >$1 million
competitions to increase flood explore flood resiliency measures in commercial building systems
resiliency in commercial building be expanded to produce options for a broad range of building types
systems and scales.
Ensure that street reconstruction The Planning Committee recommends that current and future street N N/A
projects incorporate resiliency reconstruction projects in the Planning Area incorporate resiliency
measures measures into street design and landscaping (e.g., increasing

Improve stormwater natural groundcover/permeable paving and investigating sloped

capture and street design to improve drainage).

retention Encourage use of New York The Planning Committee recommends that the City and relevant N N/A

 

State Green Infrastructure Grant
program funds run through DEP

 

nonprofit and business organizations publicize the availability of the
State’s Green Infrastructure Grant program and its potential use in a
variety of green infrastructure projects in the Planning Area.

 

 

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Regional
project Estimated
Strategy Project name Short project description (Y/N) cost
Establish and communicate The Planning Committee recommends that the City and State N N/A
flood protection project establish and communicate flood protection project standards
standards specific to the needs specific to Lower Manhattan communities’ respective needs and
of Lower Manhattan character, including differing neighborhood cultural, ethnic, and
Protect edge communities socioeconomic makeup, as well as architectural and historic
neighborhoods from composition.
coastal flooding Encourage the implementation The Planning Committee recommends that the City and/or State N >$1 million
of a deployable wall system to implement a deployable wall system along four to six blocks of
protect the Canal Street area Hudson Street for protection of the mixed-use neighborhood to the
east of Hudson Street interior as well as the Holland Tunnel entrance/exit portals against a
100-year storm ata minimum, up to a 500-year storm.
Contract with cell service The Planning Committee recommends that the City ensure the N N/A
providers to enhance resiliency resiliency and hardening of cell tower sites in the Planning Area.
and hardening of cell tower sites
Explore potential for use of the The Planning Committee recommends that the City explore options Y N/A
NYCWIN network for key for use of the NYC Wireless Network (NYCWIN) by community-
community organizations during based organizations immediately before, during, and after
emergencies emergency events.
Advocate for the Facilitate electric power The Planning Committee recommends that utility providers Y >$1 million
long-term resiliency restoration through mobile determine locations and construct pre-connections for mobile
and dependability of | electric substations electric substations to facilitate service restoration post-storm
transportation and events.
utility infrastructure Expand funding for New York The Planning Committee recommends that the State expand Y >$1 million

 

City gas stations to install
backup generators in case of
power outages

 

funding for the purchase of backup generators by New York City gas
stations. Under a new State law, all gas stations located within a
half-mile of a highway exit or hurricane evacuation route must have
a backup generator. Under the Fuel NY initiative, grants of up to
$13,000 per station will be provided for the costs of generators, and
the Committee recommends expanding funding availability to
ensure that gas stations in New York City install backup power, and
service disruptions are avoided during and after emergency events.

 

 

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Master table of projects

The master table of projects below includes all Proposed Projects and Featured Projects identified by the NYRCR Lower Manhattan Planning Committee
and larger Community, as described in more detail in Section IV.

Table V-2 : Master table of projects

 

 

 

 

Regional
Project Estimated project
Strategy Project name Short project description Category cost (Y/N)

Improve Community This project would create: (a) one or more local community Proposed $1.5 million N
emergency emergency emergency preparedness coordinators and (b) local Project | to $2 million
preparedness preparedness emergency preparedness programs and plans, throughout the
through enhanced program Planning Area.
coordination and
planning

Community This project would fund: Proposed $10 million N
Ensure CBO /recover i Project to $12
capacity to deliver resource Y | a) Anetwork of hardened community resource/recovery 5] s

: center and CBO centers, to be based out of existing community facilities million
key services to grant program oe ;
local populations and organizations, and
during emergency b) Grants to provide technical and financial assistance
events programs to CBOs to implement the functions of the
community emergency preparedness plans.

Residential This project would fund: (a) the creation of a resiliency Proposed $3.5 million N
Strengthen the resiliency and information assistance center for residential building owners, Project | to $7 million
resiliency of education tenant associations, and building managers, as well as (b)
existing residential program technical assistance and individual counseling and (c)

buildings

 

 

financial assistance for improving the resiliency of residential
buildings.

 

 

 

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

 

 

 

 

 

Regional
Estimated Project project
Strategy Project name Short project description cost Category (Y/N)
Small business This project would fund: (a) the creation of an information $2.25 million | Proposed N
resiliency and and assistance center to connect ground-floor and below- to $3.75 | Project
Empower small education grade small business retailers with existing programs and million
businesses to program resources, as well as offer technical assistance for improving
become more the resiliency of operations and retail spaces; and (b)
resilient financial assistance to help small businesses pay for
technical audits and recommended resiliency upgrades.
Stormwater This project would fund: (a) a study to examine the $2 million | Proposed
capture and feasibility, costs, and benefits for various high-impact Project
retention study stormwater capture and retention approaches in the
Improve Planning Area, followed by (b) the implementation of
stormwater capture recommended scalable pilot projects.
and retention
Wetland creation This project would provide funding to support the creation of $1 million | Proposed N
at East River Park | 2 constructed wetland in East River Park ata new Project
composting facility.
Berming and This Proposed Project would allocate $2 million in funding $2 million | Proposed N
deployable walls toward the construction of the first phase of a system of Project
at Battery Park: berms and adjoining deployable flood barriers at Battery
Phase 1 Park, for protection against a 500-year flood event.
Protect edge construction
neighborhoods Berming and This Featured Project would entail the next phase of $1.8 million | Featured N
from coastal deployable walls implementation as part of Phase 1, as well as conceptual to 3.4 million | Project

flooding

 

at Battery Park:
Phase 2
construction and
future conceptual
design

 

design for future phase(s) of work to the east and west of the
Phase 1 project site.

 

 

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

Regional
Estimated Project project
Strategy Project name Short project description cost Category (Y/N)
Feasibility study This Proposed Project would fund a feasibility study and $750,000 | Proposed N
and design of conceptual design for a targeted strategy that would protect Project
targeted flood the West Street area south of Harrison Street against a 100-
protection year flood event, using interventions at the southernmost
strategy for lower | edge of Hudson River Park and the northern edge of Battery
West Street Park along Battery Place.
Protect edge Implementation of | This Featured Project would fund the implementation of the $8.4 million | Featured N
neighborhoods targeted flood Proposed Project (described above), which could ultimately Project
from coastal protection provide comprehensive flood protection for this area around
flooding strategy for lower lower West Street.
West Street
Coastal This project would fund a feasibility study and conceptual $2 million | Proposed N
protection study design for a series of multipurpose flood barriers for Project

 

for east and west
side

 

protection of the east and west sides of Lower Manhattan
against a 100-year flood event, using measures such as a
raised greenway, berming, and deployable walls.

 

 

 

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Additional materials V-10
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Public engagement process

Public engagement
Public engagement has_- been _ central
to all phases of development of the
Lower Manhattan NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Plan. Through public
engagement and committee meetings, over
200 residents, including Committee members,
elected officials, and professionals participated in
Lower Manhattan NYRCR events. In addition to
engagement through relationship- building inthe
community, the Committee used online tools
such as an online Interactive Community Map to
solicit feedback from community members unable
to attend meetings. The Planning Committee
utilized community guidance and feedback to
identify assets, needs, and ultimately, the projects
that are proposed for funding in the NYRCR Plan.
Continuous public engagement has ensured
that the NYRCR Plan reflects the community’s
priorities for rebuilding and resiliency.

Planning Committee

The Lower Manhattan NYRCR_ Planning
Committee Members are volunteer members
who represent various constituencies within
the Planning Area, including, but not limited to,
residents, business and community leaders, and
community groups.

V-11 Additional materials

assets are located in N¥S Extrame & High Risk

 

Community members provided input at Public Engagement Event #1.

The boundary of the Planning Area underwent
evolution at the beginning of the NYRCR process,
having originally been defined as the area below
Chambers Street on the west side and Frankfort
Street on the east side. Committee members
noted that a much larger area of Manhattan,
south of approximately West 62nd Street along

the Hudson River and East 42nd _ Street on the
East River was vulnerable to natural disasters
associated with climate change during and after
Superstorm Sandy. The Committee ultimately
determined, however, that the area below 14th
Street would be the subject of the planning
process, as local businesses and residents,
experienced particularly acute effects due to
Sandy’s impact in the area, with impacts to the
greater region as well.

The Planning Committee held six Committee
Meetings over the course of seven months.
These meetings were venues for discussion
and often lively debate among the Planning
Committee Members. Members of the public and
representatives of community groups attended
Planning Committee Meetings and contributed
to discussions and information-sharing. At some
meetings, Planning Committee members divided
into break-out groups to provide an intimate
opportunity for collaboration; break-out group
participants would then act as the “experts-on-
hand” for the respective topic and report back to
the general Committee. All Planning Committee
Meetings were announced publicly on the NYRCR
website. Meetings were open to the public and
held at a variety of community facilities throughout
the Lower Manhattan NYRCR Planning Area.

Planning Committee meetings addressed all
topics covered in this Plan. Specific tasks and
discussions held at the meetings included:
identification of community assets; assessment
of needs and opportunities; formalization
of reconstruction and resiliency strategies;
development of priority projects; and finalization

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Community members provided input at Public Engagement Event #1.

of proposed and featured projects. The
Committee spearheaded community outreach
strategy, identifying avenues for outreach to the
Planning Area’s diverse population, and solicited
public feedback throughout the process.

In addition to Planning Committee meetings, the

Planning Committee created five Working Groups.
Four of the Working Groups were structured
to reflect the strategies formalized by the
Planning Committee— Emergency Preparedness,
Residential Resiliency, Open Space Resiliency,
and Small Business Resiliency—and provided
Planning Committee Members an_ additional
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

opportunity to foster discussions on the Proposed
and Featured projects. The fifth Working Group
focused on outreach and planning related to the
Public Engagement Events.

Public Engagement Events

Public Engagement Events were designed to
be highly interactive and maximize community
feedback on the priorities and needs of the
community. Three Public Engagement Events
were held prior to the submission of the

 

Community members provided input at Public Engagement Event #2.

NYRCR Plan. The Planning Committee selected
community-based venues with accessibility and
proximity to targeted stakeholders, including low-
and middle-income residents and seniors. At the
Public Meetings, the Planning Committee offered
general information about the NYRCR_ Plan
process; presented outcomes and information
gathered to-date; and_ solicited feedback
through dynamic discussions and _ interactive
displays. Following each Public Engagement
Event, community feedback was aggregated
and analyzed in order to guide discussion during
Planning Committee meetings.

Public Engagement Event #1

(October 2013)

Program Scope; Goals, and_ Timeline;
Feedback on Vision; Community Assets; and
Needs and Opportunities

Public Engagement Event #1 showcased the
NYRCR Program scope and presented the
Planning Committee’s assessment of community
assets and needs and opportunities. The
Public Engagement Event began with a formal
presentation that introduced NYCRCR_ and
the program’s objectives to the community.
Following the presentation, an open house style
event was held in which Planning Committee
members facilitated group discussion and invited
community input on a number of topics including
identification of assets, needs, opportunities,
and goals as featured on the display boards.
While the public engaged in conversation around
the display boards, they were invited to take
part in interactive exercises by placing stickers
and notes on feedback boards. This feedback
mechanism created a documented record of
community discussion feedback from the Public
Engagement Event for the Planning Committee to
use during future meetings.

Public Engagement Event #2

(December 2013)

Contents of Draft Conceptual Plan; Gathering
Feedback on Strategies and Projects

Public Engagement Event #2 solicited public
responses to priority resiliency strategies
determined by the Planning Committee and
public. The meeting consisted of an introductory
presentation followed by two breakout sessions
in which the public and Planning Committee
members gathered in groups organized by
strategy. Planning Committee members staffed
the breakout tables and led the discussions
on potential strategies. The public was again
invited to gather around display boards around
the room and offer their feedback with stickers

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Community members provided input at Public Engagement Event #3.

and written notes placed on feedback boards.
Community members’ comments at the tables
and on the boards provided powerful guidance to
the Planning Committee on the types of projects
to pursue that address the Lower Manhattan
Community’s greatest priorities and concerns,
and substantially shaped project development

going forward.

Public Engagement Event #3

(March 2014)
Presentation of Proposed and Featured
Projects, and Additional Resiliency

Recommendations; Gathering Feedback on

Additional materials V-14
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Strategies and Projects

The third Public Engagement Event provided
a critical opportunity to share the Proposed
and Featured Projects with the Community and
obtain feedback on these projects. The Lower
Manhattan Committee organized a two-day open
house, held in Community Boards 1, 2, and 3 to
maximize the opportunity for a wide geographic
swath of the public to provide comment.

Public Engagement Event #3 featured an
introductory presentation followed by an open-
house with display boards of the proposed
projects placed throughout the
Community members traveled back-and-forth
between the projects making general inquiries,
engaging in small group conversations, and
voicing their opinions on feedback boards. They
then headed to a voting board and identified
their top five projects with sticker voting. By the
end of the meeting, the voting board displayed a
colorful summary of the community discussions
and members’ perspectives on the projects. The
voting tally was summarized at the next Planning
Committee meeting during deliberations on the
proposed projects.

venue.

Public Engagement Event #4

(April 2014 or TBD)

Presentation of Final Plan and
announcement of projects

Public Engagement Event #4 will take place in
April and conclude the Public Engagement Event
series. At the Public Engagement Event, the
Planning Committee will present the proposed
projects and the NYRCR Plan to the public.

Public Engagement Event
outreach

The Planning Committee spearheaded outreach

for Public Engagement Events. Planning
Committee members leveraged community
distribution channels to distribute emails,

social media, community events, and printed

material—palm cards, flyers, and storefront
posters—with Public Engagement meeting
information. Distribution channels included

Community Boards, local newspapers, business
organizations, local businesses, community
centers and organizations, local schools, religious
intuitions, and word-of-mouth. The Planning
Committee also selected local publications for
online and print advertisement campaigns. The
Lower Manhattan Planning Committee requested
Spanish and Chinese translators for all the Public
Engagement meetings; printed materials were

additionally translated into Spanish and Chinese
with specific mention of translators on hand at
the Public Engagement Events.

Online engagement and social
media outreach

The NYRCR website, located at http://www.
stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr, served as a valuable
public resource. The Lower Manhattan NYRCR
page is located at http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/
nyrcr/community/lower-manhattan and featured
announcements, meeting dates and locations,
and materials produced by the Planning
Committee throughout the process. The NYRCR
website also directed visitors to the NYRCR
Facebook page (located at https://www. facebook.
com/NYStormRecovery) and Twitter account (@
NYStormRecovery). Communities were also able
to submit comments through the NYRCR website
and by emailing info@stormrecovery.ny.gov.

Acustomized interactive online public engagement
tool was generated for the community through
an online Interactive Community Map located
at http://lowermanhattan.nyrisingmap.org/.
The Community Map allowed users to confirm
specific physical and cultural assets significant to
Lower Manhattan, identify recovery and resiliency
needs, and suggest rebuilding and resiliency
initiatives. The Planning Committee distributed
flyers and conducted outreach to promote the
Interactive Community Map. Public comments on
the map were summarized and presented to the
Planning Committee and utilized as an additional
feedback metric.

 

Fest [fee Liheat inferenatior ated Lewes Mastartan'a Community
Recomtruction planning process, plemse vimil Lover Manhattan on
(Hee Mew Veoh, Piling even [tg

Moot thin map

ms ee a

Community members provided input through an online Community Map.

Additional materials

 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

EZ ere
ed

=n
==

=>

cc

=
os -

er

=
o=

or

a

c=

V-16
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Community asset inventory

 

Facilities Serving Vulnerable Populations

TWO BRIDGES SENIOR RESIDENCE

 

Name

TWO BRIDGES TOWER

 

ANDREWS HOTEL

VILLAGE CARE REHABILITATION AND NURSING CENTER

 

ASSOCIATION FOR REHABILITATIVE CASE MANAGEMENT AND HOUSING

WOMEN'S PRISION ASSOCIATION AND HOUSING

 

BAILEY HOUSE

 

BARRIER FREE LIVING

Key Housing Assets: Subsidized Housing

 

BONITAS YOUTH SERVICES

Name

Asset Subcategory

 

CENTERLIGHT HEALTHCARE COMPREHENSIVE CARE CENTER

BARUCH HOUSES (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

CHINATOWN DAY CARE CENTER

CAMPOS PLAZA | (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

COMMUNITY ACCESS HOUSING

CAMPOS PLAZA Il (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

COMMUNITY ACCESS TRANSITIONAL HOUSING PROGRAM

GOUVERNEUR GARDENS (CO-OP)

Multi-Family Residence

 

EVELYN AND LOUIS GREEN RESIDENCE AT COOPER SQ. (JASA)

KNICKERBOCKER VILLAGE (MITCHELL-LAMA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

GEORGE DALY HOUSE

LANDS END I (SECTION 8)

Multi-Family Residence

 

GOUVERNEUR COURT

LANDS END II (SECTION 8)

Multi-Family Residence

 

HARRY AND JEANETTE WEINBERG RESIDENCE (JASA)

LAVANBURG HOMES (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

HELEN'S HOUSE

LOWER EAST SIDE Il (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

HOUSING DEVELOPMENT FUND

LOWER EAST SIDE Ill (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

HOUSING WORKS CYLAR HOUSE

LOWER EAST SIDE REHAB (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

THE HALLMARK BATTERY PARK CITY

RIIS HOUSES (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

JEWISH BOARD OF FAMILY AND CHILDREN'S SERVICES

RIIS HOUSES II (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

LOWER EAST SIDE COALITION HOUSING DEVELOPMENT

SMITH HOUSES (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

MANHATTAN DETENTION COMPLEX

TANYA TOWERS (MITCHELL-LAMA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

METROPOLITAN CORRECTIONAL CENTER

TWO BRIDGES HOUSES (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

NATIONAL CENTER FOR PALLIATIVE CARE INNOVATION (UNDER CONSTRUCTION)

TWO BRIDGES TOWER (SECTION 8)

Multi-Family Residence

 

NEW EAST SIDE NURSING HOME

VILLAGE EAST TOWERS (MITCHELL-LAMA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

PROJECT RENEWAL

WALD HOUSES (NYCHA)

Multi-Family Residence

 

RENEWAL ON THE BOWERY

WEST VILLAGE HOUSES (CO-OP)

 

 

Multi-Family Residence

 

RIDGE STREET GARDENS

 

RIVINGTON HOUSE

 

SACRED HEART CONVENT

 

SALVATION ARMY CHINATOWN CORPS

 

SIROVICH CENTER

 

ST. MARGARET'S HOUSE

 

THIRD STREET WOMEN'S RESIDENCE

 

 

 

 
 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Key Infrastructure Assets

Natural and Cultural Assets

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Name Asset Subcategory Name Asset Subcategory

BATTERY PARK UNDERPASS Transportation BATTERY PARK Parks and Recreation

BROOKLYN BRIDGE Transportation BATTERY PARK CITY BALLFIELDS Parks and Recreation

CHERRY STREET SUBSTATION (CON EDISON) Power Supply BROOKFIELD PLACE PLAZA Open Space

DOWNTOWN HELIPORT Transportation EAST RIVER ESPLANADE Parks and Recreation

GOVERNORS ISLAND FERRY Transportation EAST RIVER PARK Parks and Recreation

HOLLAND TUNNEL Transportation HUDSON RIVER PARK Parks and Recreation

HOUSTON STREET UNDERPASS Transportation IRISH HUNGER MEMORIAL Memorial

HUGH L. CAREY TUNNEL Transportation LOWER EAST SIDE COMMUNITY GARDENS Parks and Recreation
Museums, Performing Arts Centers, and

L TRAIN TUNNEL Transportation MUSEUM OF JEWISH HERITAGE Stadiums

LEONARD STREET SUBSTATION (CON EDISON) Power Supply NATIONAL SEPTEMBER 11 MEMORIAL AND MUSEUM = |Memorial

MANHATTAN BRIDGE Transportation NELSON A. ROCKEFELLER PARK Parks and Recreation

PIER 11 / EAST RIVER FERRY TERMINAL Transportation NEW AMSTERDAM MARKET Natural and Cultural Resources

 

SOUTH STREET SUBSTATION (CON EDISON)

Telecommunications

PIER 25

Parks and Recreation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SOUTH STREET TRUCK ROUTE Transportation PIER 35 ECO-PARK Parks and Open Space
STATEN ISLAND FERRY - WHITEHALL FERRY TERMINAL Transportation PIER 40 Parks and Recreation
VERIZON SWITCHING STATION Power Supply PIER 42 PARK (UNDER CONSTRUCTION) Parks and Recreation
VVORLD TRADE CENTER PATH STATION Transportation POETS HOUSE Cultural or Religious Establishments
Museums, Performing Arts Centers, and
WEST STREET TUCK ROUTE (ROUTE 9A) Transportation SKYSCRAPER MUSEUM Stadiums
Museums, Performing Arts Centers, and
WHITEHALL FERRY TERMINAL Transportation SOUTH STREET SEAPORT MUSEUM Stadiums
Museums, Performing Arts Centers, and
WHITEHALL STATION AND SUBWAY TUNNELS Transportation SOUTH STREET SEAPORT HISTORIC VESSELS Stadiums
WILLIAMSBURG BRIDGE Transportation TEARDROP PARK Parks and Recreation
Museums, Performing Arts Centers, and
13TH STREET SUBSTATION (CON EDISON) Power Supply TRIBECA PERFORMING ARTS CENTER Stadiums

 

140 WEST STREET VERIZON EXCHANGE

Telecommunications

WESTBETH ARTISTS' HOUSING AND CENTER FOR
THE ARTS

 

 

Museums, Performing Arts Centers, and
Stadiums

 

BATTERY PARK CITY FERRY TERMINAL

Transportation

 

BATTERY PARK UNDERPASS

 

Transportation

 

 

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Health and Social Services: Key Emergency Response Assets

SOUVERNEUR HOSPITAL

Key Health Care Center

 

Name

Asset Subcategory

GRAND STREET SETTLEMENT

Key Community Organizations

 

311 OFFICE

Key Community Organizations

HAMILTON MADISON HOUSE

Key Community Organizations

 

BATTERY PARK CITY EMERGENCY MEDICAL OFFICE

Key Health Care Center

HENRY STREET SETTLEMENT

Key Community Organizations

 

BATTERY PARK CITY SENIORS' GROUP

Key Community Organizations

NEW YORK DOWNTOWN HOSPITAL

Key Health Care Center

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BETANCES HEALTH CENTER Key Health Care Center NYPD 1ST PRECINCT TROOP A NYPD Facility
BOWERY RESIDENTS' COMMITTEE (BRC) Key Community Organizations NYPD EMS STATION 4 NYPD Facility
BRECHT FORUM Key Community Organizations NYPD LOWER MANHATTAN CENTER NYPD Facility
CHARLES B. WANG COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTER Key Health Care Center NYPD SERVICE AREA 4 NYPD Facility
CHINESE CONSOLIDATED BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION Key Community Organizations NYPD 5TH PRECINCT NYPD Facility
COMMITTEE AGAINST ANTI-ASIAN VIOLENCE (CAAAV) Key Community Organizations NYPD 6TH PRECINCT NYPD Facility
COMMUNITY BOARD 1 Key Community Organizations NYPD 7TH PRECINCT NYPD Facility
COMMUNITY BOARD 2 Key Community Organizations NYPD 9TH PRECINCT NYPD Facility

 

COMMUNITY BOARD 3

Key Community Organizations

PRIMITIVE CHRISTIAN CHURCH

Key Community Organizations

 

DEWITT REFORMED CHURCH

Key Community Organizations

SARA DELANO ROOSEVELT PARK COALITION
BUILDINGS (VARIOUS SITES)

Key Community Organizations

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OOD OLD LOWER EAST SIDE (GOLES)

 

Key Community Organizations

 

 

DOWNTOWN ALLIANCE Key Community Organizations SEWARD PARK Evacuation Center

FDNY ENGINE 33, LADDER 9 FDNY Facility SEWARD PARK HIGH SCHOOL EVACUATION CENTER |Evacuation Center

FDNY ENGINE 15, LADDER 18 FDNY Facility TWO BRIDGES NEIGHBORHOOD COUNCIL Key Community Organizations

FDNY ENGINE 24, LADDER 5 FDNY Facility UNIVERSITY SETTLEMENT Key Community Organizations
— WORLD TRADE CENTER EMERGENCY MEDICAL

FDNY ENGINE 28, LADDER 11 FDNY Facility OFFICE Key Health Care Center

FDNY ENGINE 4, LADDER 15 FDNY Facility

FDNY ENGINE 5 FDNY Facility

FDNY ENGINE 55 FDNY Facility Key Economic Assets

FDNY SQUAD 18 FDNY Facility Name Asset Subcategory

FDNY LADDER 20 FDNY Facility 55 WATER STREET Employment Hub

FDNY LADDER 8 FDNY Facility BROOKFIELD PLACE Employment Hub

FDNY ENGINE 7, LADDER 1 4.

MANHATTAN BOROUGH COMMAND FDNY Facility NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE Employment Hub

FDNY ENGINE 10, LADDER 10 FDNY Facility PIERA Employment Hub
a: SOUTH STREET SEAPORT AND SEAPORT HISTORIC

FDNY LADDER 3 FDNY Facility DISTRICT Employment Hub

FDNY ENGINE 6 FDNY Facility WORLD TRADE CENTER Employment Hub

FDNY ENGINE 9, LADDER 6 FDNY Facility

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Additional materials V-20
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Appendix A - Existing plans and initiatives

 

Plan/Program

Lead Organization(s)

Description

Recovery Functions

 

Community Planning &
Capacity Building
Economic Development
Health & Social Services
Housing
Infrastructure
Natural & Cultural
Resources

Sub-Category

 

A Stronger More Resilient
New York (SIRR Report)

NYC Office of the Mayor
and various City agencies

Citywide resiliency study proposed numerous initiatives relevant to
Lower Manhattan. Key initiatives include: Install an integrated coastal
protection system in Lower Manhattan; construct physical
enhancements to Water Street; expand Take the H.E.L.M.:
implement planned investments in South Street Seaport; retrofit
public housing units damaged by Sandy and increase future
resiliency of public housing; implement planned and ongoing
investments at city parks and open space: establish a financial
assistance program for small businesses affected by Sandy; and
study feasibility of multipurpose levee on East River (Seaport City).
Many more initiatives relevant to Lower Manhattan and the wider city
are proposed, some of which are underway.

Resiliency

 

The Plan for Lower Manhattan

Lower Manhattan
Development Corporation
(LMDC), NYC Parks &
Recreation Department
(NYCDPR), New York
Police Department (NYPD)

Finalized and ongoing efforts towards waterfront access and park
improvements. LMDC hopes to expand and improve waterfront
access at Peck Slip, Old Slip, Coenties Slip, Montgomery Slip,
Catherine Slip, and Rutgers Slip. Upgrades are necessary for the
Peck, Montgomery, and Catherine Slip medians, Pike/Allen Street
malls, James Madison Park, Bowling Green, Brooklyn Bridge Plaza,
Drumgoole Plaza, Sara D. Roosevelt Park, Washington Market Park,
Wall Street Triangle, Canal Varick, and Collect Pond Park, among
others.

Waterfront
Access / Open
Space

 

World Trade Center
Redevelopment

Lower Manhattan
Development Corporation
(LMDC)

Improvements to the World Trade Center site and connections to the
surrounding area.

Development

 

Fulton Corridor Revitalization
Project

 

Lower Manhattan
Development Corporation
(LMDC)

 

Initiative calls to create and expand open spaces, implement retail
and fagade improvements, and complete streetscape and retail
improvements.

 

Public Realm -
Open Space

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Recovery Functions

 

 

 

 

 

Peels! | IE
< 216 Pls
e Z/lln sjJ= 9
cs slol_|/Pl/=/s 2
a mlelsl/£isjo &
> ols 2|Sla 2
= Fle aI o18ls 4
© o/2 rifle oa
5 8] € los €/5 2
— Sls £le
zat vot 5 (8i3] | |
Plan/Program Lead Organization(s) Description oO jwiz Sub-Category
Greenwich South (Corridor Alliance for Downtown New |The initiative calls for open space improvements, connections Corridor Plan
Plan} York (ADNY} between WTC and Greenwich South, public realm activation,
enhancing connections across Water Street, reimagining Greenwich
Street as a gateway, the study of zoning and real estate development] X |X| |X|X] X
models to prioritize mixed-use development in Greenwich South, and
coherence with community needs.
Water Street: A New Alliance for Downtown New |A proposal to rescale the streetscape of Water Street to create an Public Realm /
Approach (Corridor Plan} York (ADNY} iconic boulevard, strengthen connections to the historic core and Open Space
waterfront, realign public and groundfloor spaces to encourage street x xX] X
life, and extend hours of activity.
Hudson River Park Lower Manhattan Current or imminent park projects include: Pier 26 (boathouse and Waterfront
Development Corporation |restaurant), Center Upland (including a dog run), and Hudson River Access / Open
(LMDC), Hudson River Park Estuarium in Tribeca; Pier 40 infrastructural improvements; Space
Park Trust (HRPT), New Gansevoort Peninsula and Pier 57 in the Meatpacking District; and
York City Planning the expansion of Pier 97 at Clinton Cove. Pier 57 is currently
Commission (CPC), New Jundergoing a review process to be converted to retail, restaurant, x xix] x
York State Department of |commercial, marina, educational, and cultural spaces with estimated
Environmental completion in 2015. Pier 40 has received two bids - from the Durst
Conservation (NYSDEC) Organization and Pier 40 Champions - for revitalization projects
related to retail, commercial, and residential venues.
East River Waterfront NYC Economic The first section of the East River Esplanade from Maiden Lane to Waterfront
Esplanade Development Corporation |Wall Street was completed in 2011. The esplanade will continue to Access / Open
(EDC), Department of City [be upgraded and piers installed. Resiliency measures might be able Space
Planning (DCP}, Lower to be incorporated into sections that are not yet under construction x xX} X

 

Manhattan Development
Corporation (LMDC)

 

such as the section between the Brooklyn and Manhattan Bridges.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Recovery Functions

 

 

 

 

 

2RIE> E
< Qiao 21s
<= B/2la alsl= 3
S wo #/S5
ao gleisl£lsio &
> alolslSlele 2
Seeigislai— 3
§ glels(=lE|§
Eelois| |=|s
zat vot § (3 /3} | FF
Plan/Program Lead Organization(s) Description Oo jw iz Sub-Category
Battery Garden Bikeway Battery Conservancy, Piet |Battery Garden Bikeway will link the Hudson River Park Bikeway to Public Realm
Oudolf the East River Esplanade. Construction on the first phase is
underway with completion of a section expected by the end of 2013.
Later phases and sections of the bikeway may include resiliency xl x
components such as mild elevation or drainage technologies. The
Conservancy is looking to increase the use of salt-tolerant plantings
going forward.
The East River Blueway Plan |Office of Manhattan A community-based waterfront planning initiative for the East River, Waterfront
(Waterfront to the People) Borough President Scott running from the Brooklyn Bridge to 38th Street, will incorporate Access / Open
Stringer, Office of New York|storm recovery, integrate recreational activities, and connect Space
State Assemblymember neighborhoods to the waterfront. Though designed before
Brian Kavanagh, New York |Superstorm Sandy, the design has been adjusted in order to include
State Department of State |more agressive resiliency elements such as a flood wall that would
Division of Coastal protect the Con Edison substation and marsh design to absorb storm x XIX] X
Resources, Community surge energy. As of May 2013, there were no plans in place for
Boards 3 and 6, Lower East/implementation though the borough president has committed $3.5
Side Ecology Center, million to study strategies and feasibility.
LMDC
Comprehensive Citywide New York City Economic Released in March 2011, the study evaluates potential opportunities Transportation
Ferry Study Development Corporation |for ferry expansion in New York City. x| xX
Development of a Community-|Chinatown Working Group |The Chinatown Working Group is spearheading redevelopment Neighborhood
Based Plan (CWG), Lower Manhattan |efforts and generating a community-based plan for Chinatown x Ixdxdxbet x Planning

 

Development Corporation

improvements with support from a 2012 grant from the Lower
Manhattan Development Corporation.

 

(LMDC)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Recovery Functions

 

 

 

 

 

 

a — —
eelele! lol§
& s|3|2|2\ZI5 3
a glelslelsjo 2
> >Ols/Slsle 2
es o/slal% °
ec DlL(7l2I sla 3
= S/ El Sle
Esleis| l=|s
Eolsle 2
oO
Plan/Program Lead Organization(s) Description Oo |wlz Sub-Category
Chinatown Rezoning Plan Coalition to Protect Special Zoning District to Preserve Chinatown and the Lower East Zoning
Chinatown and the Lower |Side is being pursued. Previously, the Chinatown Business and
East Side, Chinatown Property Owners Group contracted with WXY Architecture + Urban
Working Group (CWG), Design to study the implications of rezoning Chinatown. x 1x x
Chinatown Business and
Property Owners Group
Hudson Square: Rezoning, New York City Council, Proposals for Hudson Square's Rezoning and Special District, both Zoning
Special District, and Other Department of City approved March 2013, will add affordable housing units, fund open
Improvements Planning (DCP), space and recreational amenities, and create a K-5 school. Thus far,
Landmarks Preservation half of the petitioned South Village Historic District will be preserved
Commission, Port Authority Jin light of rezoning efforts. Recent updates to Hudson Square also
of New York and New include the Freeman Plaza West opening; 2011 CityBench seating x xixlx
Jersey, Department of additions; 2012 Soho Square redevelopment; the Pedestrian Traffic
Transportation (DOT), etc. |Managers program establishment; ongoing pedestrian safety
improvements at Hudson, Varick, and Canal Streets; and planned
plaza renovations near the Holland Tunnel entrance.
Seaport City New York City Economic [Feasibility study for a multi-purpose levee along Lower Manhattan's Coastal
Development Corporation Jeastern edge to address coastal flooding and create economic Protection /
(EDC) development opportunities. X IXIXIXIX) X economic
Development
Essex Crossing (Seward Park, |Educational Alliance, Grand]$1.1 billion mixed-use development for largest undeveloped City- Development,
Lower East Side), also known |Street Settlement, Mayor's [owned property. Plan will include 1.65 million square feet Housing, Public
as SPURA (Seward Park Office encompassing 1,000 housing units, including 500 affordable housing Realm
Urban Renewal Area) units (with different affordability tiers}; the renovation of Essex
Market; an Educational Alliance school: a community center; a xIxtx x
rooftop urban farm; the Andy Warhol Museum: 250,000 square feet
of offices and retail; retail catered to small businesses; a bowling
alley; and a movie theater. Announced Sept. 2013 with construction
beginning Spring 2015.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Recovery Functions

 

 

 

 

 

 

Do = =
Fzig\s| els
££ S/lln s|/= #
s&s Slo Dlsels v
a ale|sle/eloe&
68] 2/5 2
P2slelalals 2
sc oje r/SIS wo
2 S)E/3 ele“
Eslls =|s
_ - E oO 8\s Zz
Plan/Program Lead Organization(s) Description Oo jui{z Sub-Category
Seaport Pier 17 Mayor's Office, City A three-year project to create a hub comprised of retail, Development,
Reconstruction Council, Community Board Jentertainment, restaurants, bars, an amphitheater, and open space. Waterfront
1, Department of Cultural |The venture will produce over $260 million and provide 1,000 jobs. Access / Open
Affairs, Howard Hughes x x Space
Corporation, Southstreet
Seaport Museum
Paths to Pier 42 0.U.R. Waterfront Pier 42 will be converted into a park based on community input. LES Waterfront
Coalition/Lower East Side |Waterfront Alliance initiated Paths to Pier 42 in summer 2013 to Access / Open
(LES) Waterfront Alliance, |request proposals for art programming and events that will promote Space
the Lower Manhattan waterfront access. Hester Street Collaborative solicits public
Cultural Council, State feedback for the project using its Waterfront on Wheels initiative. x x
Senator Daniel Squadron, |Since March 2012, Two Bridges Neighborhood Council has
New York City Department |generated South Street Stakeholder discussions to brainstorm uses
of Parks and Recreation of the area around Pier 42 and increase access between the
neighborhood and waterfront.
Transforming the East River [City of New York, SHoP A plan for reenvisioning the East River's access and open space Waterfront
Waterfront Architects creation dividing projects into categories by type and location and Access / Open
including Pier 42, Pike/Allen, the Slips, and the Esplanade. A xX} X Space
comprehensive overview of ongoing projects.
Hudson River Park Hudson River Park Trust Nov. 2013 proposal to create a neighborhood improvement district Neighborhood
Neighborhood Improvement |(HRPT), Department of that would generate revenue for Hudson River Park's maintenance Planning
District (NID) Small Business Services __|and operations. Annual per-square-foot charges would be made of x Ix x! x
(SBS) 7.5 cents and 15 cents for residents and commercial property
owners, respectively, located in a three-block radius from the park.
Framework to Preserve Two Bridges Neighborhood |2010 study analyzed preservation and affordability in Chinatown and Housing
Chinatown/Lower East Side Council the Lower East Side. x Ix x

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

Recovery Functions

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a a = —
< = EI e o £
€¢ S/2ln s|=2 4
S S1@l|sl/Zlsla 8
ao ole/S]£Islo &
Ble] S|Elo
22 olf Slal— 2
© o/s xr/Sif wo
2 gs E |S els x
e S|els! |-|s
o -|8is
Plan/Program Lead Organization(s) Description oO |wls Sub-Category
East Side Action Plan Transportation Alternatives, |Recommendations to improve the safety of Manhattan's eastern Transportation
New York State Governor's |corridors (CB3, CB6, CB8, CB11) based on community studies in
Traffic Safety Committee, |2010. x x
National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration
HUD Rebuild by Design US Department of Housing |Design competition, hosted by HUD, seeks to solicit local resiliency Housing,
and Urban Development designs that can provide regional and replicable solutions. In Neighborhood
(HUD), multiple firms November 2013, ten ideas were selected to progress to the next Planning,
round of analysis. Of those proposals, one is particularly relevant to Resiliency
Lower Manhattan: "The Big 'U" proposal from the BIG Team. This
1 : : . X |X|XPX TX] xX
proposal envisions an integrated protection system, wrapping around
Manhattan from West 57th Street down to The Battery and up to East
42nd Street.
TRANSPORTATION & INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
Sandy Recovery and Metropolitan Transportation |Repairs and rehabilitation to critical projects including: Transportation
Resilience Division Authority (MTA) - Rehab / Flood Mitigation for Metropolitan Transportation Authority
(MTA) NYC Transit Lower Manhattan Stations x
- East River Tunnel Rehab and Repair
- Original PATH Station repairs
Hudson River Tunnel Port Authority of NY & NJ = |Hudson River Tunnel Resiliency Retrofits (PATH tubes and Holland Transportation
Resiliency Retrofits (PATH) Tunnel) x
Tunnel and subway repairs Metropolitan Transportation |Repairs to subway stations and tunnels including: Transportation
Authority (MTA) - South Ferry subway station repairs xX

 

 

- Montague Tunnel (R Train)
- Hugh Carey/Battery Tunnel repairs

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Recovery Functions

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Americans for Equality, and
GOLES (Good Old Lower
East Side)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FP! | If
g 2/2/2] o[5l= 8
a ale|s}eyeio &
Oro )ole s
BB O/ls/s/81% 9
ec o/L/ 2 sls 3
Ss] Ele £15 2
ESlol- Els
E Ol16|% z
Plan/Program Lead Organization(s) Description Oo |i}? Sub-Category
DDC Capital Projects NYC Department of Design |Reconstruction of numerous projects including: Public Realm
and Construction (DDC) - Worth Street, Chambers Street, Warren Street, Fulton Street,
Cobble Stone Street, John Street, and Broadway and associated
sewer upgrades x
- Morris Street pedestrian bridge replacement
- Seward Park Sidewalk: Vault Replacement
PATH extension to Newark Port Authority of NY and NJ|The PATH extension to Newark Airport is proposed and likely to be Transportation
Airport (PATH) funded. x
World Trade Center Port Authority of NY and NJ|Construction underway for transportation center that connects to Transportation,
Transportation Hub (PATH) PATH station and Battery Park City Ferry Terminal, is planned to Development
connect to eleven subway lines, Hudson River ferries, the WTC x x
towers, and will include a retail complex.
DOT Resiliency Retrofits New York City DOT Resiliency retrofits to Battery and West Street underpasses x Transportation
DEP Resiliency Retrofits New York City DEP Water and wastewater system resiliency upgrades Xx Utilities
“Go-Green’ initiative - Car Seward Park Co-op, Hertz, |As part of Hertz's car-sharing program and a larger push by the Co- Transportation,
Share Program Manhattan Borough op to undertake sustainable endeavors, in May 2011 Seward Park Housing
President Scott Stringer acquired electric hybrid vehicles and a charging station for use by x x x
tenants as well as non-residents.
Local Spokes (Lower East Two Bridges Neighborhood |A local initiative to promote bicycling in the Lower East Side. The Transportation,
Side-Chinatown Bicycling Council, Hester Street project aims to use feedback from the community to generate a Public Realm
Coalition) Collaborative, Asian conceptual plan for transit. Xx Xx

 

 

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Additional materials V-28
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Appendix B - Risk assessment tool

The following table provides the assets that
were identified through the NYRCR planning
process, which were then evaluated using the
NYS DOS Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment
tool. The table provides the baseline “risk score”
for each asset and the scores for the following
three risk evaluation components: hazard,
exposure, and vulnerability. Hazard scores are
based on each asset’s location relative to NYS

DOS risk areas and the assumption of a 100-
year storm event. Exposure scores are based
on landscape attributes, which were determined
using publicly available data, aerial imagery, and
site reconnaissance. Vulnerability scores are
based on information regarding each asset’s
performance during and after recovery after
Superstorm Sandy and the asset’s current state of
repair as described to the Committee, the public,

and in some instances, agency stakeholders and
reports. More information, including a description
of each table attribute, can be found at http://
stormrecovery.ny.gov/resources-0.
 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
= 2 = s 2 | & =| 8 » | &
s g 2 f1 elt telelzZzié =) 2¢ gl2les
3 = S gz S = 2=]Te¢/e)se)2/)2/2]8:7 sl e]24 18
2 3B 3 3 S sg = s/s] es e/sils] t=. Esl z)/2]e
2 = S eo | & s| 2 “|S
5 a|°
Community Board 1 housing inhigh DOS) i) Housing Multi-Family) vig | No | High} No | Yes} Yes | Yes |No|No}] 1.5 | 3 [250] 2 | 15
risk areas Residence
Community Board 2 housing infligh DOS) i, Iousing Multi-Family) vig | No | High} No | Yes} Yes | Yes |No|No}] 1.5 | 3 [250] 2 | 15
risk areas Residence
Community Board 3 housing inhigh DOS) i ousing Multi-Family) vig | No | High} No | Yes} Yes | Yes |No|No}] 1.5 | 3 [250] 3 | 23
risk areas Residence
Subsidized housing in high DOS risk High |Housing Affordable | 6 1 No | High No | Yes| Yes | Yes |No|No| 1.5 | 3 [250] 4 | 30
areas Housing
Housing serving vulnerable populations | iii) THousing Supportive | ves] No | High} No | Yes} Yes | Yes |No|No] 1.5 [3 [250] 4 | 30
in high risk areas Housing
Economic assets in high DOS risk areas Empl A
centered around the Avenue C/D High — |Economic ae No | No |Highf} No | Yes | Yes} Yes |No| No] 1.5 9 3 |2.50| 3 | 28
commercial corridor
Economic assets in high DOS risk areas Employment
centered around the Canal Street High Economic Mb No No High J No | Yes | Yes | Yes | No] No 1.5 3 72.50] 3 | 23
commercial corridor
Economic assets in high DOS risk areas Employment
centered around the Water/South Street High Economic Mb No No High J No | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | No 1.5 3 72.50] 4 | 30
commercial corridor

 

 

 

 

Meaning of Risk Scores

Severe (>70)
High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
= 2 _ s 2 | & =| 8 » | &
= 8 2 = =| e]e7ele!]2 18 =) eek. el2i]s
“ = g =» |S) 2 ]}E" ]* 2/8 oS] 22 PF] el ele
2 |e] ° [5 “Jel fste 7] |=
5 a|°
Economic assets in high DOS risk areas Employment
centered around the West Street High Economic and No No High J No | Yes | Yes | Yes | No] No 1.5 3 72.50] 2 | 15
commercial corridor
. Natural and Parks and :
Hudson River Park Extreme . No No | High§ No | Yes | Yes | Yes |No| No] 1.5 3 13.50] 3 | 32
Cultural Recreation
Battery Park High [Natural and | Parks and | i, | No | High No | Yes | Yes} Yes |No}No| 1.5 | 3 [250] 4 | 30
Cultural Recreation
East River Park Extreme |Neatural and | Parks and | Ni | No | High No | Yes | Yes] Yes|No}No] 15 [3 [350] 3 | 32
Cultural Recreation
NYPD/FDNY Facilities in high DOS risk Health and | Emergency Yes
High Social Operations/ | No ’ | High f No | Yes | Yes | Yes |No| No] 1.5 3 72.50] 1 8
areas : FEMA
Services Response
states in bt . Health and
Key healthcare facilities in high DOS risk High Social Healthcare No Yes, High | No | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | No 15 3 |o50] 2 | 45
areas : Facilities FEMA
Services
A oa ae Health and
Key community organizations in high . : Community Yes, .
DOS risk areas High oon Centers No FEMA High — No | Yes | Yes | Yes |No| No] 1.5 3 72.50] 3 | 23

 

Meaning of Risk Scores
Severe (>70)

High (24-53
Moderate (6-23

)
)

Residual (<6)

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Additional materials V-32
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Endnotes

1. Five of the 102 localities in the program—
Nlagara, Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and
Montgomery Counties—are not funded
through the CDBG-DR program.

2. Esri. Census 2010 Summary Profile: Lower
Manhattan. Washington: US Census Bu-
reau, 21 Dec 2010. Microsoft Excel file.

3. Esri. Census 2010 Summary Profile: Lower
Manhattan. Washington: US Census Bu-
reau, 21 Dec 2010. Microsoft Excel file.

4. New York City. Department of City Planning.
NYC MapPLUTO 13v2. October 2013. Mic-
rosoft Excel file.

5. Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Housing Summary: Lower Manhat-
tan. Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
2012. Microsoft Excel file.

6. Esri. Census 2010 Summary Profile: Lower
Manhattan. Washington: US Census Bu-
reau, 21 Dec 2010. Microsoft Excel file.

7. Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Population Summary: Lower Manhat-
tan. Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
2012. Microsoft Excel file.

8. Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Summary Profile: Lower Manhattan.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

15.

Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
2012. Microsoft Excel file.

Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Housing Summary: Lower Manhat-
tan. Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
2012. Microsoft Excel file.

Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Housing Summary: Lower Manhat-
tan. Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
2012. Microsoft Excel file.

Mean Lower Low Water is the average
height of the lowest tide recorded at a tide
station each day during a specific recording
period, and is often used as a benchmark for
measuring the height of water levels.

New York City. Special Initiative for Rebuild-
ing and Resiliency. A stronger, More Resilient
New York. 11 June 2013, Web. 10 Mar 2014.

New York City. Special Initiative for Rebuild-
ing and Resiliency. A stronger, More Resil-
ient New York. 11 June 2013, Web. 10 Mar
2014.2014.

New York City. Special Initiative for Rebuild-
ing and Resiliency. A stronger, More Resilient
New York. 11 June 2013, Web. 10 Mar 2014.

“HUB Bound 2012 Travel Data.” New York

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

Metropolitan Transportation Council, Dec
2013. Web.11 Mar 2014.

“Lower Manhattan.” New York City Econom-
ic Development Corporation. NYCEDC, n.d.
Web. 11 Mar 2014.

New York City Housing Authority. “$100
Million+ Coming to NYCHA for Post-Sandy
Boiler Replacement.” New York City Housing
Authority Journal 44(3). April 2014.

“Lower Manhattan.” New York City Econom-
ic Development Corporation. NYCEDC, n.d.
Web. 11 Mar 2014.

“With Recent Tech Leases Totaling 351,000
Square Feet, Report Shows Spike in Growth
for Lower Manhattan’s Tech Sector.”
LaunchLM. LaunchLM, 15 Oct. 2013. Web.
11 Mar 2014.

“Pace University Housing and Residential
Life”. Pace University. Pace University, n.d.
Web. 11 Mar 2014.

New York City. Department of City Planning.
NYC MapPLUTO 13v2. October 2013. Mic-
rosoft Excel file;

Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Housing Summary: Lower Manhat-
tan. Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
23.

24.

25.

26.

2012. Microsoft Excel file.

Rebuild by Design Stage Ill, The BIG “U”
Team. “Promoting Resilience Post-Sandy
through Innovative Planning and Design.” 3
Feb 2014. Presentation.

Green and blue roofs collect rainwater that
is falling on a roof and retain it so that it is
not immediately released into the combined
sewer system, either temporarily or until it
evaporates naturally. Green roofs use veg-
etation and a growing medium to store and
release rainwater, while blue roofs can use
vegetation, storage tanks, or other features
to retain water and release it later.

Construction costs have been provided by
VJ Associates, a construction cost con-
sulting firm. To provide cost estimates that
account for the preliminary level of design
work that has been conducted, conservative
markups were included. As a percentage of
estimated hard costs these include: general
requirement (10%), general contractor over-
head and profit (21%), design contingency
(25%), soft cost allowance (80%), and 3%
annual escalation.

All construction job estimates are based on
local construction cost and construction
wage data, as well as standard industry as-

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

sumptions of labor as a percentage of total
hard costs. Data source is Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Quarterly Census of Employment
and Wages 2012.

Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Population Summary: Lower Manhat-
tan. Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
2012. Microsoft Excel file.

Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Summary Profile: Lower Manhattan.
Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
2012. Microsoft Excel file.

Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Summary Profile: Lower Manhattan.
Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
2012. Microsoft Excel file.

Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Summary Profile: Lower Manhattan.
Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
2012. Microsoft Excel file.

Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Summary Profile: Lower Manhattan.
Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
2012. Microsoft Excel file.

Esri. 2007-2011 American Community
Survey Summary Profile: Lower Manhattan.

33.

34.

Washington: US Census Bureau, 6 Dec
2012. Microsoft Excel file. New York City.
Department of City Planning. NYC MapPLU-
TO 13v2. October 2013. Microsoft Excel file.

Rebuild by Design Stage Ill, The BIG “U”
Team. “Promoting Resilience Post-Sandy
through Innovative Planning and Design.” 3
Feb 2014. Presentation.

A composting windrow is a row of com-
postable material that is arranged linear-

ly while it is undergoing the composting
process. It is used to improve the efficiency
and effectiveness of large-scale composting
operations. Photovoltaic cells generate elec-
tricity by converting solar radiation directly
into electrical power.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Glossary

ABFE

Advisory Base Flood Elevation

The preliminary published computed elevation
resulting from floodwater that has a 1% chance
of equaling or exceeding that level in a given
year.

ACS

United States Census Bureau American
Community Survey

A continuous survey provided by the
United States Census Bureau that provides

demographic data between decennial censuses.

ADA

Americans with Disabilities Act

A law enacted by U.S. Congress that
prohibits discrimination against people with
disabilities in employment, transportation,
public accommodation, communications, and
government activities.

ADNY

Alliance for Downtown New York

A not-for-profit organization that manages
the Downtown-Lower Manhattan Business
Improvement District.

BPCA

Battery Park City Authority

A New York State public benefit corporation
responsible for the creation and maintenance of

Battery Park City.

CBO

Community-Based Organization

A not-for-profit organization that operates within
a local community.

CDBG-DR

Community Development Block Grant-Disaster
Recovery

Federal grants administered by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) and allocated to cities, counties and
States to facilitate rebuilding and recovery of
disaster areas as designated by the President of
the United States.

CDCs

Community Development Corporations

A not-for-profit organization that provides
services to promote and support community
development.

CERT

Community Emergency Response Team

An organization composed of volunteers trained
and tasked to provide supplementary emergency
care during a major disaster.

Con Ed Consolidated Edison

An investor-owned energy company that
provides utility services to New York City and
Westchester County, New York.

DASC

Disaster Assistance Service Center

A temporary center established and designed
by New York City Office of Emergency
Preparedness (NYC OEM) to provide an array
of resources for victims and evacuees after a
disaster.

DHSES

Division of Homeland Security and Emergency
Services

The New York State governmental agency
responsible for coordination of efforts around
counter terrorism, emergency managemert, fire
prevention and control, and interoperable and
emergency communications.

FDNY

Fire Department of New York

The New York City governmental agency
responsible for providing first responders to
fires, public safety and emergency situations,
disasters, and terrorist acts.

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency
An agency within the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security responsible for the
coordination of the response to a state-of
emergency-declared-disaster.
FIRMs

Flood Insurance Rate Maps

The official map of a community used by
FEMA to delineate a community’s Base
Flood Elevations, flood zones, and floodplain
boundaries.

HRPT

Hudson River Park Trust

A public benefit corporation responsible for the
construction and maintenance of the Hudson
River Park.

HUD

United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development

The U.S. federal government executive
department responsible for executing federal
policies on housing and metropolises.

HVAC
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning

The technology of indoor environmental control.

LES Ready!

Lower East Side Long-Term Recovery Group
A coalition of community groups and
organizations that provides education and
training in emergency preparedness and
coordinated emergency services during a
disaster.

LMCCC

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Lower Manhattan Construction Command
Center

A joint City and State agency that provided
construction and environmental coordination
and oversight in Lower Manhattan, south of
Canal Street.

LMDC

Lower Manhattan Development Corporation
A joint State-City corporation created in the
aftermath of September 11, 2001, to coordinate
rebuilding and revitalization in Lower Manhattan.

MTA

Metropolitan Transportation Authority

A public benefit corporation responsible for
providing public transportation in 12 counties
in southeastern New York and two counties in
southwestern Connecticut.

NFIP

National Flood Insurance Program

A FEMA-run program that provides government-
sponsored flood insurance to homeowners,
renters and business owners.

NPCC

New York City Panel on Climate Change

An Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
convened by Mayor Michael Bloomberg in
August 2008 as part of PlaNYC, the City’s long-
term sustainability plan.

NYC DEP

New York City Department of Environmental
Protection

The New York City governmental agency
responsible for providing the City’s water supply;
managing the City’s wastewater system; and
regulating the City’s environment, including

air quality, hazardous waste, and quality of life
issues.

NYC DOB

New York City Department of Buildings

The New York City governmental agency
responsible for the enforcement of building
codes and zoning regulations; the issuance of
building permits; and the inspection of new and
existing buildings.

NYC DOT

New York City Department of Transportation
The New York City governmental agency
responsible for the management of the City’s
transportation infrastructure.

NYC DPR

New York City Department of Parks and
Recreation

The New York City governmental agency
responsible for the management of City parks,
monuments, and historic house museums; the
preservation of the City’s ecological diversity;
and the provider of recreational and athletic
facilities and programs.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

NYC HPD

New York City Department of Housing
Preservation and Development

The New York City governmental agency
responsible for the development and
maintenance of the City’s housing stock.

NYC OEM

New York City Office of Emergency
Management

The New York City governmental agency
responsible for preparation, coordination and

education of emergency response and recovery.

NYCEDC

New York City Economic Development
Corporation

The City’s official economic development
organization charged with leveraging the City’s
assets to promote economic growth.

NYCHA

New York City Housing Authority

A public authority responsible for administering
public housing for low- and moderate-income
residents in New York City.

NYPD

New York City Police Department

The New York City governmental agency
responsible for law enforcement and
investigation within the City.

NYS DEC

New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation

The New York State governmental agency
responsible for the conservation, improvement,
and protection of natural resources; the
management of State owned lands; and the

regulation of environmental laws and regulations.

NYS DHSES

Division of Homeland Security and
Emergency Services

The New York State governmental agency
responsible for coordination and support of
counter terrorism, emergency managemert, fire
prevention and control, and interoperable and
emergency communications.

NYS DOS

New York State Department of State

The New York State governmental agency
responsible for strategic investment in the
revitalization and economic growth of regions.

NYS DOT

New York State Department of Transportation
The New York State governmental agency
responsible for the development and
management of State transportation
infrastructure.

NYS SHPO

New York State’s Historic Preservation Office
The New York State governmental agency
responsible for helping identify, evaluate,
preserve, and revitalize historic, archeological,
and cultural resources.

NYSERDA

New York State Energy Research Authority

A public benefit corporation tasked with helping
New Yorkers increase energy efficiency via the
implementation of reduced consumption and the
use of renewable energy sources.

PANYNJ

Port Authority of New York and New Jersey

A joint agency between the States of New York
and New Jersey responsible for the development
and maintenance of regional transportation and
the World Trade Center site.

PATH
Port Authority Trans-Hudson

A rapid transit railroad administered by the
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey
that provides service northern New Jersey and
Manhattan.

RFP

Request for Proposals

A bidding process by which an agency or
business outlines a procurement of services
needed and accepts solicitations from potential
suppliers.

SIRR Report

A Stronger, More Resilient New York

A comprehensive City plan commissioned by
former Mayor Michael Bloomberg detailing
actionable recommendations for the rebuilding
and increased resiliency of communities and
infrastructure impacted by Superstorm Sandy.

USACE

United States Army Corps of Engineers

The U.S. Federal agency under the Department
of Defense composed of civilian and military
personnel and respondible for providing public
and military engineering services.

USCG
United States Coast Guard

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

A branch of the United States Armed Forces
that operates under the U.S. Department

of Homeland that provides maritime law
enforcement.
 
