NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

O A K D A L E / W E S T S AY V I L L E
SOUTH

WILDLIFE SUBURBAN

HISTORIC CHARACTER

restaurants

NATURAL PRESERVES

BAYARD CUTTING ARBORETUM

Improvement Societies

CONNETQUOT RIVER

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

historic character
CHAMBER OF

SUBURBAN COMMERCE
RESTAURANTS

south bay

WATER FRONT

LIVING

south bay WILDLIFE

BAYARD CUTTING ARBORETUM

CIVIC ASSOCIATION
natural

preserves

IMPROVEMENT

SOCIETIES
SUBURBAN

WILDLIFE

WATERFRONT

LIVING

historic

WATERFRONT LIVING VISION SOUTH BAY
RESTAURANTS COMMUNITY CONNETQUOT RIVER
HISTORIC CHARACTER NATURAL PRESERVES
CIVIC ASSOCIATION NEIGHBORS IMPROVEMENT
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE WATERFRONT LIVING

SOUTH

BAY

CIVIC
RIVER
WILDLIFE

SUBURBAN

VISION

BAYARD

CUTTING

ARBORETUM

SOUTH BAY

improvement

societies

neighborhoods

CHAMBER OF

COMMERCE

historic

character

NATURAL PRESERVES

NEIGHBORHOODS

SUBURBAN

WATER FRONT

LIVING

BAY
natural
preserves

south bay

HISTORIC
CHARACTER

WATERFRONT

LIVING

SUBURBAN

RESTAURANTS

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

CONNETQUOT

RIVER

VISION

CIVIC

ASSOCIATION

historic character

NEIGHBORHOODS

BAYARD CUTTING

ARBORETUM

neighborhoods
improvement

COM M UNIT Y HISTORIC CHARACTER

neighborhoods

chamber of commerce
COMMUNITY
IMPROVEMENT SOCIETIES

NATURAL PRESERVES south bay

societies restaurants SUBURBAN
NATURAL PRESERVES
CIVIC ASSOCIATION LIVING
WILDLIFE
WATER FRONT

SOUTH BAY SUBURBAN

NATURAL PRESERVES CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
WILDLIFE HISTORIC CHARACTER CONNETQUOT RIVE
BAYARD CUTTING ARBORETUM RESTAURANTS SOUTH
IMPROVEMENT SOCIETIES COMMUNITY SUBURBAN W
CIVIC ASSOCIATION HISTORIC CHARACTER NATURAL P

MARCH 2014

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 1: Committee Member List

Committee Role

Oakdale/West Sayville NYRCR Committee
Name
Committee Role

Co‐Chair
Richard Remmer
Co‐Chair
Ron Beattie
Member
Brian Bast
Member
Brian Browne
Member
Raymond Carta
Member
Cathline Cohen
Member
Mark DeAngelis
Member
Jamie Flynn
Member
Brendan McCurdy
Member
George Munkenbeck, Jr.
Member
Mark Murray
*Non‐voting member

Name

Member
Member
Member
Member

Monica Musetti‐ Carlin
Clyde Payne
Carol Schwasnick
Allen Seeley

Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative
Municipal Representative

Ben Monachino *
Bryan Bortzfield *
Anthony D'Amico *
Tom Marquardt *
Ann Mendes *
Joe Montuori *
Tom Owens *

This document was developed by the NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Planning Committee as part of the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program within the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is supported by NYS Homes
and Community Renewal, NYS Department of State, and NYS Department of Transportation. The document was prepared by the
following consultant firms:


Jacobs Engineering



Cameron Engineering and Associates, LLP

Page | i

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Foreword
Introduction
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in August 2011,
the State of New York experienced three extreme weather events.
Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked
havoc on the lives of New Yorkers and their communities. These
tragic disasters signaled that New Yorkers are living in a new reality
defined by rising sea levels and extreme weather events that will
occur with increased frequency and power. They also signaled that
we need to rebuild our communities in a way that will mitigate
against future risks and build increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo led the
charge to develop an innovative, community‐driven planning
program on a scale unprecedented and with resources unparalleled.
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program
empowers the State’s most impacted communities with the
technical expertise needed to develop thorough and implementable
reconstruction plans to build physically, socially, and economically
resilient and sustainable communities.
Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo in April of
2013, is a more than $650 million planning and implementation
process established to provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance
to communities severely damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical
Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy. Drawing on lessons learned from

Foreword

past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program is a unique combination
of bottom‐up community participation and State‐provided technical
expertise. This powerful combination recognizes not only that
community members are best positioned to assess the needs and
opportunities of the places where they live and work, but also that
decisions are best made when they are grounded in rigorous
analysis and informed by the latest innovative solutions.
One hundred and two storm‐affected localities across the State
were originally designated to participate in the NYRCR Program. The
State has allocated each locality between $3 million and $25 million
to implement eligible projects identified in the NYRCR Plan. The
funding for these projects is provided through the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community
Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG‐DR) program.1
Forty‐five NYRCR Communities, each comprising one or more of the
102 localities, were created and led by a NYRCR Planning Committee
composed of local residents, business owners, and civic leaders.
Members of the Planning Committees were identified in
consultation with established local leaders, community
organizations, and in some cases municipalities. The NYRCR
Program sets a new standard for community participation in
recovery and resiliency planning, with community members leading
the planning process. Across the State, more than 500 New Yorkers
represent their communities by serving on Planning Committees.
1

Five of the 102 localities in the program—Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida,
Madison, and Montgomery Counties—are not funded through the CDBG‐
DR program.

Page | ii

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
More than 400 Planning Committee Meetings have been held,
during which Planning Committee members worked with the State’s
NYRCR Program team to develop community reconstruction plans
and identify opportunities to make their communities more
resilient. All meetings were open to the public. An additional 125‐
plus Public Engagement Events attracted thousands of community
members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR planning process
and proposals. The NYRCR Program’s outreach has included
communities that are traditionally underrepresented, such as
immigrant populations and students. All planning materials are
posted on the NYRCR Program’s website
(www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several ways for
community members and the public to submit feedback on
materials in progress.
Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were
supported by staff from the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery
(GOSR), planners from New York State (NYS) Department of State
(DOS) and NYS Department of Transportation (DOT), and
consultants from world‐class planning firms that specialize in
engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green infrastructure, and
more.
With the January 2014 announcement of the NYRCR Program’s
expansion to include 22 new localities, the program comprises over
2.7 million New Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which
is equivalent to 14% of the overall State population and 12% of the
State’s overall geography.

Foreword

The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR Plan. Governor
Cuomo has allocated over $650 million of funding to the program
for implementing projects identified in the NYRCR Plans. NYRCR
Communities are also eligible for additional funds through the
program’s NY Rising to the Top Competition, which evaluates
NYRCR Communities across eight categories, including best use of
technology in the planning process, best approach to resilient
economic growth, and best use of green infrastructure to bolster
resilience. The winning NYRCR Community in each category will be
allocated an additional $3 million of implementation funding. The
NYRCR Program is also working with both private and public
institutions to identify existing funding sources and create new
funding opportunities where none existed before.
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated with State and
Federal agencies to help guide the development of feasible projects.
The program has leveraged the Regional Economic Development
Council’s State Agency Review Teams (SARTs), comprised of
representatives from dozens of State agencies and authorities, for
feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR Communities. The SARTs
review projects with an eye toward regulatory and permitting
needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources.
The NYRCR Program is continuing to work with the SARTs to
streamline the permitting process and ensure shovels are in the
ground as quickly as possible.

Page | iii

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
On the pages that follow, you will see the results of months of
thoughtful, diligent work by NYRCR Planning Committees,
passionately committed to realizing brighter, more resilient futures
for their communities.
The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more
resilient community. Each NYRCR Planning Committee began the
planning process by defining the scope of its planning area,
assessing storm damage, and identifying critical issues. Next, the
Planning Committee inventoried critical assets in the community
and assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On the basis of this work,
the Planning Committee described recovery and resiliency needs
and identified opportunities. The Planning Committee then
developed a series of comprehensive reconstruction and resiliency
strategies, and identified projects and implementation actions to
help fulfill those strategies.
The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan are divided
into three categories. The order in which the projects and actions
are listed in this NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the
NYRCR Community’s prioritization of these projects and actions.
Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding through a
NYRCR Community’s allocation of CDBG‐DR funding. Featured
Projects are projects and actions that the Planning Committee has
identified as important resiliency recommendations and has
analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through the
NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are
projects and actions that the Planning Committee would like to

Foreword

highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects or
Featured Projects. The Proposed Projects and Featured Projects
found in this NYRCR Plan were voted for inclusion by official voting
members of the Planning Committee. Those voting members with
conflicts of interest recused themselves from voting on any affected
projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics Handbook and Code of
Conduct.
NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville is eligible for up to $3.0 million in
CDBG‐DR implementation funds.
While developing projects for inclusion in this NYRCR Plan, Planning
Committees took into account cost estimates, cost‐benefit analyses,
the effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and
critical assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning
Committees also considered the potential likelihood that a project
or action would be eligible for CDBG‐DR funding. Projects and
actions implemented with this source of Federal funding must fall
into a Federally‐designated eligible activity category, fulfill a
national objective (meeting an urgent need, removing slums and
blight, or benefiting low to moderate income individuals), and have
a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding is linked. These are
among the factors that the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery will
consider, in consultation with local municipalities and nonprofit
organizations, when determining which projects and actions are
best positioned for implementation.

Page | iv

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan exceeds the
NYRCR Community’s CDBG‐DR allocation to allow for flexibility if
some Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to
environmental review, HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other
factors. Implementation of the projects and actions found in this
NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State, and local laws
and regulations, including the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan does not
guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for
CDBG‐DR funding or that it will be implemented. The Governor’s
Office of Storm Recovery will actively seek to match projects with
funding sources.
In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions
outlined in this NYRCR Plan will become a reality helping New York
not only to rebuild, but also to build back better.
Note: map includes those NYRCR Communities funded through the
CDBG‐DR program, including the NYRCR Communities announced in
January 2014.

Foreword

Page | v

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ..................................................................... ES‐1
Section 1.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Community Overview ........................................................ 1

Geographic Scope of the NYRCR Plan ...................................... 11
Description of Storm Damage .................................................. 15
Critical Issues ............................................................................ 20
Community Vision .................................................................... 21
Relationship to Regional Plans ................................................. 22

Section 2.

Assessment of Risk and Needs ......................................... 31

A. Description of Community Assets and Assessment of Risk ..... 32
i. Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems .................................. 42
B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities................................. 49
Section 3.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies ........................ 55

A. Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies ................................ 56
Section 4.

Implementation ‐ Project Profiles .................................... 71

Proposed Project: “Living” Marsh – Grand Canal Levee
Improvement ............................................................................... 75
Proposed Project: Public Access to the Waterfront and Coastal
Restoration ................................................................................... 79
Proposed Project: Infrastructure Hardening: Raising Roads ............... 83
Proposed Project: Backflow Prevention/Check Valves for Storm
Drainage Systems ......................................................................... 87
Proposed Project: Emergency Shelter: Identification and Hardening . 91
Proposed Project: Annual Education/Coordination ............................ 94
Proposed Project: Community Sustainability/Energy Conservation ... 97

Proposed Project: Enhanced Electronic Mapping/Emergency
Management System .................................................................. 100
Proposed Project: Multimodal Transportation/Tourism
Development .............................................................................. 103
Proposed Project: Electrical System Isolation Switches/ Smart
Meter Feasibility Study ............................................................... 106
Proposed Project: Oakdale Central Business District Master
Implementation Plan .................................................................. 109
Featured Project: Wastewater Collection and Treatment System .... 111
Featured Project: Oakdale Central Business District
Revitalization Program ............................................................... 115
Section 5.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.

Additional Materials ....................................................... 118

Additional Resiliency Recommendations ............................... 119
Master Table of Projects ........................................................ 127
Public Engagement Process .................................................... 141
Community Asset Inventory ................................................... 147
Glossary .................................................................................. 157
End Notes ............................................................................... 160

Page | vi

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table of Tables
Table 1: Committee Member List ......................................................... i
Table 2: Economic Resources ............................................................ 37
Table 3: Fire Stations ......................................................................... 38
Table 4: Federal Non‐Recreation Areas .............................................38
Table 5: NYS OPWDD State and Voluntary Program Locations ........38
Table 6: Post Offices........................................................................... 39
Table 7: Religious Institutions ............................................................ 39
Table 8: Schools ................................................................................. 39
Table 9: State‐owned Buildings and Properties .................................39
Table 10: Housing Resources ............................................................. 40
Table 11: Bridges in Poor Condition................................................... 40
Table 12: Critical Bridges.................................................................... 40
Table 13: Infrastructure Resources .................................................... 41
Table 14: Parkland Resources ............................................................ 41
Table 15: Natural Resources .............................................................. 42
Table 16: National Register Listed Historic Resources .......................42
Table 17: Risk Scores .......................................................................... 47
Table 18: Needs and Opportunities ................................................... 53
Table 19: Strategy .............................................................................. 57
Table 20: Strategy .............................................................................. 58
Table 21: Strategy .............................................................................. 59
Table 22: Strategy .............................................................................. 61
Table 23: Strategy .............................................................................. 63
Table 24: Strategy .............................................................................. 64
Table 25: Strategy .............................................................................. 65

Table 26: Strategy ............................................................................. 66
Table 27: Strategy.............................................................................. 67
Table 28: Strategy.............................................................................. 68
Table 29: Strategy.............................................................................. 69
Table 30: Strategy.............................................................................. 70
Table 31: Additional Resiliency Recommendations ........................ 119
Table 32: Master Project Table ....................................................... 127
Table 33: Risk Assessment Tables ................................................... 150

Table of Figures
Figure 1: Geographic Location Map .................................................. 12
Figure 2: Risk Assessment Map ......................................................... 46
Figure 3: Asset Map ........................................................................... 48
Figure 4: Living Marsh – Grand Canal Levee Improvement .............. 75
Figure 5: Infrastructure Hardening Locations #1 .............................. 83
Figure 6: Infrastructure Hardening Locations #2 .............................. 84
Figure 7: FEMA Emergency Supply List ............................................. 94
Figure 8: Depicts sustainable energy practices ................................. 97
Figure 9: Virtual Meeting................................................................. 145

Page | vii

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Executive Summary
Overview of NY Rising Community Reconstruction Community:
Oakdale/West Sayville
NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Oakdale/West Sayville
Community (Community) is one of eight NYRCR Communities in
Suffolk County. The Community is composed of two distinct hamlets,
Oakdale and West Sayville, both located along the South Shore of Long
Island in the Town of Islip, Suffolk County, New York. Up to $3 million
has been allocated for resiliency projects within this Community.

institutions include the fire department, ambulance company, school
district (partially), and several religious and fraternal organizations.
The combined population within the Oakdale and West Sayville U.S.
Census Designated Place population in 2010 was about 13,000. The
2010 Census reported a total of 5,400 housing units.

Oakdale and West Sayville are situated between the Connetquot River
to the west, Green’s Creek to the east, and the Great South Bay to the
south. Adjoining communities include Great River, Bohemia, and
Sayville. A small portion of the NYRCR Community located east of
Green’s Creek is situated in the hamlet of Sayville.

The Jacob Ockers House is part of the history and identity of both
Oakdale and West Sayville and their mutual connection to the Great
South Bay. While the house is located in Oakdale, Jacobs Ockers
operated the world famous Bluepoints Clam and Oyster Company a
short distance away in West Sayville. The house has been restored to
how it appeared in 1911, when occupied by the Jacob Ockers family.
(Photo credit: T. Marquardt)

The Communities are linked in several ways. They are adjoining coastal
communities with shared histories and common institutions. The

Executive Summary

Page | ES‐1

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The effects of Superstorm Sandy on Oakdale and West Sayville were
significant. At the highest point of inundation, much of Oakdale south
of Montauk Highway was flooded. Flooding was equal to the expected
impacts of a Category Two hurricane, despite the fact that Superstorm
Sandy was not at hurricane level when it made landfall on Long Island.
The area of inundation in Oakdale was over one square mile and
extended a mile inland along Edgewood Avenue.

Along Green’s Creek, flooding occurred on both sides of the creek
affecting properties in both West Sayville and Sayville. Flooded roads
on the Sayville side included West Lane, Anita Drive, Palmer Circle,
Sunset Drive, and Montauk Highway (Main Street). Throughout the
communities, a high number of trees and power lines were down. In
many cases, roads were impassable to homeowners, police, fire
rescue, and other emergency responders.

Further to the east in Oakdale, the West Oak Recreation Club (WORC),
a seasonal residential community, experienced extensive inundation.
Many of the dwellings were damaged and property was destroyed. In
West Sayville, the streets along the waterfront were flooded including
West Avenue, Shore Road, and Clyde Street.

Widespread damage occurred to many coastal facilities including
docks, marinas, and bulk heading. The Town of Islip reported damage
to the West Avenue Dock in West Sayville including damage to
decking, the parking lot, electrical and water supplies, and a need for
dredging due to increase sedimentation from bay bottom movement
and the undermining of solid fill piers.
Communications were also severely affected by Superstorm Sandy.
Both landline and cellular services were unavailable for different
periods of time. This was a major issue to the Community and a
significant impediment to response efforts during the storm and
recovery efforts afterward.

Flooded roads and properties during Superstorm Sandy, east of
Green’s Creek
(Photo credit: M. DeAngelis)

Executive Summary

Page | ES‐2

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Damage and debris following Superstorm Sandy at the Snapper Inn
Restaurant, Oakdale
(Photo credit: R. Remmer)

Superstorm Sandy also affected the availability of gasoline and diesel
fuel. This was both a local issue as well as a regional one. Locally, many
area fuel stations were without electric power and were unable to
operate fuel‐dispensing pumps. Later, after power was restored,
supplies were quickly exhausted. “Gas lines” (hours‐long lines of
people waiting to fuel their cars) were common for over a week until
the Suffolk County Executive issued an order mandating rationing by
license plate number. The local supply issue was exacerbated by the
closure of the ports where fuel is typically delivered by barge or
tanker.

Executive Summary

The Oakdale and West Sayville communities identified a variety of
resiliency issues relating both to protecting the life and safety of
community members in the face of future storm event and to the
strength of the local economy and its ability to bounce back following a
disruptive disaster event. Some of the most significant and widespread
issues identified included:
 Lack of storm preparedness and communication of risk to all
members of the community including vulnerable populations;
 Need for evacuation routes and pre‐stocked shelters within the
community;
 Reduction of repetitive flooding of roads and properties from tidal
surges and severe rainfall events to protect life safety and property;
 Need for hazard mitigation measures for utilities that are critical in
the aftermath of an event—electric, gas, and communications;
 Improved development in Oakdale along Montauk Highway to
strengthen the business district, increase the tax base, create jobs,
and grow the local economy;
 While the visible damage for the businesses along Montauk
Highway in Oakdale was not devastating, the economic damage was
substantial;
 Better access to the waterfront and reinforcement of the maritime
heritage;
 Protection of the natural environment and utilization of resiliency
techniques that work with, rather than against, natural processes; and
 An overall regional focus to the planning process including to
transportation, power, communications, and economic issues.

Page | ES‐3

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
NYRCR Program: Community‐Driven Process
The development of a Community Vision Statement was a critical early
step for the NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Planning Committee. It was
a means of introducing the Committee to the planning process and to
enable them to look beyond the immediate recovery from Superstorm
Sandy. The process to develop the Statement was as important as the
Statement itself. It was a process that involved all members of the
Committee with direct input from the Community. This was
accomplished at the first Public Engagement Event held by the
Committee in the first month of the Committee’s deliberations. The
Statement served as a benchmark for all strategies and projects later
identified in the development of the Final Plan.
Community Vision Statement
Oakdale and West Sayville will be communities with a “greener” and
more sustainable future with hazard resistant buildings and
infrastructure and well‐functioning natural systems that can prevent
or minimize damage to life and property and the disruption of critical
services. The rich history of the communities, the spectacular public
and private spaces, emphasizing the importance of the health of our
waterways and coastal proximity will guide future development with
downtown identities which will focus on the essential character and
charm of Oakdale and West Sayville.

Executive Summary

NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Public Engagement Event
(Photo credit: Consultant team)

The Public Engagement Process did not end with the development of
the Vision Statement. In keeping with Governor Cuomo’s emphasis on
bottom‐up planning, members of the Community were involved in each
step of the NYRCR Program. The NYRCR Committee was composed of
residents who could speak directly from experience of the character of
the community, its needs, and strengths in good times and bad. Ten
Committee meetings have been held as of March 31, 2014. All
Committee meetings were open to the public with meeting dates and
times posted on the NYRCR website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr).


The community at‐large was invited to take part in the NYRCR
Program through a variety of methods. Their feedback was
reviewed by the Committee and incorporated into the decision‐
making that informed the development of this Plan. Engagement
activities included several in‐person and web‐based opportunities
for participation:

Page | ES‐4

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Three open‐house style events were held during the
development of the plan and a forth will be held to present
this final document. In total, hundreds of residents attended
the events;
o Residents were encouraged to complete a web‐based survey
to gauge public opinion on the Proposed Projects in
conjunction with Public Engagement Event #3;
o Younger members of the community were invited to
participated in a web‐based “Next Generation” survey to
gather feedback on proposed projects that would likely affect
their futures in the Community; and
o The NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville website
(http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr/community/oakdale‐
west‐sayville) served as a repository for downloadable
versions of all public information and event notifications. The
website includes an area to accept public comment.
Planning information was disseminated through local print media
to keep the Community informed and respond to media inquiries;
E‐mail comments and requests for information could be sent to
the State’s e‐mail address at: info@stormrecovery.ny.gov; and
Comment forms were available at Committee meetings and public
engagement events and on the State’s website to provide an
opportunity for the public to contribute their feedback.
o





Executive Summary

NYRCR Final Pan: A Blueprint for Resiliency

An asset risk assessment was conducted for the Community to identify
those resources, both built and natural, which are critical to the safety,
resiliency, and character of the Community and establish the potential
for future damage to the assets (risk.) Identification of risks to critical
assets provided the framework within which resiliency strategies were
developed. Strategies are general approaches to types of projects,
programs, policies, or other actions that specifically address an
identifiable need or leverage an existing opportunity within the
Community. For every need or opportunity, potential strategies were
generated for each resiliency issue. The list of strategies spanned an
array of methodologies and timeframes, from preparedness to
retrofits, from immediate procedural improvements to long‐range
capital investment programs.

Page | ES‐5

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG‐DR)
program established by the Federal government.
An example of a Proposed Project recommended by the Committee is
the raising of roads elevations in Extreme Risk Areas. The project
implements a strategy to protect infrastructure improvements in the
Community through the protection of a high value asset, secondary
roads.
The following table presents a summary of the Proposed and Featured
Projects for the NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Community by Strategy.
West Sayville/Oakdale Fire Department
(Photo credit: T. Marquardt)

Projects are the path to executing the strategies and meeting the
Community’s need for resiliency. Three tiers of projects were
identified: Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional
Resiliency Recommendations.
Proposed Projects are projects that are proposed for funding through
the Community’s allocation of Community Development Block Grant
Disaster Relief (CDBG‐DR) funding. Featured Projects are innovative
projects consisting of an initial study or discrete first phase of the
project for CDBG‐DR funding or other identified funding; and
regulatory reforms and other programs that do not include capital
expenditures. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are projects
and actions the Committee would like to highlight and are not
categorized as Proposed or Featured Projects. It is important to note
that there is no priority order or ranking of projects aside from the
project tier, which is derived solely from the requirements of the

Executive Summary

Page | ES‐6

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Resiliency Projects
Strategy
Project Name
Investigate conservation and management measures to protect
Living Marsh‐Grand Canal Levee Improvement
and improve the natural environment
Reduce inflow of tidal surges
Check Valves on Drainage Outfalls
Provide low‐ impact recreational opportunities and public access Public Access to Waterfront/Coastal Restoration
to the waterfront while restoring degraded shorefront areas
Multimodal Transportation/Tourism Development
Increase opportunities that can provide economic growth and
resiliency that also improves access to and awareness of
environmental assets
Infrastructure Hardening/Raising Roads
Invest in infrastructure improvements at the community and
neighborhood level while addressing individual needs
Ensure emergency shelters are located within the community
Ensure storm preparedness and resiliency of community residents
Develop a sustainable and energy conscious community
Increased awareness of and access to resources for hazard
mitigation, preparedness and response
Plan for resiliency at the community and neighborhood level while
addressing individual needs
Support the growth of the business district

Seek to provide wastewater treatment facilities to protect water
quality and promote economic growth.

Executive Summary

Project Category
Proposed
Proposed
Proposed
Proposed

Proposed

Emergency Shelter Hardening
Annual Education/ Coordination Program
Community Sustainability/Energy Conservation
Enhanced GIS Emergency Management System

Proposed
Proposed
Proposed
Proposed

Electrical System Isolation Switch‐Smart Meter‐
Feasibility Study
Oakdale Central Business District Master
Implementation Plan
Oakdale Central Business District Revitalization
Waste Water Collection and Treatment System
(Sewers)

Proposed
Proposed
Featured
Featured

Page | ES‐7

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 1. Community Overview

Sailboat on the Great South Bay

Section 1: Community Overview

i

Page | 1

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
“Eventually, all things merge into one, and a river runs through it.”
‐‐ Norman Maclean, A River Runs Through It and Other Storiesii
A river runs through us.
A river, the Connetquot, where Daniel Webster fished more than 200
years ago; a river in Oakdale with bass and bluefish and even, once in
wondrous while, a salmon answering its ancestral summons to spawn
in only this river’s headwaters. A less iconic creek, the Green, also
runs through us past West Sayville’s marinas, restaurants, and
backyard docks. And a bay, the Great South, runs around us; a bay into
which the river and creek flow creates an ecosystem that defines our
Oakdale/West Sayville Community.
“Our identities are tied to the water,” said Brendan McCurdy, an
environmental activist and a member of the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Oakdale/West Sayville Planning Committee
(Committee). “It’s who we are and what we do. We need to protect
it.” And so we do, most obviously with better ways to treat our waste
whose nitrates endanger our waterways and the economy that thrives
on them. On this the Committee and the Community speak as one.

Connetquot Riveri
One time, a new creature called a “Superstorm” comes to sweep away
assumptions and shift priorities like a barrier beach battered by wind
and wave. This time, with flooding as if it were a Category 2 hurricane,
Sandy changed everything.
Richard Remmer owns the restaurant where the river meets the Great
South Bay. The Snapper, as he calls it, sustained nearly $1 million in
damage.

But sometimes a river runs over us and we are in trouble like the
character in the story, even in run‐of‐the‐mill rains and high tides.
We clean up and maybe complain to our neighbors and sometimes to
officials. And then, one time, the river, creek, and bay all run over us
with a savagery that none of us have ever seen. One time, the tidal
surge sweeps in so swiftly that it swamps homes and roads that have
never taken on water.

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 2

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
“My Grandfather built the Snapper Inn in 1929 and not
once in those 84 years have we seen flooding and
destruction like Sandy…Even the surge from the
Hurricane of 1938 was a foot lower on the Connetquot.
The main dining room [of The Snapper restaurant] was
destroyed, we were without power for over a week, and
it took every effort to reopen ten days later for a
wedding.”
‐‐ Richard Remmer, NYRCR Co‐Chair, Snapper Inn Restaurant owner
Dr. Radha Sachdeva Munk Coleman of Sayville is a NYRCR
Subcommittee member who watched from her home with her husband
and five children as Sandy’s tides rose relentlessly. And now, after
never receiving the mandatory evacuation order because the 911
notification system failed and after clutching her nine‐month old twins
while searching for her six‐year‐old — now Dr. Munk Coleman’s
concerns for the future of the Community has only grown.

“After Sandy, I put my foot down – we would raise the
house as high as necessary to keep the water from our
door. We didn’t leave because we never got the
message, never. We also never had water in the house.
But when we lost power to the pumps, the basement
filled with ten feet of water in 15 minutes. We went to a
higher floor, but the water kept rising and soon we had
three and a half feet on the first floor. We were getting
scared. When we looked outside and saw firemen
wading toward us in five feet of water, we knew we had
to leave. They brought a powerboat to the front door. I

Section 1: Community Overview

was carrying one of the babies, my husband the other,
and we were looking around for our six-year-old. We
found him hiding and crying. He had become scared
when he stepped off his bed into cold water. We had to
leave the toys that he had gotten two days earlier for his
birthday. We also left the dog behind in a dry room until
the next morning. There was still a foot and a half in the
house.”
‐‐ Dr. Munk Coleman, NYRCR Subcommittee from Sayville
We are a community that looks for the best – to find ways to better
ourselves and our community – in even the worst situations. Richard
Remmer reopened his restaurant for a bride who only wanted to be
married by the mouth of the river off the Great South Bay.

“The restaurant and my home, which was also flooded,
have been rebuilt, better than ever and my faith in the
human spirit has never been stronger. The images of
the storm and the destruction will never vanish, but the
memories of family, friends, and employees wading
through knee deep [water] to come help will always be
brighter. A truly amazing testament to the human heart
and spirit especially of a younger generation.”
‐‐ Richard Remmer, NYRCR Co‐Chair, Snapper Inn Restaurant owner
NYRCR Planning Committee Co‐Chair Ron Beattie also saw a “silver
lining” in Sandy:

Page | 3

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
“Ironically, it's the galvanizing effect for the
community, with neighbors helping each other out,
businesses getting up and running with heroic efforts
to serve their clients. And now it’s the State and
Federal governments helping us to rebuild for long
term resiliency.”
‐‐ Ron Beattie, NYRCR Co‐Chair, former Oakdale Chamber of
Commerce president
Another silver lining was the extent to which neighbors shared food,
water, shelter, and generators to keep the pumps going and the lights
and heat on. So was the way the community came together behind
the NY Rising planning process. Committee Member Brendan
McCurdy, who has focused on encouraging attention to wastewater
treatment and public education about environmental stewardship,
said the following:

“It was a very collaborative process. I never felt they
were trying to channel our thoughts and direct our
opinions. I’ve been on a bunch of committees over the
years, and this was inclusive and welcoming.”
‐‐ Brendan McCurdy, NYRCR Committee Member
The process, which we believe reflected New York Governor Andrew
M. Cuomo’s directive to produce a community‐driven plan, allowed
anyone and everyone in our community to contribute their ideas. Our
work has benefitted from the experiences and expertise of our
neighbors.

One, the Committee defines resiliency as something beyond preparing
for a storm. No doubt, we must strengthen our shorelines with natural
and manmade defenses – from bulkheads and jetties to bio‐swales
and smart marshes. And we propose to do just that. We need to
“harden” our communication system so everyone, especially the
elderly and disabled, are not left uncertain about what to do before,
during, and after a hurricane. We also must encourage our leaders to
collaborate in producing emergency plans for evacuation, power
restoration, and temporary shelter. But if this is all we do – no matter
how ambitious and expensive – we will have missed the chance to
really strengthen our community as a whole.

“The key is the synergies between all the things we are
doing and want to do. We have to strengthen the
appeal of our waterfront and our waterways – that’s
what defines Oakdale and West Sayville – but we also
need to connect them to downtowns that are more
viable and vibrant.”
‐‐ Ron Beattie, NYRCR Co‐Chair, former Oakdale Chamber of
Commerce president
That is why we propose investing in creating a stronger identity for
downtown Oakdale along Montauk Highway. That is why we like the
idea of “green incubators” for ecotourism, and connecting our Long
Island Rail Road (LIRR) station with our “main streets” and marinas,
perhaps with a jitney. A water taxi from the West Sayville Maritime
Museum to the Community’s commercial docks could also transport
visitors who first would shop and eat here on their way to Fire Island.

In our plan to recover from Sandy and protect against the next Big

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 4

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
“Six generations of my family have lived, played, and
worked on the Great South Bay. To see our Committee
generate plans that intertwine all of those aspects is
amazing. Raising roads connected with better drainage
into bioswales thereby improving the quality of
marshes and at the same time providing for better
public access including foot paths, waterfront space,
boat launching and improving water quality is an
amazing combination of projects that will brand
Oakdale/West Sayville as a "greener" and better place
to live, work, and play…”
-- Richard Remmer, NYRCR Co‐Chair, Snapper Inn Restaurant owner

Before we move on to the details of our plan, we want to make a few
more things clear: We know that we will not get everything we want.
Coming up with a more effective, environmentally friendly means of
disposing of wastewater is important to many people in the
community, but we are realists and know that the up to $3 million set
aside for our Community would not make a dent in such a big public
infrastructure project.
We chose to focus on initiatives for which there is not only consensus
but also some pre‐existing plans that can provide a blueprint for
moving forward, such as the one that came out of Oakdale’s
downtown revitalization visioning initiative several years ago. The idea
is to accomplish what we can now and keep working for more
improvements in the future. The Committee gave us a way to come
together and it can give us a way to stay together.

Section 1: Community Overview

But we do need help. In some ways, our community is all about
repurposing and renewing; vision and revision is part of our heritage.
Oakdale was carved out of the former estates of some of the nation’s
richest and most powerful families. Their names, such as Vanderbilt,
still show up on street signs, and their architectural and other
ambitions, such as mansions and barns, along with canals for their
yachts, remain both relics of history and very much in use as schools,
smaller private homes, and public water routes. Overall, we are not a
rich community: there no longer are people with almost limitless
wealth to impose their will and implement their plans. Now, the
projects that can transform us into a truly resilient community are
beyond the means of any one or even cluster of suburban villages or
hamlets. We can not realize our vision without help from “above,”
from the Federal, State, County, and Town governments. And while
we may not get everything we want, we are prepared to work
collaboratively to get what we need.
“I am haunted by waters,” says the aging narrator of A River Runs
Through It. So are some of us in Oakdale/West Sayville where we paid
a steep price for passivity. But we will not dwell on the past, except to
learn from it. We will not shrink in fear from the future – storms and
all. Instead, we are ready, willing, and able – with help of the Federal,
State, County, and Town governments, and in collaboration with every
other Village and hamlet in our region – to take control of our
collective destinies. A river runs through us, in many ways defining but
not defeating us. We are determined that a river, as well as a creek
and bay, never catch us unprepared again.

Page | 5

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
forms the northern edge of the Community. Portions of the
Community, in the vicinity of the Green’s Creek watershed, are
situated in the hamlet of Sayville.
The Communities are linked in several ways. They are adjoining coastal
communities with shared histories and common institutions. These
institutions include the fire department, ambulance company, school
district, and several religious facilities. Both communities are within
the jurisdiction of the Town of Islip, the local municipal entity.

Residences in the “Artist Colony” in Oakdale, formerly stables and
other support buildings associated with the W.K. Vanderbilt Estatei

The main roadway that extends through NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville
is Montauk Highway (C.R. 85). Like Sunrise Highway, the road is
generally oriented in an east‐west direction. Sunrise Highway is a
major limited‐access arterial extending along the north side of the
communities. The other notable transportation facility is the Montauk
Branch of the Long Island Rail Road.

Geographic Context
Oakdale and West Sayville are hamlets and Census Designated Places
(CDP) located within the unincorporated portions of the Town of Islip
in Suffolk County, New York. The communities are located along the
South Shore of Long Island and are situated between the Connetquot
River to the west, Green’s Creek to the east, and the Great South Bay
to the south. The NYRCR Oakdale/Sayville Community includes land
along the east side of Green’s Creek, extending along Benson Avenue,
north along Saxton Avenue, Brook Street, and continuing north along
Green’s Creek to Lakeland Avenue. State Route 27 (Sunrise Highway)

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 6

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
This right‐of‐way also extends through Oakdale and West Sayville and
includes rail stations in Oakdale and, to the east, Sayville.
It is significant that Montauk Highway, Sunrise Highway, and the Long
Island Rail Road all converge as they pass over the Connetquot River to
the immediate west of Oakdale. At this location, the Connetquot River
extends to the south while the Connetquot River State Park Preserve
extends to the north, with no alternative east‐west access until
Veterans Memorial Highway, about three miles to the north.
Both Oakdale and West Sayville are located on an outwash plain, a
term used to describe the glacial geomorphology of the region. The
outwash plain was formed with the retreat of glacial advances
thousands of years ago. While the central and northern portions of
Long Island are defined by greater topographic variation – hills,
valleys, bluffs – features of two glacial moraines (Ronkonkoma and
Harbor Hill), the South Shore is characterized by a low‐lying, flat land
form that slopes to the Great South Bay and the barrier island (Fire
Island). The glacial moraine is where the glacial advance stopped. The
outwash plain formed as the glacier melted and the run‐off “washed”
or drained towards the bay. Much of the South Shore along the bay
front formed into tidal wetlands that sometimes extended thousands
of feet inland. It is this physical context – a relatively flat, low‐
elevation, coastal location – that is both an asset and a liability: while
giving the Community access to the water, it also exposes the
Community to the hazards of coastal weather events – including storm
surge flooding – that can reach far into the Community.

Section 1: Community Overview

Waterfront restaurant and marina, West Sayvillei

Historic Context
Oakdale and West Sayville have unique development histories. A large
part of Oakdale was developed as private estates beginning after the
Civil War. This included the Robert’s estate, known as Pepperidge Hall,
the W.K. Vanderbilt estate (now Dowling College), known as Idle Hour,
and the Bourne estate (now St. John’s University). Mansions and many
service buildings were constructed during this period. In addition,
canals were dug in the vast wetlands that existed south of Montauk
Highway. Later, when the Vanderbilt estate was sold off in the 1920s,
a land developer subdivided the property for the sale of individual
lots. This occurred before the advent of modern land development

Page | 7

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
standards such as subdivision control, public health, and
environmental regulations. Subsequently, much of Oakdale was
developed in the post‐World War II era when much of western Suffolk
County was suburbanized. On the border of Oakdale and West
Sayville is a property known as the West Oak Recreation Club
containing about 280 primarily seasonal dwellings, a marina,
recreational facilities, and extensive wooded acreage.
West Sayville’s early development was centered on the waterfront.
The world famous Bluepoints Oyster Company, a major national
supplier of shellfish, was located in West Sayville until its closing about
twelve years ago. The company capitalized on the vast shellfish beds
within the Great South Bay. As a result, a vibrant community
developed in West Sayville to service the shellfish industry. Today this
is evident by the commercial, working waterfront development at the
south ends of both West Avenue and Atlantic Avenue. Many of the
houses along these roads are the former residences of bay men. A
portion of West Sayville was developed as an estate of 500 acres,
formerly known as the Hard estate. This property is now a Suffolk
County park and the site of the non‐profit Suffolk County Maritime
Museum.

Present Day
Single‐family detached residential homes are the predominant land
use in both communities. Each community also has a central business
district, apartments, and townhouses, industrial and institutional uses
and extensive areas of active parkland and preserved open space. A
significant amount of commercial development also exists along
Sunrise Highway.

Section 1: Community Overview

Residences along West Avenue, West Sayvillei
In Oakdale, the waterfront contains primarily single‐family residential
uses. In addition, there are several clusters of commercial uses
including marinas and restaurants. In West Sayville, the waterfront
west of Green’s Creek is commercial, much of it working waterfront. In
both communities, significant portions of the waterfront are
preserved as open space.
Development standards during the period of rapid population growth
following World War II failed to adequately protect water quality.
Sanitary waste from residences was disposed of through on‐site
cesspools until the 1970s. Cesspools are simple leaching structures
that do little to remove nitrates. Later, septic tank systems were
required which provided somewhat better treatment.
In the 1980s, Suffolk County adopted density standards that limited
the issuance of building permits for new structures based on the
discharge of untreated waste (excluding some pre‐filed subdivisions).

Page | 8

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The minimum lot size established for most of NYRCR Oakdale/West
Sayville was one house per acre. Similar density restrictions also
applied to non‐residential buildings including commercial uses. At this
density, the Suffolk County Department of Health Services determined
that groundwater drinking standards could be maintained. The
problem, however, was that most of the land in NYRCR Oakdale/West
Sayville was already developed at much higher densities.

Residences along the Connetquot River, Oakdalei

An additional threat to water quality was a result of stormwater
runoff. For many years, it was an accepted practice to collect
rainwater into a piping system and discharge it directly into the creeks
and canals including the Connetquot River and the Great South Bay.
Later practices reduced the volume of direct discharge by means of
holding areas such as recharge basins and leaching pools. However,
significant amounts of stormwater continue to be discharged into
surface waterbodies in NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville, thus
contributing high quantities of nutrients, hydrocarbons and other
contaminants to the South Shore Estuary system.
Presently, land development is continuing in both communities. Much
of it consists of infill development in the form of single‐family houses
on previously subdivided lots. Larger developments and multi‐family
residential clusters are also located within the communities. Recently,
additional multi‐family development has occurred along Oakdale‐
Bohemia Road in Oakdale. These land uses are serviced by on‐site,
tertiary level wastewater treatment systems. As tertiary systems, they
remove most nitrates. Proposed development projects include
portions of the Oakdale campus of St. John’s University. In addition, a
modest amount of commercial development has occurred in the past
decade along with the revitalization of several older commercial
properties.

Community Core Strengths
Both Oakdale and West Sayville are established hamlets within a large
suburban Town (Islip). Each has a strong sense of community identity
and character. The physical environment including natural features
such as the Connetquot River in Oakdale and Green’s Creek in West

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 9

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Sayville reinforces this identity. Strong social institutions including
schools, places of worship and fraternal and recreational organizations
also reinforce their individual identities.
Core strengths of the communities include:
 Hundreds of acres of preserved lands including extensive tidal and
freshwater wetlands;


View of the Great South Bay and the Connetquot River;



A deep historical foundation that is visible in the architecture and
buildings of the estate era as represented by the Vanderbilt and
Bourne mansions as well as the historic Jacob Ockers house and
the nationally significant Bluepoints Oyster Company buildings;



A strong local economy anchored by Dowling College and St.
John’s University’s satellite campus for Graduate studies along
with high quality primary and secondary schools;



A broad and diverse base of businesses ranging from regionally
important commercial marine shipyards to long‐standing, locally
based family enterprises;



Ease of access to highway, rail and air transportation facilities
including Sunrise Highway, the Long Island Rail Road (Oakdale
Station) and Long Island MacArthur Airport; and



A wide variety of housing choice in an attractive, well‐maintained
environment.

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 10

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
A. Geographic Scope of the NYRCR Plan
The identification of a geographic scope was one of the first steps in
the planning process untaken by the Committee. It was important to
decide the appropriate scope of the NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville
Community (Community). Properly scoping the Community included
meeting Federal guidelines for the appropriate use of reconstruction
funds, as NYRCR Plans are intended to address the damage directly
resulting from Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical Storm
Lee. As a result, communities seeking to implement projects indirectly
impacted by those storms were required to demonstrate how such
projects and/or policies would help to mitigate the risk of potential
storm damage in the future. Guidance was provided by New York
State relative to establishing the geographic scope of a NYRCR Plan as
it related to asset location, risk assessment areas, as well as
floodplains.

The original NYRCR Community considered by the Committee was co‐
terminus with the hamlet boundaries of Oakdale. After the initial
Committee meetings and consideration of the geographic scope, it
became apparent that it would be appropriate to include Green’s
Creek in West Sayville. This decision was based upon the effects of
Superstorm Sandy on West Sayville and also the historical connections
between the two communities. Both communities are directly located
on the Great South Bay and each are characterized by very low ground
elevations south of Montauk Highway. Subsequently, the east side of
Green’s Creek in Sayville was added to the Community to encompass
the drainage area along the east side of the creek.

Community assets most likely to be at risk due to future weather
events are typically located in Extreme, High, and Moderate risk areas
of the community. The geographic scope of the NYRCR Plan includes
areas where: assets are most at risk; future construction or
reconstruction of existing development should be encouraged or
discouraged; or key investment to improve the local economy can be
instituted. The identification of more resilient areas for future
development can later be reinforced in municipal comprehensive
plans as well as other local regulatory requirements.

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 11

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 1: Geographic Location Map

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 12

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Demographic Overview

General Demographics

Geographic Area and Data

NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville has a CDP population of about 13,000
people. The age of the population in both the Oakdale and West
Sayville CDPs shows a typical suburban distribution among the Census
age groups, with about 30% of the population between 35 and 54
years old, and the remaining thirds nearly evenly split between
residents under 35 and over 55 years old.

A word on the numbers: According to the US Census Bureau (Census),
NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville is composed of most of the Oakdale
Census Designated Place (CDP) and all of the West Sayville CDP. With
the exception of data on ethnicity and race, all demographic
information depicted below is taken at the CDP level, and reflects data
from the most recent American Community Survey (ACS).
Demographic data relating to ethnicity and race were derived from the
2010 Census in order to provide the most recent data available in
those categories.
The CDP level of data aggregation was selected because the
availability, detail, and geography of other data aggregation levels
(e.g., Census Tracts, Groups, and Blocks) are subject to variation across
the decennial censuses. The CDP level provided a uniform level of data
detail and reporting period. It is acknowledged that the CDP level data
may include some areas that are not contained within NYRCR
Oakdale/West Sayville; however, across all CDPs in Suffolk County, the
differences between the Census CDP boundaries and NYRCR
Oakdale/West Sayville delineations are not large. Additionally, the
Census data’s intended use in this report is to provide an overview of
the composition and general habits of the community.
It is unlikely that areas included in the CDP but excluded from NYRCR
Oakdale/West Sayville would result in a substantial effect on the
overview‐level interpretation of the data or affect the identification of
needs and opportunities or projects under the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Program.

Section 1: Community Overview

The percentages of race and ethnicity are similar between the two
CDPs. Ninety‐six percent of the Oakdale CDP is White, 1% African
American, 1% Asian, 0.3% other and 0.7% two or more races. Ninety‐
five percent of West Sayville CDP is White, 1% African American, 2%
Asian, 1% other and 1% two or more races.
In their responses to the latest Census, the majority of residents in
both CDPs report speaking English as the only language at home. In
the Oakdale CDP, about 5% of the population comprises non‐native
English speakers who rate their English proficiency as “very good.”
Comparable figures from the Census were not available for West
Sayville, which can be due to a small sample size. It is likely that the
rate is similar to Oakdale.
These data are important for the identification of needs and
opportunities as the non‐English speaking population represents a
community of concern that may not have easy access to important life
safety information. In this case, 2% of the population in the Oakdale
CDP alone report that they speak English less than well, potentially
reducing the need to focus on multi‐lingual projects and initiatives.

Page | 13

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Income and Poverty: Both CDPs include a diverse range of individual
wage earners. Median household income in the Oakdale CDP was
$94,051 with the percentage of individuals below the poverty level at
2.3%. By comparison, the West Sayville CDP had a median household
income of $98,631 with the percentage of individuals below the
poverty level of 3.2%. Neither CDP includes a significant population
under 150% of the poverty level.
Employment and Journey to Work: Understanding the general
character of the Communities’ workforce helps identify needs and
opportunities as well as projects to maintain, restore, and enhance the
economic vitality of the community. Nearly 75% of the residents in
both the Oakdale and West Sayville CDPs work within Suffolk County,
and nearly all of the residents in both CDPs work somewhere within
New York State. The majority of workers in both CDPs drives alone to
work or carpools. The next largest means of travel to work is by rail,
but the percentage of rail commuters as a portion of all commuters in
either community is less than 10%. As would be expected, the
percentage of zero‐car households in either community is less than
1%.
While workers in each CDP are employed by a diverse array of
industries, educational services employ the greatest percentage of
residents in both communities. In West Sayville, the second greatest
employment sector is split between retail and transportation/utilities,
and in Oakdale, the second greatest employment sector is
professional services.

Section 1: Community Overview

Housing: In both the Oakdale and West Sayville CDPs, most housing
units are owner‐occupied. In the Oakdale CDP, the 2010 Census
reported 3,116 occupied housing units, of which 2,482 were owner‐
occupied (79.1%) and 634 were occupied by renters (16.1%). An
additional 164 units were vacant, resulting in a total of 3,280 housing
units. For the West Sayville CDP, there were 1,771 occupied housing
units, of which 1,485 were owner‐occupied (83.9%) and 286 were
occupied by renters (16.1%). The number of vacant units was 353,
mostly seasonal residences. The total number of housing units for
West Sayville was 2,124.
Guidance and Insight from Demographic Analysis: The demographic
analysis indicates a few significant trends and characteristics that may
help shape the identification of needs, opportunities, and projects for
NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville. One of the first observations is that
schools and similar educational facilities are noteworthy at two levels.
The educational facilities not only are significant public facilities that
provide necessary services in terms of education, but are also major
employers. Ensuring the resiliency of educational facilities is therefore
a goal strongly suggested by the Census data.
Additionally, the journey to work data indicated that most of the
NYRCR Community’s workers commute by car. This has particular
relevance to Oakdale and West Sayville where flooded roads are a
chronic condition and may affect the ability of residents to get their
jobs. At the same time, the opportunity to improve, create, and
provide resilient improvements to the pedestrian, bicycle, and transit
networks should not be overlooked.

Page | 14

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Lastly, housing type and occupancy indicates that the resiliency of the
housing stock is of vital importance. There are very few renter‐
occupied units in NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville, indicating relatively
low residential turnover and few vacancies.
The vacancy assumption is further supported by the occupancy
statistics. This indicates that in the event of a catastrophic event, the
homes affected are permanent residences and the affected
homeowners and their families have few options for relocation within
their community. The Census data therefore strongly suggests that
programs and incentives to protect and preserve the existing housing
supply, to provide for potential increases in the diversity of house
types, as well as to provide for the temporary housing of dislocated
residents, would be beneficial to the Community.

B. Description of Storm Damage
Long Island is particularly vulnerable to coastal storms, given its
location on the edge of the Atlantic Ocean. As a result, the Island has
experienced many severe coastal storms, including hurricanes, tropical
storms, and nor’easters. Two recent storms impacted the NYRCR
Oakdale/West Sayville Community: Tropical Storm Irene and
Superstorm Sandy.
Irene was a Category 1 hurricane when it struck North Carolina on
August 27, 2011. It moved northward along the east coast of the mid‐
Atlantic region and made its final landfall in the New York City area on
August 28, 2011iii. At that point, it had weakened to a tropical storm
with heavy rain and widespread flooding. Long Island was affected by
the storm, as was the Town of Islip and the NYRCR Oakdale/West

Section 1: Community Overview

Sayville Community. The Town received over $2.7 million in
reimbursement from the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) for damage as a result of Tropical Storm Irene. While this did
not include reimbursement for any facilities in the NYRCR
Oakdale/West Sayville Community, it did cover costs for debris
removal and clean up.
Superstorm Sandy occurred only 14 months after Tropical Storm Irene.
On Friday, October 19, 2012, a tropical depression formed in the
Caribbean. In only six hours, the depression intensified into a tropical
storm. This 18th named storm of 2012 was designated Tropical Storm
Sandy. By the following Wednesday, October 24, 2012, the storm’s
maximum sustained winds had increased to 74 MPH and Sandy was
upgraded to a Hurricane.
After passing through the Caribbean, including Jamaica, Cuba, and the
Bahamas, and fluctuating between a Category 1 and Category 2
Hurricane, on Saturday, October 27, 2012, Sandy turned north toward
the U.S. coast. The storm made landfall near Atlantic City, NJ around 8
PM on Monday, October 29, 2012. The winds had decreased to just
below the threshold for a Category 1 Hurricane and meteorologists
and the press christened this near hurricane as “Superstorm Sandy.”
Superstorm Sandy’s historically unprecedented track approached New
Jersey and New York from the east; storms typically approach from
the south.
As a result, the track of Superstorm Sandy resulted in a worst‐case
scenario for storm surge and inundation for coastal regions from New
Jersey north to Connecticut, including New York City and Long Island.
The storm surge came ashore near the time of high tide along the

Page | 15

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Atlantic Coast and during a full moon when tides are strongest. These
factors combined for record tide levels.
The storm surge in New York Harbor reached almost 14 feet at the
Battery. Forty‐five miles away, on the south shore of Suffolk County in
Islip, the storm surge reached nearly eight feet. This was on top of the
morning tide that had already inundated the bay front shore and had
yet to retreat.
In addition to the triple threat of the enormous storm surge, the
coinciding high tide, and the full moon, other factors conspired to
create the devastation that resulted from Superstorm Sandy. Nearby
maximum wind gusts ranged from 79 mph in East Farmingdale to 90
mph at Long Island MacArthur Airport in Islip. On the southward facing
shores of Long Island, the storm surge was accompanied by fiercely
destructive wave action. An offshore buoy located 15 nautical miles
southeast of Breezy Point on the Rockaway Peninsula reported a wave
height of 32.5 feet (the largest since record keeping beganiv).
The effects of Superstorm Sandy on Oakdale and West Sayville were
significant. At the highest point of inundation, much of Oakdale south
of Montauk Highway was flooded. Flooding was equal to the expected
impacts of a Category 2 hurricane despite the fact that Superstorm
Sandy was not at hurricane level when it made landfall on Long Island.
The area of inundation in Oakdale was over one square mile and
extended a mile inland along Edgewood Avenuev.

Section 1: Community Overview

West Avenue Dock, West Sayville, during Superstorm Sandyi
Further to the east in Oakdale, the West Oak Recreation Club (WORC),
a seasonal residential community, experienced extensive inundation.
Many of the dwellings were damaged and property was destroyed. In
West Sayville, the streets along the waterfront were flooded including
West Avenue, Shore Road, and Clyde Street.
Along Green’s Creek, flooding occurred on both sides of the creek
affecting properties in both West Sayville and Sayville. Flooded roads
on the Sayville side included West Lane, Anita Drive, Palmer Circle,
Sunset Drive, and Montauk Highway (Main Street). Throughout the
communities, a high number of trees and power lines were down.

Page | 16

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
In many cases, roads were impassable to homeowners, police, fire
rescue, and other emergency responders.
Widespread damage occurred to many coastal facilities including
docks, marinas, and bulk heading. The Town of Islip reported damage
to the West Avenue Dock in West Sayville including damage to
decking, the parking lot, electrical and water supplies, and a need for
dredging due to increase sedimentation from bay bottom movement
and the undermining of solid fill piers.
Communications were also severely affected by Superstorm Sandy.
Both landline and cellular services were knocked out for different
periods of time. This was a major issue to the community and a
significant impediment to response efforts during the storm and
recovery efforts afterward.

Fallen trees and power line damage during Superstorm Sandy,
Oakdalei

Section 1: Community Overview

The West Sayville Fire Department (WSFD) has jurisdiction for both
Oakdale and West Sayville. It reported the following damage and
response issues:









Numerous road closures due to electrical hazards and/or heavy
timbers;
Delays in response to WSFD requests for two emergency electric
circuit shutdowns;
Densely populated areas in the Idle Hour section of Oakdale were
flooded with approximately five feet of water;
WSFD and four mutual aid departments responded to distress
calls and conducted evacuation of stranded residents;
Nearly all roads to the Idle Hour section of Oakdale were
impassable;
A strong odor of fuel oil permeated many areas including marinas;
Problems with electric transmission lines; and
Significant problems and calls for assistance extending for many
days following the storm.

Superstorm Sandy also affected the availability of gasoline and diesel
fuel. This was both a local issue and a regional issue. Locally, many
area fuel stations were without electric power and unable to operate
fuel‐dispensing pumps. Later, after power was restored, supplies were
quickly exhausted. “Gas lines” (hours‐long lines of people waiting to
fuel their cars) were common for over a week until the Suffolk County
Executive issued an order mandating rationing by odd‐even number
access, based upon one’s license plate number. The local supply issue
was exacerbated by the closure of the ports where fuel is typically
delivered by barge or tanker.

Page | 17

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
It is noted that other types of storms could affect the communities in
ways that are both similar and different from Superstorm Sandy. For
example, other storms could have higher winds and rainfall than what
occurred with Superstorm Sandy. It is, therefore, critical that these
communities become resilient to a variety of storm threats.

“One of the most important effects of Sandy, ironically, is
a positive one. It's the galvanizing effect for the
community with neighbors helping each other out,
businesses that got up and running with heroic efforts to
serve their clients and now with the State and Federal
governments helping us rebuild for long term resiliency.”
--Ron Beattie, NYRCR Co‐Chair, former Oakdale Chamber of

Commerce president

Snapper Inn Restaurant, Oakdale, during Superstorm Sandyi
The following statements are from a few members of the NYRCR
Oakdale‐West Sayville Committee to provide insight and voice to the
effects of the storm on the Community.

“My wife and I live in the Idle Hour area. We did not have
much damage done to our home due to the storm (some
shingles came off the roof, and eventually we replaced
the roof due to the loss of shingles and the age of the
roof). We prepared for the storm by getting a good
supply of batteries, we made sure that we had several
working flashlights (I did not want to use candles for the
fear of fire), we made sure that a portable radio worked,
and we filled the cars with gas. We did not have power
and had to go to restaurants that had power in order to
get food. Getting gas for our cars became an issue, but
we managed. Our neighbor across the street had a small
generator that he used in the evening to provide light and
to power a small TV. We would go over in the evening to
take advantage of these "luxuries" and to get warm for
our evening and our forthcoming coming sleep in the
cold. I also used his computer to read any messages that
I might have received. This was very much appreciated.”
--Dr. Clyde Payne, NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Committee Member

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 18

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
“Upon hearing of the upcoming storm, like everyone
else, we started stocking up on food and water and
filled our cars with gas. The severity of the storm was
surprising but the aftermath of the storm was eye
opening. It was not so much the damage caused, but
rather the way it tested the very fabric of our
community. No lights, no communications, no gas,
food and water running out. My house quickly filled
with 14 members of my family and close friends that
found themselves in worse circumstances than I. We
supported each other for the next 10 - 15 days by
candlelight.
What was a pleasure to see was the community rising
to the challenge: Neighbors helping neighbors,
community groups immediately answering the call for
assistance. Many of the neighborhood’s less affected
families were ready to help but what should they do?
Who was in charge? How do we know who needs help
and what can we bring them or do for them?
Navigating around these questions, folks organized
quickly and many people were assisted.”

“I remember preparing for the storm by taping my
windows, not even realizing what was in store for me
and my family that night.
My wife and two young daughters stayed with my
mother at her house in Oakdale, north of Montauk
Highway. I remember it being around 9:00pm and
everything seemed fine. I was even thinking we were
almost “out of the woods" — little did I know!
I remember the wind blowing a tree down in my yard
that landed right on my PVC Fence crushing it.
Thinking that was going to be the extent of my damage,
I accepted it. Then the worst began to happen — water
began gushing through my back door four-to-five feet
high. I was scrambling to save as much as I could.
Unfortunately that wasn't a lot. My whole first level was
flooded — kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, home office,
washer and dryer, furnace, water heater, countless
personal items, fire place, walls, furniture — all ruined
at the hands of Superstorm Sandy.”
--Brian Bast, Oakdale Civic Association

--Ray Carta, Oakdale Civic Association

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 19

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
C. Critical Issues



Reduction of repetitive flooding of roads and properties from
tidal surges and severe rainfall events to protect life safety and
property. The inundation of storm surge caused by Superstorm
Sandy highlighted the long‐standing problems of flooding that are
chronic in the Community. The flooding was as high as five feet on
many roads, making them impassable. Access by emergency
vehicles was curtailed at the height of the storm as were critical
evacuation routes.



Need for hazard mitigation measures for utilities that are critical
in the aftermath of an event—electric, gas, and communications.
The impact of Superstorm Sandy on the utilities crippled the
Community. Loss of electrical power in particular had a significant
impact on many businesses, especially those on the waterfront.
Many homeowners were also inconvenienced and displaced as a
result of the loss of power. Communications also were non‐
functional during intermittent periods including for fire and rescue
services.



Improved development in Oakdale along Montauk Highway to
strengthen the business district, increase the tax base, create
jobs, and grow the local economy. Superstorm Sandy affected all
of the Community, including many businesses.

The Oakdale and West Sayville communities identified a variety of
resiliency issues related both to protecting the life and safety of
community members in the face of future storm events and to the
strength of the local economy and its ability to bounce back following
a disruptive disaster event. Some of the most significant and
widespread issues identified included:


Lack of storm preparedness and communication of risk to all
members of the community including vulnerable populations. It
was readily apparent from Superstorm Sandy that the Community
was not aware of the risk they faced, nor were they prepared for
the extent of flooding and damage that resulted. While programs
existed to inform the public of the need to prepare for storms and
other natural disasters, the message did not adequately filter
down to all members of the Community.



Need for evacuation routes and pre‐stocked shelters within the
community. While vast areas of the Community were inundated
with the storm surge associated with Superstorm Sandy, there was
not an emergency shelter open in the Community. The need to
evacuate many areas was hindered by the lack of a local shelter.

While the visible damage for the businesses along Montauk
Highway in Oakdale was not devastating, the economic damage
was substantial. Many businesses were affected by prolonged
power outages, reduced revenue, and difficulties in resupply. The
economic strength of Downtown Oakdale is important to the
Community and to future storm resiliency.

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 20

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan






Better access to the waterfront and reinforcement of the maritime
heritage. Oakdale/West Sayville is a coastal Community with a historic
maritime past. Despite the extensive shorefront, however, Oakdale
has very little public access to the water. This “so close yet so far”
situation has denied the public of the enjoyment of the River and Bay
and also has resulted in a disconnect between the Oakdale
Community and the water.
Protection of the natural environment and utilization of resiliency
techniques that work with, rather than against, natural processes.
The Committee identified (from the beginning of the planning process)
the need to work with nature, not in opposition to it. There is
recognition that the natural environment underpins key characteristics
of the Community that make it a great place to live and is also the
foundation of the economy. Superstorm Sandy clearly demonstrated
the weaknesses of structural systems of water management and
development and highlighted the need to consider broader, more
natural alternatives.
An overall regional focus to the planning process including
transportation, power, communications, and economic issues.
Superstorm Sandy demonstrated the interconnectedness of NYRCR
Oakdale/West Sayville to the larger region.

Community Vision Statement
Oakdale and West Sayville will be communities with a “greener” and
more sustainable future with hazard resistant buildings and
infrastructure and well‐functioning natural systems that can prevent
or minimize damage to life and property and the disruption of critical
services. The rich history of the communities, the spectacular public
and private spaces, emphasizing the importance of the health of our
waterways and coastal proximity will guide future development with
downtown identities which will focus on the essential character and
charm of Oakdale and West Sayville.
To accomplish this vision, the Committee considered the following
goals:






D. Community Vision



The NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Planning Committee developed the
following vision statement to guide the entire planning process and to
ensure that the recommended actions included in the NYRCR Plan
addressed the critical issues identified by the Committee.



Section 1: Community Overview

To protect the safety and quality of life of residents,
employees and visitors of the communities from natural
hazards and emergency events;
To make the communities more resilient to climate change
and associated future storms;
To strengthen the local economy and tax base and to ensure
the social and economic stability of neighborhoods;
To create a revitalized Downtown Oakdale to provide needed
economic development and community identity;
To establish the area as an incubator for innovative “green”
technologies;
To protect and improve the environmental conditions of the
communities including the improvement of water quality;

Page | 21

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
















To improve the waterfront as a recreational and economic
asset where compatible with surrounding land uses and the
natural environment;
To protect social and cultural facilities and customs that are
important to the character and social fabric of the
communities;
To provide for improved waterfront access and quality of use;
To provide a “Greener” community including traditional and
non‐traditional applications ranging from solar to “softening”
of shorelines to better management of wastewater;
To improve vulnerable infrastructure including:
o Raise roads to an acceptable height above sea level,
o Construct floodgates at strategic points, and
o Install one‐way valves on storm drain outflow pipes;
To improve storm preparation procedures including north/
south road access and access to local evacuation sites;
To develop procedures for post storm electrical inspections
and utility shutoffs;
To improve the rebuilding processes for future storm damage
including insurance, Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), permitting, etc.;
To explore the feasibility of connecting residential
wastewater to existing or planned treatment plants;
To seek a strategic partnership with The Nature Conservancy
to develop a “hybrid” approach to storm resilience that
incorporates natural solutions with man‐made
improvements;

Section 1: Community Overview




To implement a program to buy out residential structures in
highly vulnerable locations; and
To explore a program to incentivize the installation of
generators/alternative energies and flood resistant electrical
panels for temporary power generation.

E. Relationship to Regional Plans
In order to better understand the planning environment and the work
done to date within the NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Community, it
was paramount to understand the context and interrelated issues that
occur locally and regionally.

Review of Relevant Existing Plans and Studies
Plans and studies have been prepared at the regional, County, and
local levels that encompass the communities of NYRCR Oakdale/West
Sayville. At the regional level, broad findings and strategies are made
that generally do not address the Community in a specific manner but
for which policies and actions can affect the region and its
communities. At the local level, specific plans can have a more direct
effect on the day‐to‐day lives of residents and the future of their
communities.
The following is a list and summary of plans and studies that are
relevant to the NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan for
Oakdale/West Sayville.

Page | 22

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Highway. It included the following policy recommendations:
New development should create a sense of place, and foster a
downtown character, as well as a maritime theme. The
recommendations also called for the removal of blighted
buildings and landscapes, a diversification of housing stock to
better accommodate smaller households, and the use of traffic
management techniques such as cross‐access agreements to
interconnect properties and traffic calming measures.

Local Plans and Studies


Town of Islip Comprehensive Plan (1976, and 2011 Update)
Town of Islip Planning Department — the plan prepared in
1976 (Volume 7E) was part of the “Community Identity” series
of the Town’s Comprehensive Plan process. The plan
addressed detailed local issues including land use and
environmental protection. Key recommendations for Oakdale
included the fostering the development of a hamlet center
along Montauk Highway, the use of clustering and up‐zoning
for the development of large tracts such as LaSalle Military
Academy, protection and preservation of wetlands and a
Town boat launching facility on the Connetquot River. In West
Sayville, the plan recommended protecting residential areas. It
also addressed the large Federal Aviation Administration
parcel with an eye to protection. The parcel is located north of
the LIRR tracks and east of Cherry Avenue and is important to
both habitat protection and water quality. In addition, the
conservation of the Green’s Creek watershed was also
identified as important to water quality and marine habitat
protection.
In 2011, the Town of Islip prepared a Town‐wide update to
this Comprehensive Plan. The update broadly addressed issues
of demographic changes, affordable housing, environmental
protection, and commercial development, among others.



Oakdale Hamlet Center Vision Plan 2008 (2008), Town of Islip
Planning Department — This plan specifically addressed the
commercial corridor in Oakdale along C.R. 85, Montauk

Section 1: Community Overview



Town of Islip All Hazard Mitigation Plan (2008) Town of Islip —
The purpose of this plan was to do the following:
o identify all of the Town’s natural, human and
technological hazards,
o review and assess post disaster occurrences,
o estimate the probability of future occurrences,
o identify vulnerability,
o set goals to reduce potential impacts, and
o recommend a prioritized list of solutions.
The Town is currently updating the plan.



Green’s Creek and Brown’s River Watershed Management Plan
(2007) Town of Islip — This plan encompasses the eastern
portion of this NYRCR Community, specifically the parts of
West Sayville and Sayville. The plan is a comprehensive
assessment of the natural resources, habitats, and
environment of the watershed. It makes specific
recommendations for protecting the watershed from further
degradation and also the restoration of environmental
resources.

Page | 23

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan


Town of Islip Sewer Study (in progress) Town of Islip – The
Town has started a planning study of the feasibility of
installing sewer lines within the Community‐ and extending
sewer mains to other hamlets to the east. New York State is
funding the study. Expected completion is the second half of
2014.

strengthening of the respective downtowns. It also
recommended the containment of retail “sprawl”
development along the highway in place of a node of mixed‐
use activity at the intersection with Locust Avenue.


Comprehensive Water Resources Management Plan (in
progress), Suffolk County Department of Health Services—This
is a very significant study for the purpose of updating a similar
study that was completed in 1987, the antecedent of which
was the Long Island 208 Study (1978). The study has involved
the collection and testing of extensive groundwater samples
as well as the mapping of land uses and build‐out projection.
The purpose of the study is to ascertain if the County is
meeting water quality standards that are necessary to ensure
a safe drinking water supply. Since Suffolk County’s 1.5 million
residents rely on groundwater as their sole source of drinking
water, the quality and quantity of groundwater water is
critical. There are no surface water supplies in the County,
e.g., reservoirs. The study has produced some important
interim reports, but is not yet final.



Land Available for Development and Population Analysis
Western Suffolk County (2009), Suffolk County Planning
Department — This study was done as a component of the
County’s Comprehensive Water Resources Management Plan.
Its purpose was to determine the potential for population
growth and the subsequent potential demand for
groundwater. In Oakdale, it found that 51 acres of land were
available for development. These were identified as

County Plans and Studies


Suffolk Country Comprehensive Plan 2035 (2011), Suffolk
County Planning Commission ‐ This report was issued as the
first volume of a series that will cover all aspects of the
County’s environment, economy, sustainability and resource
protection. Volume I presented updated information on
demographics and socio‐economic information, development
trends, as well as a summary of prior regional and local plans.
As subsequent volumes of the plan are prepared, both
Oakdale and West Sayville may be affected by the
recommendations of the plan as they may pertain to County
roads, drainage, parks, and waste water treatment—all issues
of importance to the Planning Committee.



Sunrise Highway Corridor Study (2009) Suffolk County
Department of Planning, Towns of Islip and Brookhaven
Planning Departments — This multi‐jurisdictional effort,
studied land development issues along the S.R. 27 corridor
extending from Great River in the Town of Islip to Bellport in
the Town of Brookhaven. It includes parts of the northern
boundary of NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville. Of relevance to
Oakdale and West Sayville, the plan recommended a

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 24

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
residential (36 acres), commercial (10 acres), and industrial (6
acres). For West Sayville, 33 acres were identified; 10 acres of
agricultural land, 20 residential, 2 acres of commercial and 1
acre of industrial.


Suffolk Country Demographic, Economic and Development
Trends (2008, updated 2013), Suffolk County Department of
Planning — This report is provides information on
demographic, socioeconomic, and development trends for
both Suffolk County and, in some cases, for Nassau County.
The report is updated on a regular basis with the most recent
update occurring in August 2013. The 2013 report found a
slight growth in jobs in the bi‐County area (+ 19,400, an
increase of 1.54%, compared to June 2012). Of note is the
finding that the number of businesses increased 1.7% in the
five years between 2006 and 2011.



Smart Growth Policy Plan for Suffolk County, Suffolk County
(2000) Suffolk County Department of Planning – This report
describes the Smart Growth planning process and also
discusses eight Smart growth principles and how they can be
implanted in the County. The Committee’s interest in the
revitalization of Downtown Oakdale is consistent with the
recommendations of this plan.



Connect Long Island Plan: A Regional Transportation and
Development Plan, Town of Babylon (2011) – This is a plan for
regional economic development and quality‐of‐life, focusing
on strategic, sustainable infrastructure investments along
Long Island’s transit corridor. The plan scope is three‐fold:

Section 1: Community Overview

promote Transit‐Oriented Development (TOD); improve
transit connections between these TOD destinations; and
create greater connectivity between transit and job hubs,
including north‐south transit service. These goals are
important for regional storm resiliency, as they will provide
greater housing and economic development opportunities
along the rail corridor, away from the high‐risk flood areas
along the shore. And demographics on Long island indicate a
growing need for housing in “Smart Growth” communities –
that is, compact, mixed‐use downtown centers within close
proximity to public transit.

Page | 25

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Regional Plans and Studies
Long Island’s Future Economy (2011, updated in 2012 and 2013) Long
Island Regional Economic Development Council— This plan was
initiated by New York State to revive the regional economy. The plan
contains six major strategies that cover a broad spectrum of economic
and quality of life issues. The Executive Summary of the Plan describes
the strategies as follows (language from document):


Create a cohesive education and workforce training strategy
through partnerships among a range of stakeholders – business,
trade groups, labor, government agencies, educational
institutions, parents, and students – with the goal of ensuring that
workers from all of Long Island’s communities are prepared to
take advantage of new job opportunities in key economic growth
sectors;



Develop innovation and industry clusters in transformative
locations across the region including downtowns, brownfields and
university, research and medical centers by integrating the smart‐
growth principles of transit‐oriented development and vibrant
community life;



Enhance and develop multi‐faceted, interdisciplinary facilities
aimed at incubating and accelerating the commercialization of
innovative products generated at the region’s premier research
institutions, by linking scientists, engineers, health and medical
professionals, to entrepreneurs and small businesses;

Section 1: Community Overview







Reinvigorate Long Island’s manufacturing sector through
continued transformation from traditional defense and aerospace
work to advanced technology products, creating skilled, high‐value
jobs and a network of nimble companies that can develop
synergistic partnerships with companies in other regions of the
State;
Produce a new generation of sustainable, good‐paying jobs in the
legacy sectors of agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries, and tourism
by expanding export opportunities, infrastructure, recreation
facilities, research partnerships and workforce training; and
Rebuild and expand infrastructure to improve job access, revitalize
downtowns and transit hubs, speed trade, and attract and retain
dynamic regional businesses and highly skilled workforce

This study has relevance to the Oakdale/West Sayville communities.
The Oakdale community has identified a need to revitalize its
downtown and to encourage an innovative, sustainable economy
consistent with the study’s recommendation. In addition, the Planning
Committee has proposed projects that address the rebuilding and
expansion of infrastructure to protect the environment, strengthen
the economy, and improve resiliency.
Regional Comprehensive Sustainability Plan (2010)—Long Island
Regional Planning Council — The plan noted the inability of Long
Island to sustain itself fiscally, environmentally, and socially based on
current governance methods and policies. The plan put forward that
fundamental change would be necessary to alter the course of the
future by noting the following:

Page | 26

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
“Despite these challenges, Long Island has a tremendous opportunity
to redefine what it means to live in a sustainable 21st century
suburban community, recognizing it is possible for Long Island to be
affordable and prosperous, bringing a return to economic growth and
strength. Our ability to act today – and leave behind the status quo ‐
will have a tremendous impact on the future of the region.”
Fire Island Inlet to Montauk Point (FIMP) Reformulation Study (in
progress), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) ‐ According to a
summary of the planning process prepared by the Corps, the purpose
of the study is to identify, evaluate and recommend long‐term
solutions for hurricane and storm damage reduction for homes and
businesses within the floodplain along the ocean and bay shoreline
from Fire Island Inlet to Montauk Point. The Community extends
northward to Sunrise Highway on the mainland. The study is expected
to be completed in the near future. Upon approval, funding will
become available to complete projects recommended in the study. It
is expected that this will include increasing the height and width of the
primary dune on the ocean side of Fire Island in selected, vulnerable
locations, and raising, demolishing or relocating homes away from the
planned primary dune line. The Fire Island to Montauk Point
Reformulation Study Update was prepared to account for the impacts
of Superstorm Sandy and to coordinate several ongoing interim
projects. The overall purpose of the study is “to evaluate a range of
possible alternatives to address storm damage risk, including the
screening of various Storm Damage Reduction (SDR) alternatives and
their designs, analysis of potential impacts associated with various
designs, design optimization, and selection of a recommended plan for
the Project area.” The issues and needs described in the study

Section 1: Community Overview

pertaining to long shore sediment transport, cross‐shore sediment
transport, dune growth and evolution, bayside shoreline processes,
and circulation and water quality, are vital issues for Fire Island. The
study treats the beaches, dunes, sediments, and marshes as one
system that must be managed in order to increase resiliency. Likewise,
the NYRCR Committee may approach their landscape as a similar
system in which all components must be strengthened to truly reduce
risk and achieve resiliency.
The US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) New York District website on
the FIMP Reformulation studyvi was last updated on March 17, 2014 to
reflect the following information on the status of the study:


The Draft Hurricane Sandy Limited Re‐evaluation Report (HSLRR) is
complete. The HSLRR identifies the area’s vulnerability, discusses
existing/future conditions with vs. without FIMP‐related
restoration, provides an overall construction schedule (currently
anticipated as September 2014 through August 2015) and
acquisition maps, and an overall cost estimate for the project of
$161,514,000 based on October 2013 price levels. The HSLRR
includes stabilization layouts throughout the project extents,
including contours and grading and berm heights.



The project’s Draft Environmental Assessment (DEA) is available
online for public review and comment. Comments provided by
April 2, 2014 will be considered going forward, and included in the
project record.



The DEA includes prior engineering and design efforts, surveys,
and environmental compliance analysis. Topics include
economics, transportation, and natural resources, all compared to

Page | 27

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
the “No Action” condition. It identifies a Tentatively Selected Plan
(TSP) with maps, plans, and volumetric calculations, based on
analyzing multiple alternatives, many of which were found to be
cost‐effective. Multiple measures are necessary because no single
alternative can address every storm risk management
problem. Recommended features thus far include Inlet bypassing
Plans; Breach Response Plans; Non‐Structural Plans (6‐year and
10‐year levels of risk management); and Beach fill with new 13‐15
foot tall dunes. The DEA analyzes the beach fill feature combined
with incremental levels of the other features (storm management,
dunes, and structural alternatives).
Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve Comprehensive Management
Plan (2001) — Long Island South Shore Reserve Council, New York
State Department of State: This estuary plan includes the Great South
Bay and the other bays that are part of the estuary that lies between
mainland Long Island and the barrier beach. The plan includes
recommendations for management of the estuary in a holistic
manner. The plan addresses, “improving water quality, restoring and
protecting living resources, expanding public use and enjoyment,
sustaining the estuary–related economy and increasing public
education, outreach and stewardship...” Both Oakdale and West
Sayville are bay‐front communities that are inextricably tied to the
estuary, both economically and environmentally.

Section 1: Community Overview

Potential Regional Issues and Concerns
Long Island spans over 118 miles from New York Harbor to Montauk
Point and has a maximum width of approximately 23 miles between
the Long Island Sound to the north and the Atlantic Ocean to the
south. Long Island, the 11th largest island in the nation, has a land
area of over 1,400 square miles and is larger than the state of Rhode
Island. Due to its island geography, many of the communities and
counties within the Island share similar challenges as well as
opportunities relative to the natural environment, physical
infrastructure, and other built systems. Additionally, it is important to
understand the cause and effect relationship that occurs on the Island.
For example, new impervious development in areas north of the coast
may result in excessive run off that can degrade water quality and
increase flooding. Potential Island‐wide issues are expanded upon
below.
Natural Environment: Long Island has 1,180 miles of shoreline
fronting the Atlantic Ocean, Long Island Sound, and a number of
rivers, lakes, bays, inlets and canals. Approximately one‐fifth of Long
Island’s land is protected from development by Federal, State, County,
or municipal entities. About half of this land represents over 800
public parks on Long Island ranging from small community
playgrounds to larger parks like Fire Island National Seashore and
Connetquot River State Park Preserve.vii The continued protection of
Long Island’s water supply from sole source aquifers is also a
significant regional issue and is directly related to the preservation of
the natural environment.

Page | 28

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Developable Land Supply: Almost two‐thirds of Long Island’s land
surface is developed with buildings, pavement, and other manmade
structures. This, in combination with the large amount of
protected/preserved land, results in a limited supply of available
vacant land to accommodate new housing or economic development
activities. As such, it is expected that redevelopment will become the
primary means of providing new housing and economic development.
Water Quality: Long Island’s aquifers receive fresh water from
precipitation that percolates into the ground and is recharged into the
groundwater system. The public drinking water supply is provided by
pumping water from the ground and distributing it to homes and
other users by pipelines. In Oakdale and West Sayville, this is a
function of the Suffolk County Water Authority. So unlike other areas
of the country that often use surface water sources for drinking water
supplies (lakes, rivers), the residents of Suffolk County obtain their
water from the ground below them — from either public or private
wells. Therefore, a significant threat to the quality of this water is
development (residential/commercial/industrial) that would add
pollutants and impede the absorption of precipitation. In addition,
since most of the existing development in Oakdale and West Sayville
discharge waste water into on‐site septic systems instead of to sewage
treatment plants, this further degrades water quality. In addition,
other threats to water quality include nonpoint source pollution and
stormwater runoff, which are County‐wide concerns.

The bay is a key component of a local and regional economy that relies
on the health and stability of the estuarine ecology. As a result, the
bay is in many ways a regional resource. Degradation of water quality
as a result of nonpoint source runoff is of rising concern relative to the
bay.
Nonpoint source pollution released into the bay can result in increased
bacteria levels which in turn can lead to the closure of large areas of
the bay to economic activities like fishing as well as recreational
marine‐dependent uses. The continued discharge to ground and
surface waters in addition to increased runoff from roadways and
septic systems have been adversely impacting water quality and
vegetation in the vicinity of the Great South Bay. These water quality
concerns also have the potential to impact spawning habitats as well
as many marine species that are dependent on these systems.

Nonpoint sources typically include fertilizer and pesticides, oil and
other automobile fluid, as well as animal and pet waste. This type of
pollution has the potential to seep into groundwater and impact
surface waters such as the Great South Bay.

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 29

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Utilities: Electricity and the susceptibility of the power grid are issues
of national, regional, and local concern. Long Island’s Regional
Economic Development Council’s (REDC) strategic economic
development plan update has similarly stressed the importance of
addressing utility vulnerabilities that currently exist across the Island.
More specifically, one of the longest‐lasting impacts of Superstorm
Sandy was the vulnerability of Long Island’s electric power grid.
The Smarter Grid Research, Innovation, Development, Demonstration,
and Deployment (SGRID3) initiative, a collaboration between Stony
Brook University and Brookhaven National Laboratory, initially was
focused on the development and deployment of new smart grid
technologies as a mechanism to reduce energy and associated costs to
consumers.
However, this objective has changed in the wake of Superstorm Sandy
with the focus shifting to autonomous control capabilities that would
make Long Island’s grid more resilient during weather events, thus
able to recover more quickly in the aftermath.

Climate Change: As a coastal area, Long Island is susceptible to rising
sea levels, and especially storm surges. Flooding generated by major
weather events, 100‐year storms have been occurring with greater
frequency. According to a joint Columbia University and City University
of New York study, the sea level is anticipated to increase by 4 to 12
centimeters in the New York region by the 2020s and by 30 to 56
centimeters by 2080.viii Should polar icecaps melt rapidly, climate
models projects that sea levels will rise even more. As a result, climate
change is a significant Island‐wide issue. Other issues that are
pertinent on a regional level include those related to public health and
economic equity. These include projects designed to improve the
quality of life for the Island’s impoverished, under‐insured, or at‐risk
populations. Emergency preparedness projects are also important to
improve the overall safety of the Island’s population. These include:
maintaining evacuation route access; improving the communication
capability for a multi‐jurisdictional response during emergency events.

i

Power lines along LIRR

Section 1: Community Overview

Page | 30

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 2. Assessment of Risk and Needs

Waterfront residences along the Connetquot River, Oakdale

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

i

Page | 31

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
A. Description of Community Assets and Assessment of
Risk
One critical element of the NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Plan is to ensure that the community’s social, economic, and
natural resource assets and systems that were affected by Superstorm
Sandy are made more resilient to future storms. Assets that have
been affected by past storms or that are at risk of impact by future
storms were analyzed to determine whether reconstruction strategies
and implementation projects or actions effectively reduce risk to all
aspects of the NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Community (Community).
Assets are facilities, places, or services that fulfill economic,
environmental, and social functions of the community. Examples of
assets include facilities such as schools; medical facilities; emergency
and public safety services, including fire and police protection; as well
as natural, cultural, and recreational resources such as wetlands,
beaches, and parks. Assets also include critical infrastructure such as
roadways, mass transit, utility networks, and stormwater systems
required to support essential community functions.
The purpose of the inventory is to create a comprehensive description
of the assets within or outside of the Community whose loss or
impairment due to flood events would compromise essential functions
or critical facilities of the community. The inventory documents both
landscape features and vulnerable features of the asset itself that
contribute to flood risk and provides the basis for examining assets in
more detailed risk mapping and assessment.

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Numerous data sources were reviewed and feedback was solicited in
order to identify assets serving NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville. These
assets were initially characterized based on their location relative to
three geographic areas at risk to storm inundation and sea level rise.
The three risk areas, described below, help identify which assets have
likely been affected by coastal hazards, or could be affected in the
future:


Extreme Risk Area: Assets located in the Extreme Risk Area
are currently at risk of frequent inundation, vulnerable to
erosion in the next 40 years, or likely to be inundated in the
future due to sea level rise.



High Risk Area: Assets located outside of the Extreme Risk
Area that are currently at occasional risk of inundation or at
future risk from sea level rise.



Moderate Risk Area: Assets upland of the High Risk Area that
are currently at infrequent risk of inundation or at risk in the
future from sea level rise.

The complete inventory provides more detail on each identified asset,
such as its classification as a critical or non‐critical facility, whether the
asset serves a vulnerable population, and the relative value, or
importance, of the asset to the community.
The NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Committee (Committee) identified
the value of each asset as high, medium, or low.

Page | 32

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
A Low Value Community Asset is an individual asset or grouping of
assets that are determined by a community to play a role in the
functioning of a community’s day to day life but whose loss could be
managed and overcome within a community without substantial
impact to that community’s functioning. These assets are generally
more frequent in a community than a High or Medium Value
Community Asset and can be restarted, replaced, or temporarily
duplicated in a short‐term time frame with limited burden to a
community’s long‐term health.
A Medium Value Community Asset is determined by the community to
be important to the functioning of that community’s day to day life,
and that the loss of that asset or extended lack of functioning would
cause hardship to the community’s well‐being but who’s function could
be replaced or duplicated in a mid‐term time frame without significant
burden to a community’s long‐term health. Medium Value Community
Assets are generally more frequent in occurrence in a community than
a High Value Asset.

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

A High Value Community Asset is determined by the community to be
so significant in the support of that community’s day to day function
that the loss of that asset or extended lack of functioning would create
severe impacts to the community’s long‐term health and well‐being or
result in the loss of life or injury to residents, employees or visitors.
High Value Community Assets will also generally be limited in number
within a community and be difficult to replace in the short‐ to mid‐
term.
As part of the complete inventory, the Committee also noted
landscape attributes and physical features of the asset that tend to
influence the severity of storm impacts. For example, assets that are
located near shorelines absent of wide beaches, healthy dunes, and
protective vegetation are at increased risk of flooding. Specific
features of the asset that are at risk (e.g. mechanical equipment below
flooding elevation) are also recorded in the inventory to help guide
the selection of appropriate strategies and projects for risk reduction.
The community assets and their corresponding risk areas, identified by
the Committee and community at large, are presented in the following
tables. The complete asset inventory is found in Section 5, Part D.

Page | 33

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Initial Identification of Assets
Assets were identified through two methods: community engagement
and technical mapping. The community engagement approach was
undertaken by the Committee, which identified assets known to
community residents. In addition, the public comment and insight on
community assets was sought and provided at two Public Engagement
Events (see Section 5, Part C).

Some data sources were cross‐referenced with Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) Hazus data sets (a tool for estimating
potential losses from floods and hurricanes) for New York to verify the
accuracy of the Federal data, although in most cases, NYS DOS data
was presented.

The technical mapping effort was undertaken using several data
sources and with the active involvement of the Committee. It included
the identification of resources that may be inaccessible to the public
but regulated by a public agency (such as undeveloped parklands and
marshes), as well as those that may have been hidden in plain sight—
assets vital to the community’s health and resilience that go unnoticed
on a day‐to‐day basis because they only become obvious when they
fail, such as small roadway bridges and more obscure government
service offices. The assets identified through the mapping effort were
combined with the asset data provided by the Committee and
community residents during Committee Meetings and Public
Engagement Events. The results provided a complete picture of not
only the physical assets themselves but their value as perceived by the
community.
Map data was sourced primarily from geodatabase and shape‐file
resources provided by the NYS Department of State (NYS DOS) and
supplemented by data readily available to the public through the NYS
Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC).

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Residents completing Community Assets Survey at Public
Engagement Event held in the Communityi

Page | 34

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
addition, it includes waterfront commercial and industrial
development along the waterfront such as restaurants, marinas,
boatyards, and commercial ship repair facilities. Economic assets
also include the two colleges in the Community. Collectively, these
businesses and institutional uses are vital to maintaining the
economic base of the Community.

Risk Areas
As mentioned previously, the three risk assessment areas—Extreme,
High, and Moderate—depict geographic areas at risk from coastal
hazards according to differences in the exposure of the landscape.
Assets located in the Extreme Risk Area are currently at risk of
frequent inundation, vulnerable to erosion in the next 40 years, or
likely to be inundated in the future due to sea level rise. Assets
located in the High Risk Area are currently at frequent risk of
inundation or at future risk from sea level rise. Assets located in the
Moderate Risk Area are currently at moderate risk of inundation from
infrequent events or at risk in the future from sea level rise.

B. Description of Community Assets
An overview of NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville assets is provided below.
Scores of assets were originally catalogued based on this initial level of
review. This inventory highlighted community assets that, if impaired
as a result of hazard events, would compromise the essential social,
economic, or environmental functions of the community. The asset
classifications, including facilities and/or specific places as well as
systems (storm sewer, electric, etc.), are as follows:ix
o

Economic: The assets within this class are important to the
Community in that they help to sustain and/or rebuild businesses
and employment as well as to develop economic opportunities
that could result in more sustainable and economically resilient
communities. They are also important to the tax base both
through property tax collections and sales tax. The assets include
commercial development along Montauk Highway in both
Oakdale and West Sayville, as well as along Sunrise Highway. In

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

o

Health and Social Services (Life Safety and Administration/
Education): Strong health and social service networks are assets
that promote the resilience, health, independence, and well‐being
of the Community. During Superstorm Sandy, the Community’s
recovery was aided by the services of the first responders, but was
supplemented by neighbors helping neighbors:

“At the time of the storm I was Dean of Students for
Dowling College. As the storm approached we called a
meeting of the Crisis Emergency Response Team to
make sure that all safety precautions were being taken
as the storm approached. Our most pressing concern
were the students in the two dorms in Oakdale and
Brookhaven. We encouraged students whose homes
were in reasonable distance from the dorms to go
home in order to ride the storm out in their own homes.
For students that could not do that, we prepared them
with flashlights and discussed evacuation plans if
needed, as well as how they would be fed.
(continued on page 36)

Page | 35

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
We lost power in the Oakdale dorms due to the storm,
but did not lose power in the Brookhaven dorms. Thus
we moved all students in the Oakdale dorms to
Brookhaven via our shuttle buses.
We also made sure that the cafeteria in Brookhaven
was operable and could handle food for all remaining
students. The college did not operate for over a week
due to the loss of power. Flooding did take place in
some of the basement areas of the college. Another
big concern of the college was the protection of its IT
system and the data stored. Our IT people worked
hard at restoring most of the data and getting our
servers up and running again.
Once the college received power and we opened, we
tried to be good neighbors for those in the community.
Anyone that had not yet received power, especially
those closer to the river and bay, we gave them an
opportunity to use our showers in our Curtin Student
Center. Also, some student groups and athletic teams
volunteered to assist in the cleanup of houses in the
area. In some cases we let students whose homes
were destroyed by the storm to move into the dorms
for a period of time.”
-- Dr. Clyde Payne, NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Committee
member

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

o

Housing: Housing is the predominate land use in both Oakdale and
West Sayville and includes single‐family detached dwellings and
multiple‐family units. Local economies cannot recover from
devastating disasters without adequate housing. As a result of
Superstorm Sandy, many houses south of Montauk Highway were
damaged, including many that were severely affected by flooding
as a result of the storm’s tidal surge. Even today, many houses are
still unoccupied, some under reconstruction while others are
seemingly abandoned.

o

Infrastructure Systems (Transportation and Utilities): The
roadway and rail networks, gas mains, and the power grid are
central to the Community as they provide the ability to travel
within and between communities, access employment, fuel homes
and businesses, and communicate. The ability to restore these
functions in a timely manner after a storm, as well as better
protect these systems in future hazards, is important in terms of
supporting a viable, more resilient community. Investments in
infrastructure can be effective on two levels: rebuilding
capabilities lost during a storm and providing economic
development from job creation. Early on in the NYRCR planning
process, the Committee indicated that travel conditions, utility
outages and the ability to communicate effectively hindered the
cleanup and rebuilding process post‐Superstorm Sandy.

o

Cultural, Natural, and Recreational Resources: The benefits of
natural infrastructure in mitigating storm‐related impacts to
shorefront communities have been increasingly recognized among
hazard planners. Coastal ecosystems can help reduce wave
attenuation, deflect storm surges, mitigate erosion, and provide

Page | 36

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
stormwater retention. Many of these natural systems offer co‐
benefits: wetlands help to clean stormwater of contaminants
before it enters local waterways, thereby improving overall water
quality; shoreline green space provides wildlife habitat as well as
recreation and improved quality of life for residents. Natural
systems also require less maintenance and operations costs when
compared to engineered structures. Throughout the planning
process, the Committee placed a strong emphasis on working with
the natural environment wherever possible.
o

Socially Vulnerable Populations: The Committee recognized the
need to plan for and protect assets for those residents of the
Community that are most vulnerable including people with
disabilities, low and very‐low income populations, elderly, young
children, homeless and people at risk of becoming homeless.

Economic
Most, or approximately 92 percent, of the at‐risk commercial and
industrial properties in NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville are located along
the Montauk Highway corridor (see Table 2). Except at the extreme
eastern and western ends, the entire corridor is in a Moderate Risk
Area. The remaining commercial and industrial properties (8% of the
total) are along the waterfront in an Extreme Risk Assessment Area,
except for two properties that are within a High Risk Area. These
businesses include restaurants (Snapper Inn, View Restaurant,
Kingston’s Clam Bar), boatyards and marinas (Oakdale Yacht Service,
Green’s Creek Marina), and numerous other businesses, all of which
are very important to the Community for the services they provide as
well as for the jobs and tax base they provide. It is noted that some

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

properties have multiple businesses although they are counted as a
single parcel.

Table 2: Economic Resources
Asset/Resource (Parcels may have
multiple businesses)
7 commercial, 1 industrial property
1 commercial, 1 industrial property
109 commercial, 7 industrial
properties

Risk Area(s)
Extreme
High
Moderate

Community
Value
Medium
Medium
Medium

Health and Social Services: Life Safety
Health and Social Services: Life Safety includes fire protection, police
services, hospitals, and emergency operations facilities.
There are five emergency operations facilities in Suffolk County which
coordinate emergency services during an emergency. Two of these
facilities are along the South Shore of Long Island: the Babylon Town
Civil Defense facility is located directly north of the NYRCR Village of
Lindenhurst and is responsible for coordinating emergency response in
this portion of the County. The Islip Public Safety facility is located
between the NYRCR West Islip and the Oakdale/West Sayville
communities, and provides local response services at the Town level.
The NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Community does not have a police
station within it. The Suffolk County Police Department provides police
services for the entire Community. NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville has
two Fire Stations within it (see Table 3). Both fire stations are located
in the Moderate Risk Assessment Area. During Superstorm Sandy, the

Page | 37

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
fire stations provided essential public service and became a “refuge of
last resort” for those evacuating rapidly flooded neighborhoods.

Table 3: Fire Stations
Asset/Resource
West Sayville HQ Fire Station
West Sayville Fire Station 1

Risk Area(s)
Moderate
Moderate

Community Value
High
High

There are no hospitals located within NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville.
The closest hospital, Southside Hospital Medical Center, is located in
Bay Shore, six miles to the west.
The Community Ambulance Company, a municipal entity located in
Sayville, provides ambulance service for Oakdale and West Sayville.
The facility is not located in a risk area.

Health and Social Services: Administration and Education
Community assets related to Health and Social Services:
Administration and Education serve a variety of public functions, from
health treatment facilities to general purpose shelters in public
schools and fire stations. During a storm event, these facilities may
serve as critical disaster response and recovery centers, the
identification of which is essential to future disaster management and
preparedness.
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), within the U.S. Department
of Transportation, owns the one non‐recreational Federal site in
NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville. Located in a non‐risk area (see Table 4),
the site was formerly a communications facility owned by the German
government. It was seized by the United States at the start of World

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

War I and has remained in Federal ownership since that time. The site
consists about 100 acres of primarily open, undeveloped grasslands
that provide an important habitat to the area. It is adjacent to open
space owned by the Town of Islip.

Table 4: Federal Non‐Recreation Areas
Asset/Resource
Risk Area(s)
U.S. Dept. Of Transportation N/A
(FAA)

Community Value
Medium

N/A – Not applicable as asset is located outside of a Risk Area

There are six facilities operated by the Office for Persons with
Developmental Disabilities (OPWDD) located in the Community (see
Table 5). Two lie within a Moderate Risk Area along Montauk Highway
near the Oakdale Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) station in the western
portion of NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville. The remaining four facilities
are in the northeast portion of the Community within a non‐risk area.

Table 5: NYS OPWDD State and Voluntary Program Locations
Asset/Resource
Montauk Highway Individualized
Residential Alternative
Vanderbilt Boulevard
Individualized Residential
Alternative
Sycamore Avenue
Bourne Boulevard
Skills Unlimited
Waiver Services, Day Training,
Sheltered Workshop

Risk Area(s)
Moderate

Community Value
High

Moderate

High

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

High
High
High
High

N/A – Not applicable as asset is located outside of a Risk Area

Page | 38

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The Oakdale and West Sayville post offices are located along Montauk
Highway (see Table 6). Both lie within a Moderate Risk Area.

Table 6: Post Offices
Asset/Resource
Oakdale Post Office
West Sayville Post Office

Risk Area(s)
Moderate
Moderate

Community Value
Medium
Medium

Four religious institutions have been identified as being in a Moderate
Risk Area (see Table 7).

Risk Area(s)
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate

Asset/Resource
Dowling College
St. John’s University
Idle Hour Elementary
Arthur Perm School
Oakdale Bohemia Middle School
Cherry Avenue School (Shelter)
West Sayville Christian School
Sayville High School (Shelter)

Risk Area(s)
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
N/A
Moderate
N/A

Community Value
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
High
Medium
High

N/A – Not applicable as asset is located outside of a Risk Area

Table 7: Religious Institutions
Asset/Resource
Saint John’s Church
B’nai Israel Reform Temple
Christian Reformed Church
House of Judah

Table 8: Schools

Community Value
Low
Low
Low
Low

There are eight schools located in NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville. Five
schools are located in Moderate Risk Areas near the LIRR rail line and
Montauk Highway. Three of the schools are identified by Suffolk
County as emergency shelter facilities, as noted in the following table.
Two are located within non‐risk areas, while one, the Oakdale
Bohemia Middle School, is located within a Moderate Risk Area near
the Oakdale LIRR station. See Table 8.

NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville contains two State‐owned properties,
both of which are located in the southwest region of the Community
within Moderate and Moderate to Extreme Risk Areas (Table 9).

Table 9: State‐owned Buildings and Properties
Asset/Resource
Department of Environmental
Conservation ‐ Ludlow's Creek Tidal
Wetlands
Department of Environmental
Conservation ‐ Pickman‐Remmer
Tidal Wetland
Office for People with
Developmental Disabilities ‐
Sayville Hostel #2102

Risk Area(s)
Moderate

Community Value
Medium

Extreme, High, Medium
Moderate
N/A

High

N/A – Not applicable as asset is located outside of a Risk Area

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page | 39

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Housing
There are over 3,000 residential structures in Risk Assessment Areas
(Table 10). Approximately half are located in a Moderate Risk
Assessment Area north of Montauk Highway. The remaining
structures—comprised almost entirely of single‐family homes—are
situated south of Montauk Highway and within Extreme and High Risk
Areas. Approximately 90 percent of the multi‐family and two‐to‐three‐
family structures are located north of Montauk Highway.

Table 10: Housing Resources
Asset/Resource

Risk Area(s)

Community Value

764 single‐family, 4 multi‐family
362 single‐family, 2 two‐three‐
family, 4 multi‐family structures
1,818 single‐family, 41 two‐
three‐family, 48 multi‐family

Extreme
High

High
High

Moderate

High

Road, Locust Avenue, and Cherry Avenue) are situated within the
Community. Each of these is gate‐protected with two crossing gates.
A total of six LIRR spans, built in the early 1960s, were identified as
being in poor condition based on State data.x Other identified
resources are listed in Table 11:

Table 11: Bridges in Poor Condition
Asset/Resource
Byron Lake Pk. Pad. (BIN #
2261270)
Biltmore Ave. Bridge

Risk Area(s) Community Value
High
High
Extreme

High

Two scour critical bridges, noted in Table 12, are located in NYRCR
Oakdale/West Sayville, both near the Grand Canal. A scour bridge
condition occurs when water erodes the soil and sediment around the
support structures of the bridge, potentially undermining the bridge
itself. It is one of the main causes of bridge failure.

Infrastructure: Transportation

Table 12: Critical Bridges

Assets in this category include both transportation infrastructure as
well as transportation‐related facilities.

Asset/Resource
Risk Area(s) Community Value
Shore Drive crossing Grand Canal Extreme
High
(BIN # 3300750)
Hollywood Drive crossing Grand Extreme
High
Canal (BIN # 3300760)

Major roadways extending through Oakdale and West Sayville include
Sunrise Highway (SR 27), which generally represents the northern
boundary of this Community. SR 27 in the vicinity of Pond Road is
within a Moderate Risk Area. Montauk Highway/Main Street (SR 27A)
extends through a Moderate Risk Area with a small area west of
Barmen’s Court/Sunset Drive in an Extreme Risk Assessment Area.
The LIRR Montauk line provides service to points west and east and
has a station in Oakdale. Three grade crossings (Oakdale Bohemia

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Infrastructure: Utilities
A number of key utilities are located within this Community’s
Moderate Risk Assessment Area, including sewage treatment plants,
drinking water wells and communications towers (see Table 13).
Properties dedicated to flood control are found in both the Extreme

Page | 40

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
and Moderate Risk Areas. Flood control properties include recharge
basins that collect, store, and recharge stormwater. Water, electric
and gas distribution systems have not been mapped and quantified
here but are distributed throughout developed areas in these Risk
Areas.

Table 13: Infrastructure Resources
Asset/Resource
2 flood control properties
5 flood control properties
1 water treatment plant
2 sewage treatment plants
1 drinking water well
4 microwave and cell towers
1 rail support facility

Risk Area(s)
Extreme
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate

Community Value
High
High
High
High
High
High
High

Natural and Cultural Resources
Natural and Cultural Resources include natural habitats, wetlands and
marshes, recreation facilities, parks, open space, religious
establishments, libraries, museums, historic landmarks, and
performing arts venues.
The South Shore of Long Island has historically been and continues to
be a natural and recreational resource of value to the region. This area
is also most likely to be inundated during a storm event. However,
undeveloped natural coastal resources such as wetlands and marshes
may provide protective detention capacity, thereby lessening the
impact of storm surges on inland locations. Many of these shoreline
resources are relatively large in geographic area and span multiple
Risk Areas.

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Natural and Cultural Resources are named according to the data set
provided by the responsible government agency. Natural features that
are elements of the landscape and not given place names by an
agency are not named or listed individually. When wetlands are
associated with a water body, they are named as associated with that
water body.
The NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Community is buffered from the
Great South Bay by a network of tidal marshes and wetlands. These
areas are identified as parks, but serve more of an ecological function
than a traditional recreational one (see Table 14). Many of the
parkland and natural resources are located in the Extreme Risk Area
where they are at risk of frequent inundation or are vulnerable to
erosion.

Table 14: Parkland Resources
Asset/Resource
Ludlow’s Creek State Tidal
Wetlands
Connetquot River (aka
Packman‐ Remmer) State Tidal
Pepperidge Hall Marsh State
Tidal Wetlands

Risk Area(s)
Extreme,
High,
Moderate
Extreme,
High
Extreme,
High

Community Value
Low

Low
Low

The rivers and creeks that flow north‐to‐south are bordered by
freshwater wetlands that transition into tidal wetlands near the coast
(see Table 15). One isolated maritime grassland is located in a non‐risk
area north of the LIRR.

Page | 41

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
i. Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems

Table 15: Natural Resources
Asset/Resource
Tidal Wetlands associated with
Indian Creek and unnamed water
bodies in State tidal wetland
resource areas
Freshwater Wetlands associated
with West Brook, Indian Creek,
and Green Creek
Natural Heritage Priority
Communities:
Maritime Grasslands

Risk Area(s)
Extreme, High

Community Value
Low

Extreme, High,
Moderate

Low

N/A

Low

N/A – Not applicable as asset is located outside of a Risk Area

Two National Register‐listed resources are located in NYRCR
Oakdale/West Sayville (see Table 16). Both are north of Montauk
Highway, outside of but immediately adjacent to the Moderate Risk
area.

Risk is the chance that an asset will be damaged or destroyed.
Assessing the risk to community assets and systems helped the
Committee identify projects and understand measures to help restore
and protect its assets at greatest flood risk while also ensuring
appropriate long‐term economic growth.
A standardized risk assessment tool was used to assist the NYRCR
Oakdale/West Sayville Committee assess and quantify the risk to their
assets, and later, to test whether various projects are effective at
reducing risk. The asset inventory provided a baseline to identify the
most critical assets in the community to be advanced through the Risk
Assessment Tool for further analysis. The assets selected from the
inventory for input into the Risk Assessment Tool included:




Table 16: National Register Listed Historic Resources
Asset/Resource
Jacob Ockers House
St. John's Episcopal Church and
Cemetery

Risk Area(s)
N/A
N/A

Community Value
Low
Low




Assets situated in Extreme and High Risk Areas;
Critical Assets (FEMA‐critical) in Moderate Risk Areas;
Locally‐significant community identified (High Community
Value) in Moderate Risk Areas;
Assets with High Community Value in Non Risk Areas; and
Assets providing critical life safety services

N/A – Not applicable as asset is located outside of a Risk Area

NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville is also home to two National Historic
Landmarks, both at the Long Island Maritime Museum in West
Sayville. Both landmarks are vessels: the Priscilla, which is in the
water, and the Modesty, which is currently unrestored and in storage
above the flood zone.

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page | 42

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
In addition, assets in close proximity with similar functions and
vulnerable characteristics were grouped as a single asset to the
maximum extent possible because these assets would likely
experience the same effects from storm events. For example,
residential neighborhoods with similar construction were
combined by risk area.

otherwise unprotected), they are more likely to suffer storm
effects than similar assets located at a higher elevation, on a
rocky shoreline, or protected by dunes. Similarly, landscape
features and vegetation are more important for an asset
proximate to a flood source than an asset further inland.
o

For each asset, or group of assets, that was advanced through the
risk assessment tool, a risk score was produced based on three
contributing factors to an asset’s overall risk:
Hazard x Exposure x Vulnerability = Riskxi
The three factors that contribute to the measure of overall risk for
each asset are:
o

o

Hazard: The likelihood and magnitude of future storm
events. Examples of the most common hazard risks include
coastal flooding, flooding in a 100‐year floodplain, sea level
rise, or hurricanes. Typically, an asset located in an Extreme
risk area experiences hazards with greater frequency and
intensity than assets in a High or Moderate Risk Area. This
risk assessment uses the “100‐year” flood event, which has a
1% chance of occurrence in any given year, as the baseline
event.
Exposure: The variability of local topographic and shoreline
features which tend to increase or decrease storm effects on
assets. If assets are more exposed (e.g., situated on low‐lying
floodplains, directly exposed to a probable storm surge, or

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Vulnerability: The level of impairment or consequences that
assets may experience from a storm event, expressed by the
capacity of an asset to return to service after a storm. If an
asset recovers quickly with limited interruption in service it
has low vulnerability. An asset with extended service loss or
permanently reduced capacity would be considered to be
significantly vulnerable.

The final risk scores will provide the community with a general sense
of which assets are at greatest risk, and where projects and
management measures are needed to adapt assets to future storms
and environmental changes. The list of assets advanced through the
risk assessment tool, and their corresponding risk scores, are provided
in Section 5.D Additional Materials.

Risk Assessment Results
The Asset Inventory Worksheet and corresponding Risk Assessment
Tool data and scores for Oakdale and West Sayville are provided in
Section 5, Part D. Generally, but in not all instances, risk dissipates the
further upland an asset is from the water.

Page | 43

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The inventory catalogued 51 assets that were carried through for
analysis in the Risk Assessment Tool. These assets ranged from
residential areas within Moderate, High, and Extreme Risk Areas
primarily south of Montauk Highway to commercial clusters along
Montauk Highway and on the waterfront. Natural resource systems
such as the extensive New York State wetlands were also inventoried
as well as major and secondary roads and critical facilities. Other asset
categories included transportation facilities, communication, and
commercial/economic uses.

The area south of Montauk Highway is predominantly comprised of
residential properties. It also includes important waterfront
commercial centers that contribute to both the local and regional
economy. In Oakdale, much of the area south of Montauk Highway is
subject to chronic, recurring flooding during both major storms and
typical seasonal weather and extreme high tides. In fact, during Public
Engagement Event #2, the Committee conducted a planning exercise
where the public was given the opportunity to map roads that were
chronically flooded, defined as flooding several times a year. This
exercise pointed to the inherent nature of the problem: that the
community is located in a low‐elevation, high‐groundwater
environment facing sea level rise and the impacts of infill development
and an associated increase in impervious area.
It is significant to note that at least fifteen assets or asset systems
ranked by the Risk Assessment Tool (out of 51) were classified as high.
Risk scores in this category are indicative of conditions that could lead
to significant negative outcomes from a storm. These conditions could
include severe flooding as a result of storm surge and a threat to life
safety due to difficulties in evacuating these areas. This was illustrated
during Superstorm Sandy when some locations were inundated with
five feet of water. Also, such conditions could cause extensive
building and property damage. Such damage could result from the
force of the floodwaters and also due to delays in responding to fires
and other emergencies that may occur during storms.

Committee Members identifying areas of flood inundation at Public
Engagement Eventi

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

The following assets received the highest risk score among the
inventoried assets: Oakdale Residential Housing (portions within the
Extreme Risk Area), the West Sayville Residential Housing (portions
within the Extreme Risk Area), the West Sayville waterfront

Page | 44

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
commercial area, the Idle Hour Taxpayer Association Beach Club, the
Long Island Maritime Museum, secondary streets located within the
Extreme Risk Areas, the Oakdale Waterfront commercial area, and the
West Sayville downtown commercial area.

low elevation. The facility provides a recreational use to the Community,
and its loss would diminish the areas quality of life as well as access to the
waterfront. As a nonprofit facility, the expense of reconstruction may be
a deterrent to rebuilding and recovery of the use.

Generally, assets located along the waterfront or adjacent to creeks
have higher risk scores because they are more likely to be inundated
during extreme events. This situation is compounded by the low
elevation relative to sea level and exposure to storm surges of this
Community. In Oakdale, for example, the low elevation extends for
approximately 3,400 feet along Vanderbilt Boulevard before the
elevation rises to meet the Base Flood Elevation. Base Flood Elevation
is the national regulatory standard of a flood event having a one
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; it is
also known as the “100 year flood event.”

The Long Island Maritime Museum is a regional asset that serves an
historic and cultural purpose. It is in an Extreme Risk Area due to its
frontage directly on the Bay and the low topography characteristic of
the area. Loss or damage to this asset could potentially affect
important historic and cultural resources that are irreplaceable.

The significance of this risk and the exposure of these areas can affect
the community in a direct manner. Houses within the Extreme Risk
Area can experience conditions that can place residents at areas at risk
and even displacement. The housing can also be subject to damage
and the loss of use on a temporary or long‐term basis.
For the waterfront commercial uses in Oakdale and West Sayville, the
most immediate impact to the community is the loss of economic
activity. This can include the jobs directly associated with the
commercial activity as well as the ripple effect to secondary jobs
associated with those businesses such as suppliers and service
providers.
The Idle Hour Taxpayers Association Beach Club is located directly on
the Connetquot River where it meets the Great South Bay. It is exposed
to the risk of storm hazards because of its frontage on the water and its

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

The secondary streets in the Extreme Risk Area are extensive and vital
to the functioning of the Community. These include Shore Drive and
Vanderbilt Boulevard in Oakdale, Shore Road in West Sayville and
Sunset Drive in Sayville, among others. As with many of the other
assets, the secondary roads are affected by exposure to flood
conditions as a result of the low‐lying topography. The flooding is
chronic, with many locations inundated several times a year. This
impacts the surrounding community on several levels, including the
ongoing need for evacuation and emergency response, the disruption
to waterfront businesses, and the inconvenience to daily life for
affected residents.
The Risk Table (Table 17) provides an identification number for each
asset shown on the Risk Map (Figure 2). The table is color‐coded by
risk level: Severe Risk assets (shown in red in the table and map) are in
a dangerous situation or location; High Risk assets (orange) are prone
to significant negative outcomes from a storm; Moderate Risk (yellow)
pose moderate to serious storm consequences; and Residual Risk
assets (green) occur when both vulnerability and exposure are
relatively low, posing a minor threat with infrequent occurrences.

Page | 45

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 2: Risk Assessment Map

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page | 46

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 17: Risk Scores
ID#
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

Name
Economic
Oakdale Waterfront Commercial
West Sayville Downtown
West Sayville Waterfront Commercial
Oakdale Downtown
Health and Social Services
St. Johns University
Oakdale Bohemia Middle School (Shelter)
Sayville High School (Shelter)
West Sayville Fire Department Headquarters
West Sayville Fire Station #1
Housing
Oakdale Residential Housing ‐ Extreme Risk Area
West Sayville Residential Housing ‐ Extreme Risk Area
Oakdale Residential Housing ‐ High Risk Area
Oakdale Residential Housing ‐ Moderate Risk Area
West Sayville Residential Housing ‐ High Risk Area
West Sayville Residential Housing ‐ Moderate Risk Area
Fairfield Senior Apartments
Greenview Court Senior Apartments
Greenview Senior Apartments
Infrastructure Systems
Secondary Streets
Hollywood Dr. Bridge at Grand Canal ‐ Scour Critical Bridge
Shore Drive Bridge at Grand Canal ‐ Scour Critical Bridge
Biltmore Ave Bridge
Cell Tower ‐ West Sayville Fire Department
Cell Tower
Dowling College ‐ Wastewater System
West Avenue Town Dock
LIRR Montauk Branch Rail Line
Dutchman's Cove Townhouses ‐ Wastewater System

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

ID#
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51

Name
Greenview Court Senior Apartments ‐ Wastewater System
Oakcreek Commons ‐ Wastewater System
State Hwy 27
Byron Lake Park Pedestrian Bridge
SCWA Facility
SCWA ‐ Montauk Highway Treatment Plant and Wells
LIRR Oakdale Station + Buildings
Natural and Cultural Resources
Long Island Maritime Museum
Idle Hour Taxpayer Association Beach Club
W.O.R.C. Beach/Recreation
W.O.R.C. Marina (Private)
Green's Creek County Park
Connetquot Brook
Green's Creek
Indian Creek
West Brook
Ludows Creek State Tidal Wetlands
Pepperidge Hall Marsh State Tidal Wetlands
Pickman‐Remmer Wetlands
West Sayville County Park and Golf Course
Byron Lake Town Park
Socially Vulnerable Populations
Adults and Children With Learning and Developmental
Disabilities Facility
Ocker's House Senior Housing

COLOR KEY:

Extreme Risk Range
High Risk Range
Moderate Risk Range
Residual Risk Range

Page | 47

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 3: Asset Map

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page | 48

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
The NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Planning Committee (Committee)
initially identified needs and opportunities based on the Community’s
reconstruction and economic growth goals, existing plans and studies,
and the Community’s overall vision for its future.
The term ”need” is used here to illustrate infrastructure and services
that were damaged or rendered inoperable by Superstorm Sandy as
well as methods and operations that failed to work during the storm
event or experienced insufficient capacity to respond effectively.
During a disaster, many things can go wrong, including
communications breakdowns, equipment failure, infrastructure
damage, and more.
Thinking through what took place during the storm event, as well as
what was damaged, provided the Committee with insights as to the
inherent resiliency of those structures, procedures, and operations.
This assessment process led to a frank discussion of community needs
and included recognition of changing climate patterns and the
economic and practical necessity of factoring resiliency and adaptive
capacity into recovery actions.
Opportunities are based on the idea that additional resiliency benefits,
whether economic, environmental, social, or cultural, may be
achieved through the integration of new methods, procedures, and
materials into the normal course of rebuilding.

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

The post‐disaster environment also presents opportunities to rebuild
in such a way to create a community that is stronger and more
resilient to future storms. Resilient communities tend to have
redundant infrastructure and communication systems, diverse and
flexible adaptation strategies, and collaborative public and private
partnerships.
Throughout this plan, strategies and projects are categorized by their
Recovery Support Function (RSF). The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) uses these RSFs to identify, coordinate,
and ultimately deliver assistance to the Community from several
different funding sources involved in the recovery effort – e.g.,
Federal, State, private, and not‐for‐profit. The Economic Development
RSF, for example, will help bring together all the possible sources of
assistance available to achieve business recovery and resiliency
through the projects identified by the Community. The six RSFs are:






Community Planning and Capacity Building: The community’s
ability both to implement storm recovery activities and to plan
to mitigate the effects of future storms.
Economic Development: Returning economic and business
activities to a state of health and developing new economic
opportunities that result in a stronger, more resilient
community.
Health and Social Services: The restoration, and potential
expansion of public health programs, health care facilities, and
essential social services, especially for vulnerable populations
in NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville.

Page | 49

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan






Housing: An assessment of local housing conditions and
associated risk levels is critical as communities continue to
rebuild.
Infrastructure: Investments in infrastructure can be effective
both in rebuilding capabilities lost during the storm and in
reducing future risks to critical assets.
Natural and Cultural Resources: The rehabilitation,
management, and protection of the natural and cultural
resources, including historic properties that define the
community’s physical and human character.

Community Planning and Capacity Building
The NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Community identified the need for
planning and capacity building at several levels. This included flood
protection issues and ideas such as adopting of the National Flood
Insurance Program’s Community Rating System. This program would
provide reduced flood insurance premiums for various programs to
reduce risk at the community level. Also, the Committee noted the
need to complete the Town’s Local Waterfront Revitalization Plan for
the NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Community.
The need to protect structures was a critical concern along with the
mitigation of damage in the future. The Committee discussed
significant problems during Superstorm Sandy with a general lack of
preparation and awareness by residents. There was confusion about
which shelters were open and frustration that there were none
available in either Oakdale or West Sayville. Compounding this were
difficulties with evacuation due to flooded roads, downed trees and
power lines.

Economic Development
The Committee noted that an essential part of the character and
economy of the NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Community is tied to
the water: the Great South Bay and the Connetquot River.
i

Working waterfront in West Sayville

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

The Committee discussed the opportunities that this presented to the
communities and expressed the need to capitalize on the marine
industry as a tool for economic growth. It was also noted that Oakdale
and West Sayville both have downtowns located along Montauk
Highway. In addition, commercial development is located along

Page | 50

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Sunrise Highway at the northern edge of the Community. The Oakdale
community has had a long‐term vision for a more cohesive, compact,
and walkable downtown. While a specific vision plan was completed
for Oakdale in 2008, the community would benefit from a more
detailed plan that would serve as a blueprint to implementation.
As coastal communities, Oakdale and West Sayville have significant
waterfront commercial development that includes restaurants,
marinas, shipyards and other vital businesses. These activities add to
the local economy and also contribute to the historic maritime identity
of both communities. However, opportunities for expansion of
waterfront development are very limited; therefore the opportunity to
expand economic development in the downtown areas is important.
Protection of the shoreline and coastal areas with increased public
access was also viewed as important to the long‐term economic well‐
being of NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville.

Health and Social Services
Following Superstorm Sandy, the health and safety needs of the
residents of Oakdale and West Sayville covered a wide range of
immediate and long‐term issues. These included problems with
blocked evacuation routes, failing communication services, the lack of
local storm shelters, to longer‐term issues with the resumption of
basic health care. Committee Members described what it was like to
deal with an almost complete loss of electronic communication and
the feelings of isolation and vulnerability that this created. The
Committee’s idea for a physical message center, a fallback to simple
paper message posting in a central place, was one response to this

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

need. Similarly, interest in a local emergency shelter with sufficient
supplies and back‐up power was also in response to the fundamental
need for safety and security, especially for the most vulnerable
populations.

Housing
The Committee and the Community discussed the need for
improvements to the resiliency of the existing housing stock. Some of
this work is underway as some property owners have repaired homes
damaged from Superstorm Sandy. More visible are resiliency
improvements that include the raising of the structures to above the
base flood elevation. One example is a cluster of homes on Fern Place
in Oakdale.
The Committee identified a strong need to improve Downtown
Oakdale through the implementation of a plan prepared by the Town
of Islip entitled, Oakdale Hamlet Center Vision Plan (2008).
The plan identified many needs including the diversification of the
housing stock through the creation of dwellings for smaller
households. It recommended mixed‐use development where
commercial uses co‐exist with residential uses. An example of this
type of development is found in many downtowns where retail stores
exist on the first floor, street level of a building with apartments
above. The development of this type of housing in Oakdale would help
to achieve a two‐fold purpose of increasing the supply of a needed
housing type and fostering a compact and walkable form of
development.

Page | 51

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Infrastructure
The impact of Superstorm Sandy on infrastructure was of significant
concern to both the Committee and the residents of the Community.
Roads, drainage systems, electrical lines, and communication facilities
were extensively impacted and affected public health, safety, and
quality of life. In particular, the neighborhoods below Montauk
Highway were severely impacted and a clear need for long‐term
mitigation measures to address repetitive flooding was noted. These
areas included large portions of the Idle Hour neighborhood as well as
parts of West Sayville and Sayville.
Residents described problems caused by loss of access to their
properties due to flooded roads and inoperable drainage systems. One
resident of Grassmere Road in Oakdale observed four feet of water on
Shore Drive during Superstorm Sandy. It was noted that while these
problems were severe during Superstorm Sandy, the incidence of
flooding is chronic in many locations with storms of much less
intensity.
Power outages throughout the communities were prevalent and
recovery extended to well over a week in many cases. This greatly
impacted the business districts that were generally spared of flood
impacts but rendered inoperable due to prolonged power outages.
The most significant infrastructure need identified by the Committee
was for a community‐wide wastewater collection and treatment
system. This was apparent during the storm when inoperable on‐site
septic systems and backed‐up sewage lines caused sewage to flow into
streets and backyards. It was also apparent when the Committee
considered the long‐term needs of the Community for a more

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

sustainable system of wastewater disposal that would address both
water quality and economic development.

Natural and Cultural Resources
The Committee placed a high value on the natural environment by
noting the coastal location and the significance of the Connetquot
River and the Great South Bay to the identity, economy, and
environment of both communities. This was echoed in comments
expressed by the community. Accordingly, the Committee expressed
the importance of protecting the remaining vacant, environmentally
sensitive lands within flood zones and watersheds. Also, the
Committee noted the importance of restoring and conserving existing
wetlands so that they are able to absorb storm energy, accommodate
tidal surges, and reduce vulnerability of the communities to future
storm events.
In terms of cultural resources, the Committee noted the extensive
historic properties throughout the Community and the significance of
these sites to the identity of the communities. Interestingly, the
Committee held two of their Public Engagement Events in two of the
larger historic buildings within the Community. The Committee was
fully supportive of preserving and improving the historic and cultural
sites and accentuating them as opportunities for increased tourism as
a means of economic resiliency.
Table 18 on the following pages tabulates how the Committee
identified its needs and opportunities in each of the six RSF categories.

Page | 52

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 18: Needs and Opportunities
Community Planning and Capacity Building
Need: Planning for flood protection and coastal management.
Opportunity: Consider adoption of National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Community Rating System (CRS). Consider completion of Local
Waterfront Revitalization Plan.
Need: Overcome confusion about location of storm shelters and about best ways to protect life and property.
Opportunity: Initiate educational programs at the start of the storm season to remind people where shelters are, how to protect homes, and
persons.
Need: Mitigate extensive damage to homes and commercial properties in the Extreme and High Risk Areas.
Opportunity: Review current management/regulatory approaches in Extreme and High Risk Areas and revise to require more resilient construction
and repairs.
Economic Development
Need: Greater focus on marine resources and economy of the area.
Opportunity: Promote the maritime presence of Oakdale and West Sayville in order to foster a more cohesive image throughout each of the
hamlets.
Need: Increase awareness of the economic activity associated with the marine industry, including boatyards, marinas, marine supply, and other
related recreational and commercial businesses.
Opportunity: Support and capitalize on marine related economic activity such as considering the feasibility/appropriateness of additional marine
commercial activities.
Need: Bolster business district activity outside of the Extreme and High Risk Areas.
Opportunity: Strengthen the business district along Montauk Highway in Oakdale as a pedestrian‐scale, dynamic commercial district. Also consider
adding residential uses.
Need: Improve resiliency of shoreline and enhance public access.
Opportunity: Incorporate shoreline restoration with increased public access to the waterfront in Oakdale.
Need: Improve resiliency of the local economy.
Opportunity: Encourage development along the Montauk Highway corridor in Oakdale.
Health and Social Services
Need: Improved communications during and after storm events.
Opportunity: Designate a single location for a message center that could be used for sharing information including identification of those with needs.
Need: Improve access to storm shelters.
Opportunity: Several potential shelter sites exist within NYRCR Oakdale/Sayville.

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page | 53

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 18 (cont’d)
Need: Improve response times of emergency services.
Opportunity: Improve road conditions for critical emergency access routes through tree and storm debris removal.
Housing
Need: Rebuild existing housing to be more resilient.
Opportunity: Consider adding residential uses to Downtown Oakdale (Montauk Highway). Consider mixed‐use commercial‐residential structures.
Infrastructure
Need: Maintain clear evacuation routes.
Opportunity: Consider raising the elevation of roads that are subject to chronic flooding, especially collector roads.
Need: Prevent contamination of groundwater and surface water resources caused by limited treatment, on‐site wastewater disposal systems.
Opportunity: Investigate feasibility of creating a community‐wide wastewater treatment system.
Opportunity: Investigate options for existing drainage structures that may serve as conduits for incoming tidal surges with resultant neighborhood
flooding.
Need: Regular tree removal or maintenance program to protect above ground utilities.
Opportunity: Investigate potential for burying overhead utility infrastructure.
Infrastructure
Regional Need: Continuity and recovery of all utilities including electric, telephone, and internet.
Regional Need: Continuity of gasoline/diesel fuel supply including power at retail dealers.
Regional Need: Protect or elevate LIRR tracks over Connetquot River/Rattlesnake Brook.
Natural and Cultural Resources
Need: Prevent flooding from storm surge from compounding flooding caused by stormwater runoff.
Opportunity: Investigate better use of wetlands to mitigate storm surge or to contain stormwater runoff.
Need: Protect key properties and infrastructure from storm surge and tidal flooding.
Opportunity: Consider placement of bulkhead further upland.
Opportunity: Consider raising bulkhead at West Avenue dock.
Need: To improve ability of individual homeowners and businesses to maintain power during and after major storm events.
Opportunity: Improve permit process for generator installations and consider other incentives to encourage the installation of generators and flood
resistant electrical panels.

Section 2: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Page | 54

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 3. Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

View of the Great South Bay looking towards Fire Island from the Oakdale campus of St. John’s University

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

i

Page | 55

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The process of identifying the community’s post‐storm needs and
opportunities informed the Committee’s development of strategies to
resolve these needs and realize opportunities. In turn, the strategies
assisted in the conceptualization and design of projects to specifically
address these needs and opportunities. Strategies can be used to
identify and guide implementation of projects, programs, policies, or
other actions that specifically address an identifiable need. Typically,
several strategies may address a given need. For example,
communities are most successful when they blend traditional
stabilization and repair actions with a holistic, long‐range, forward‐
looking vision of recovery and economic development. This section
presents the strategies developed by the Oakdale/West Sayville
Planning Committee (Committee) for how best to use community
assets, capitalize on opportunities, and resolve critical issues.
For every need, opportunity, and resiliency issue, potential strategies
were generated from multiple management angles. The list of
strategies spans an array of methodologies and timeframes, from
preparedness to retrofits, from immediate procedural improvements
to long‐range capital investment programs. Strategies also include
conservation of natural protective features, regulatory changes and
building code updates, structural defenses, resilient retrofits, market
measures, land use planning, and education and outreach in an effort
to employ multiple, complementary actions rather than relying on a
single means of protection.

As general resiliency strategies evolved to specific projects and
actions, several factors were considered to begin identifying the most
effective and feasible strategies. These considerations included how
each strategy relates to Superstorm Sandy’s impacts on Oakdale/West
Sayville; to what extent each strategy would reduce current and
projected risk; whether it contributed to protection of vulnerable
populations; feasibility of a successful implementation; compliance
with existing regulations; upfront and long‐term maintenance costs;
direct and indirect benefits; and public perception.

A. Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
To rebuild a more resilient community, the Committee developed
reconstruction strategies, which were derived from assets that were
identified as being at risk relative to the community’s needs; all of
which was discussed in the previous section of this report. Each
strategy was designed to take into account the following
considerations:
(1) Whether it reduced the level of risk and met an identified
community need;
(2) Whether it helped (or improved the resiliency of) vulnerable
populations; and
(3) Whether it could be implemented through discrete programs
and/or projects.

Careful consideration was given to what is at risk, what resources are
available, and the capacity to implement various management
measures.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 56

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Ensure emergency shelters are located within the community.
Residents felt vulnerable and isolated during and after Superstorm Sandy and many were not comfortable leaving their homes to go to
designated shelters located outside of the Community. As such, the Committee expressed the importance of assessing the sufficiency and needs
of existing shelters, and if current locations are not suitable, to consider alternate locations. This strategy addresses a basic need of the
population, especially those that are most vulnerable, by providing a nearby shelter that will be compliant with the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA).
A project to advance this strategy and address the Community Planning and Capacity Building Recovery Support Function could be implemented
by developing an effective plan for pre‐ and post‐disaster to ensure the protection of residents through safe, well‐equipped shelters within the
community. Additional resiliency recommendations associated with this strategy includes the use of the local fire stations as “shelters of last
resort.” See Table 31 in Section 5.A for more information on Additional Resiliency Recommendations.
Table 19: Strategy
Ensure adequate emergency shelters are located within the community.

Project Name
Emergency Shelter‐
Identification, hardening

Short Description
This project will identify all emergency shelters that
currently serve the Community. It would include a
review of the adequacy of the shelters and
determine any issues or needs, working with
emergency response authorities. If additional
facilities are needed or existing shelters should be
relocated, alternate locations would be reviewed.
Also, the project will review on‐site supplies at each
evacuation center and plan for an on‐site generator
in at least one shelter location.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost
$380,000

Proposed or
Featured
Project
Proposed

Regional
Project
(Y/N)
N

Page | 57

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Improve storm preparedness and resiliency of community residents.
The Committee heard from many residents about the lack of information about storm preparation, which led to many feeling ill‐ prepared and
vulnerable during the storm. Improving the Community Planning and Capacity Building Support capacity of the Community and the Town of Islip
by establishing a regular and open dialogue with emergency management agencies would partly address this need for more timely information
about how to prepare and weather storm events, including when to evacuate and where to shelter. Further, the development of educational
materials will also assist residents, including those most vulnerable, in the development of individual disaster plans in order to be appropriately
equipped and ready for potential storms.
To address this strategy, a Proposed project focused on providing public education related to storm preparedness and improving communication
with emergency services has been developed. This project could be implemented immediately within 12 months. The Committee also identified
several additional resiliency projects associated with this strategy including improving communication at the community level, the establishment
of a physical message center in a central location, as well as improving communication at the governmental level. See Table 31 in Section 5.A for
more information on Additional Resiliency Recommendations.
Table 20: Strategy
Improve storm preparedness and resiliency of community residents.
Project Name
Annual Education/ Coordination
Program

Short Description
This project will focus on improving
preparedness among the population and
coordination with the emergency response
agencies. It would develop educational
materials including handbooks, brochures,
a website, signage, etc. It would also
review current agency coordination
protocols and determine methods to
improve coordination and communication.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost
$100,000

Proposed or
Featured
Project
Proposed

Regional Project
(Y/N)
N

Page | 58

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Increase awareness of, and access to, resources for hazard mitigation, preparedness, and response.
This strategy addresses the Community Planning and Capacity Building Recovery Support Function in that it recognizes the need for enhanced
communications related to emergency management and increased public awareness of risk management and hazard mitigation measures. The
strategy would address risk in the entire Town of Islip by coordinating emergency management and record collection efforts as well as reduce
the gaps in information flow and accuracy. The strategy also focuses on identifying hazards and assisting residents to be prepared in the face of
an oncoming storm in order to protect life and property of those at risk of becoming homeless due to storm damage. Improving emergency
response is also a focus of this strategy, which includes reducing response time to reach vulnerable populations. One proposed project includes
the Enhanced GIS Emergency Management system which would increase the efficiency of data gathering post‐disaster, hastening response and
recovery actions, and reducing vulnerability to those most at risk. Additional resiliency recommendations associated with this strategy includes
improving communication at the community neighborhood, community, and government levels. See Table 31 in Section 5.A for more
information on Additional Resiliency Recommendations.
Table 21: Strategy
Increase awareness of and access to resources for hazard mitigation, preparedness, and response.
Project Name
Enhanced GIS Emergency
Management System

Short Description
This project would establish a
Geographic Information System (GIS)
system that would improve storm
response and recovery. It would
include several specific applications
including those addressing road
obstructions, damage assessments,
e911 information, and public
information.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost
$50,000

Proposed or
Featured
Project
Proposed

Regional Project
(Y/N)
Y

Page | 59

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Provide low‐impact recreational opportunities and public access to the waterfront while restoring degraded shorefront areas.
This strategy addresses the Economic Development and, secondarily, Natural and Cultural Systems Recovery Support Functions. This strategy is
intended to expand opportunities for economic development through the promotion of the Community’s natural and aesthetic attributes,
particularly along the Great South Bay and the Connetquot River. It would address the Community’s need for storm surge protection, coastal
restoration, low impact recreation, and tourism. The strategy would address the risk of flooding and property damage caused by coastal wave
energy and storm surges by developing natural shoreline restoration projects which can better absorb storm impacts. Ancillary benefits would
include the restoration of the properties to a more natural condition, e.g. with limited or no impervious surfaces, the re‐introduction of native
vegetation and the addition of bio‐filtration swales for stormwater retention and recharge. This would be beneficial to the natural resources of
the community by reintroducing and promoting native vegetation and restoring shoreline habitats. Low‐impact recreational and tourism
benefits could accrue on appropriate sites for public access to the waterfront. The strategy also addresses the need identified by the Committee
for a more diversified local economy that builds upon and seeks to improve the environmental assets and resiliency of the community. The
recommendation for bio‐filtration swales is consistent with an additional resiliency recommendation identified by the Committee, specifically for
additional storm surge/storm runoff retention areas throughout the community. See Table 31 in Section 5.A for more information on Additional
Resiliency Recommendations.
The Proposed Public Access to the Waterfront and Coastal Restoration project is designed to leverage the NY Rising Housing Buyout Program
acquisitions. Many of the properties that are included in the Buyout Program are in highly vulnerable, shorefront locations along the Great South
Bay and the Connetquot River. As part of the program, any houses on the lots would be removed; however, shorefront structures such as
bulkheading, piers, and docks would remain. The proposed project would result in the removal of these structures and the restoration of a
natural shoreline. This would include the removal of fill material, grading to a natural shoreline profile and the planting of native vegetation. The
properties in the Buyout Program that would be considered for this project are located along Shore Drive in Oakdale.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 60

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 22: Strategy
Provide low‐impact recreational opportunities and public access to the waterfront while restoring degraded shorefront areas.
Project
Estimated Proposed or Featured Regional Project
Short Description
Name
Cost
Project
(Y/N)
$620,000
Proposed
N
Public
This project would include a shoreline assessment that would examine
Access to
locations that could be candidates for restoration projects. It would then
the
involve site‐specific engineering and design followed by demolition and
Waterfront
shoreline restoration (removal of structures and the restoration of a
and Coastal
Restoration natural shoreline grade with appropriate soils and indigenous vegetation).
It could potentially include parcels that are acquired through the NY Rising
Acquisition or Buyout Programs, in addition to other parcels.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 61

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Increase opportunities for economic growth and resiliency which would also improve access to and awareness of environmental
assets.
This is a strategy that addresses the Economic Development Recovery Support Function by reducing the current economic vulnerability of the
Community through a diversification of the economy. Both Oakdale and West Sayville are primarily residential in character with limited acreage
in small commercial development. Therefore, diversification of the economy within these commercial areas is vital to the long‐term resilience of
NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville. The Community identified improving resiliency of shorelines and enhancing public access as a need and an
opportunity to diversify and strengthen its local economy by fostering public use of the waterfront. Together this strategy along with the
previous listed above will help to address these identified needs.
The Proposed Multimodal Transportation/Tourism Development project is designed to implement this strategy. It would do so through the
development of a diverse range of projects that includes a bicycle share operation, kayak/canoe launch and a water taxi facility with a dock and
parking. It would also include a detailed study of a hiking trail system to link the historic, cultural, and environmental assets of the Community.
An additional resiliency recommendation or project identified by the Committee was for the hiring of both a grant writer and a local disaster
recovery manager. While this recommendation applies for all of the strategies, it is noted here because this type of project requires a high
degree of coordination of funding streams and construction and implementation actions. See Table 31 in Section 5.A for more information on
Additional Resiliency Recommendations.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 62

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 23: Strategy
Increase opportunities that can provide economic growth and resiliency that also improves access to and awareness of environmental assets
Estimated
Proposed or Featured Regional Project
Project Name
Short Description
Cost
Project
(Y/N)
$230,000
Proposed
N
Multimodal Transportation/Tourism
This project is aimed at promoting
Development
tourism as a resilient economic
development strategy. It is based on
developing a multimodal
transportation system that would
include a bicycle rental operation, the
designation/ development of bicycle
and hiking trails that would link to
area parks including waterfront
access sites, natural and historic
sites, and would also link commercial
businesses in the downtowns of
Oakdale and West Sayville to the
waterfront.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Page | 63

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Seek to provide wastewater treatment facilities to protect water quality and promote economic growth
The strategy addresses the Economic Development Recovery Support Function by recognizing the need to both intensify and diversify the uses
permitted within the limited commercial areas of these Communities. Realization of this strategy requires a centralized wastewater collection
and treatment system (sewers). The Committee understands the importance of water quality and noted that the prevention of contamination
of groundwater and surface water resources was an important need to address. They spoke of the obstacles to desired encountered due to the
lack of sewers. One example involved a vacant movie theater in the community that was proposed for a renovation and re‐opening but was
unable to obtain County Health Department approvals due to the lack of sewers.
This Featured project would provide substantial ancillary benefits to the natural environment through improved water quality in residential
neighborhoods as well. It is also noted that wastewater treatment can also yield benefits to vulnerable populations by enabling land use options
that would otherwise be limited or impractical without sewers. For example, the Committee identified the revitalization of Downtown Oakdale
with mixed‐use (commercial and residential) development as a Featured project. They noted that revitalization has been a goal of the
Community for decades but has not been achieved due, in large part, to the lack of sewers. This has limited the ability to diversify the housing
supply with more apartments, including an increase of smaller‐sized units. Such units are typically more affordable than larger apartments and
detached dwellings. This would increase housing opportunities for cost‐burdened households, including young families, the elderly, and
disabled. In addition, such units are more convenient to public transportation including the railroad and buses. This can especially help
vulnerable populations that do not have access to an automobile.
Additional resiliency recommendations that also address this strategy include monitoring current County sewer planning studies and identifying
alternative wastewater treatment options for onsite systems. See Table 31 in Section 5.A for more information on Additional Resiliency
Recommendations.
Table 24: Strategy
Seek to provide wastewater treatment facilities to protect water quality and promote economic growth
Proposed or Featured
Estimated Cost
Project Name
Short Description
Project
Wastewater
This project would result in the construction of a wastewater
$67.5 million
Featured
Collection and collection and treatment system to serve Oakdale and West
Treatment
Sayville and possibly other communities. The project would be
System
contingent on the findings of a planning study currently underway.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Regional Project
(Y/N)
Y

Page | 64

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Develop a sustainable and energy conscious community.
This strategy addresses the Economic Development Recovery Support Function by seeking to provide economic resiliency throughout the
community, benefitting both residential and commercial property owner/occupants who choose to participate. The Committee noted that
Oakdale was well suited to the establishment of a pilot program due to its somewhat isolated geography; i.e., the fact that it is separated from
most other areas by natural and manmade features such as the Connetquot River and Sunrise Highway. The Committee identified the need for
the Community to be more sustainable, both economically and environmentally.
The Proposed project would reduce the risk associated with the loss of economic activity following a storm event by reducing energy
consumption and stormwater runoff. An additional resiliency strategy associated with this recommendation includes the review and updating of
local land use regulations and building codes for improved resiliency and “green” land development practices. See Table 31 in Section 5.A for
more information on Additional Resiliency Recommendations.
Table 25: Strategy
Develop a sustainable and energy conscious community
Project Name
Community
Sustainability/
Energy
Conservation

Short Description
This project is also known as the “Greening of Oakdale” initiative. It
was developed by the community several years ago as a series of
programs to reduce energy consumption and grow the economy. The
project makes the program operational. While it was originally
conceived for Oakdale, it could be applied to West Sayville as well.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost
$300,000

Proposed or
Featured
Project
Proposed

Regional
Project
(Y/N)
N

Page | 65

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Support the growth of the business district.
The strategy addresses the Economic Development Recovery Support Function and is targeted to the Montauk Highway business area in
Oakdale. For many years, the Community identified the need for improvements to this business area. This strategy seeks to address the
vulnerability of the community to economic losses following storm events. Following Superstorm Sandy, many businesses were unable to
operate for a protracted period of time, employment suffered and sales tax collections were reduced. The redirection of business growth to the
Montauk Highway central business district would be a means of minimizing future development on the waterfront as well as developing a more
resilient local economy.
The Proposed planning study would be the first step in the implementation process. An additional resiliency strategy associated with this
recommendation includes the updating of local land use regulations (zoning) for the Montauk Highway corridor in Oakdale. See Table 31 in
Section 5.A for more information on Additional Resiliency Recommendations.
Table 26: Strategy
Support the growth of the business district

Oakdale Central Business
District Master Implementation
Plan

Develop of a detailed implementation plan for
Downtown Oakdale. The project would include
updating land use, a market study, infrastructure
analysis, public participation, and environmental
review.

$300,000

Proposed or
Featured
Project
Proposed

Implementation of a
Revitalization Program

Implement the Oakdale downtown revitalization
plan.

TBD

Featured

Project Name

Short Description

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost

Regional
Project
(Y/N)
N

N

Page | 66

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Plan for resiliency at the community and neighborhood level while addressing individual needs
This strategy addresses the Housing Recovery Support Function by addressing the vulnerability of flooded homes that are without power. It
addresses the need to improve the recovery time following power outages associated with major storms that include flooding. The strategy
targets the value of promptly restoring electrical service to structures that are approved for occupancy.
One proposed project includes studying the feasibility of installing electrical system isolation switch/smart meters in residences and commercial
structures. By restoring power more quickly, this project could potentially benefit vulnerable populations, such as senior citizens and the
disabled, who may be more reliant on power for medical devices. Additional resiliency recommendations associated with this strategy include
establishing resiliency in existing planning and land use approval processes through land use and building code review; and identifying and
disseminating information concerning resilient construction methods to homeowners. See Table 31 in Section 5.A for more information on
Additional Resiliency Recommendations.
Table 27: Strategy
Plan for resiliency at the community and neighborhood level while addressing individual needs
Project Name
Electrical System Isolation
Switch/Smart Metering‐
Feasibility Study

Short Description
This project would examine the feasibility of
individual isolation switches or a pilot project as a
Smart Meter system for the area that would enable
individual control of electrical systems in buildings.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost
$50,000

Proposed or
Featured
Project
Proposed

Regional
Project
(Y/N)
N

Page | 67

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Invest in infrastructure improvements at the community and neighborhood level while addressing individual needs.
This strategy addresses the Infrastructure Recovery Support Function. It would provide resiliency to the roads deemed to be critical
access/egress routes, but that are subject to frequent and severe flooding. Many residents of NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville spoke of both the
dramatic flooding from Superstorm Sandy as well as from the chronic flooding that occurs several times a year in many locations. Collectively,
the Community identified the need to improve the resiliency of road and utility infrastructure in those locations with chronic and severe
flooding, as well as the need to maintain a core level of emergency access for first responders and emergency personnel into the affected
neighborhoods. Ancillary benefits of the strategy, where feasible, may include the installation of bio‐filtration retention areas for stormwater
runoff, which would tie‐in to the Community’s desire to enhance protection of adjacent wetlands.
One Proposed project includes developing a comprehensive road infrastructure storm resilient improvement plan as well as hardening and
raising roads. This will help to address the identified needs of maintaining passable evacuation routes to allow for access of residents and
emergency responders during and after to a storm. It is a high cost project (over $1 million) that is “scalable” based on the length of roads
surfaces included in the project; i.e., the magnitude and cost of the project can be adjusted up or down depending on the availability of funds.
Additional resiliency recommendations that would address this strategy include raising bulkheads to reduce tidal surges at vulnerable outfall
locations, providing inspection, maintenance, and upgrades of drainage systems including the installation of storm surge/storm runoff retention
areas, and hardening utility infrastructure including electric, telephone, and cable. See Table 31 in Section 5.A for more information on
Additional Resiliency Recommendations.
Table 28: Strategy
Invest in infrastructure improvements at the community and neighborhood level while addressing individual needs.
Proposed or
Estimated
Project Name
Short Description
Featured
Cost
Project
Proposed
Infrastructure
The project would be to identify the locations of roads where pavement $1,760,000
Hardening:
levels should be raised, undertake engineering, design, permitting and
Raising Roads
construction. Associated with this task would be to identify optimal
elevations, to identify issues related to road raising including drainage
and grading to adjacent properties, to undertake engineering and
design, permitting, and, finally construction.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Regional Project
(Y/N)
N

Page | 68

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Reduce Inflow of Tidal Surges
This strategy addresses the Infrastructure Recovery Support Function. It addresses the need for flood control caused by tidal surge associated
with major storms such as hurricanes and nor’easters. It would reduce risks to properties near drainage outfall pipes that are subject to tidal
and storm inundation, by preventing seawater from entering the storm drainage system. Interior residential neighborhoods that are only
flooded through backflows associated with surge flow would be most benefited. It could also benefit the environment through a reduction in the
discharge of pollutants.
The Proposed project that was derived from this strategy is the installation of new drainage structures that would contain valves that would
prevent the reverse flow of water into the drainage pipes. The project is proposed to include an oil‐water debris separator hood to help reduce
pollutant discharges. The Proposed project would apply to twelve locations in the Community. One such location was in the vicinity of Russell
Road and Connetquot Road in Oakdale. At this location, seawater entered the drainage system during Superstorm Sandy and flowed into the
neighborhood. Seawater was observed flowing out of the catch basins located along the street. So instead of the catch basins draining water
away from the neighborhood, it brought water into the area. This resulted in unprecedented flooding and property damage. Additional
resiliency recommendations that would address this strategy includes raising bulkheads to reduce tidal surges at vulnerable outfall locations,
periodic inspection, and upgrades of stormwater drainage, and performing neighborhood drainage studies to comprehensively analyze drainage
problems and recommend solutions. See Table 31 in Section 5.A for more information on Additional Resiliency Recommendations.
Table 29: Strategy
Reduce Inflow of Tidal Surges
Project Name
Backflow
Prevention/Check
Valves for Stormwater
Drainage Systems

Short Description
The project proposed would identify locations where this situation
occurred or is likely to occur in the future with other types of storms.
The locations would then be studied for the suitability of the
installation of back flow preventers, otherwise known as check valves.
These structures allow stormwater collected in the drains to flow out
of the pipes but do not allow seawater to flow into the pipes.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost
$300,000

Proposed or
Featured
Project
Proposed

Regional
Project
(Y/N)
N

Page | 69

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Strategy: Investigate conservation and management measures to protect and improve the natural environment.
This strategy addresses the Natural and Cultural Systems Recovery Support Function. It would provide flood protection and wetlands
restoration, which in turn would boost recreation and tourism, thus providing an ancillary economic benefit. The strategy would address the risk
of flooding caused by extreme high tides or storm surges.
The identified project to implement this strategy would provide mutual benefits to the health of a large State‐owned tidal wetlands parcel that
has been adversely affected by reduced tidal exchange caused by an earthen berm levee. The Proposed project involves an earthen berm levee
was constructed as part of the excavation of the Grand Canal in Oakdale. It is located to the east side of the canal and extends for a distance of
about 3400 feet in a north‐south direction. Throughout the planning process, the Committee expressed the importance of this project and the
multiple benefits it would have to the community. They also felt that it would specifically address a need for flood control in the Idle Hour
neighborhood. Ancillary benefits would also include opportunities for recreation and tourism associated with a levee in the form of a hiking trail
along the top of the structure. This would be part of a community economic resiliency improvement. Additional resiliency recommendations
associated with this project includes water flow maintenance. See Table 31 in Section 5.A for more information on Additional Resiliency
Recommendations.
Table 30: Strategy
Investigate conservation and management measures to protect and improve the natural environment
Estimated Proposed or Featured
Project Name
Short Description
Cost
Project
$410,000
Proposed
“Living Marsh”‐ The project involves the opening of an earthen berm/ levee
Grand Canal
located along the east side of the Grand Canal in Oakdale. The
levee
purpose of the project is to improve tidal exchange to a large
Improvement
salt marsh wetland area (NYS owned, known locally as the
Pickman‐Remmer wetlands) resulting in an increase in storm
surge/runoff capacity, an improvement in the health of the
wetlands including a reduction of invasive species, along with
limited public access such as wildlife viewing and hiking trails
in environmentally compatible locations.

Section 3: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Regional Project
(Y/N)
N

Page | 70

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 4. Implementation ‐ Project Profiles

Brick Kiln Creek, looking south to the Great South Bayi

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 71

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
This section provides a complete Project Profile for each Proposed or
Featured Project identified by both the NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville
Committee (Committee) and Community (Community). The NYRCR
Program has allocated up to $3 million to the Community. The funding
is provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster
Recovery (CDBG‐DR) program. While developing projects and actions
for inclusion in the NYRCR Plan, the Committee took into account cost
estimates, cost‐benefit analyses, the effectiveness of each project in
reducing risk to populations and critical assets, feasibility, and
Community support. The Committee also considered the potential
likelihood that a project or action would be eligible for CDBG‐DR
funding.
The projects and actions set forth in the NYRCR Plan are divided into
three categories. The order in which the projects and actions are listed
in the NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the Community’s
prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are
projects proposed for funding through the Community’s allocation of
CDBG‐DR funding. Featured Projects are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee has identified as important resiliency
recommendations and has analyzed in depth, but has not proposed
for funding through the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations (see Section 5) are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee would like to highlight and that are not
categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects. The total cost
of Proposed Projects in the NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR
Community’s CDBG‐DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some
Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

review, HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors.
Implementation of the projects and actions found in the NYRCR Plan
are subject to applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations,
including the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a
project or action in the NYRCR Plan does not guarantee that a
particular project or action will be eligible for CDBG‐DR funding or that
it will be implemented.
As noted, in addition to providing a detailed description of each
project, the profiles include information on two important elements
used by the Committee to evaluate the value of each project: a Cost‐
Benefit Analysis and a Risk Reduction Analysis. Before proceeding to
the projects themselves, it is important to understand these two
analytical elements of the Project Profiles.

Cost‐Benefit Analysis
A cost‐benefit analysis (CBA) is a tool used to calculate and compare
the benefits and costs associated with a project. The CBA provides
decision‐makers with a framework for comparing different projects
(i.e., anticipated cost of implementation against total expected
benefits), and determining whether the benefits of a particular project
outweigh the costs. More specifically, the value of the CBA is two‐
fold: (1) to inform the selection of reconstruction measures; and (2) to
support the grant application for funds.
Because the NYRCR Program is a community‐driven process, the CBA
has focused on identifying project costs and benefits that easily relate
to the communities that the NYRCR Planning Committees represent.
Community and Committee input ‐‐ informed by a true understanding

Page | 72

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
of local conditions, needs and community values ‐‐ plays a crucial role
in the selection of projects that are implemented. With this in mind,
the CBA has used a mix of both quantitative and qualitative factors in
its analysis.

communities.

The CBA cannot, however, evaluate costs or benefits with complete
certainty; rather, it provides the community with a practical
understanding of the potential estimated costs of project
implementation and the potential benefits accrued to the community
with the particular project in place. The costs and benefits used to
evaluate projects through the CBA are explained further below.

These costs include:
o Extensive, repetitive damage to personal property (vehicles,
residences) and public infrastructure resulting from frequent
recurring flooding and future storm events;
o Economic loss to residents and to local and regional employers
as a result of the inability to work; and
o Hindrance in the provision of life safety and emergency services
resulting in repeated inability to access areas of the community

Project Costs
Project Profiles include all anticipated costs including “soft” and
“hard” costs. Soft costs are those that are services that are required in
order to undertake a project. It can include such items as surveying,
design, engineering, and inspection. Hard costs are the actual
development items such as construction, demolition, materials and
associated labor. The CBA cannot, however, project costs or benefits
with complete certainty; rather, it provides the community with a
practical understanding of the potential estimated costs of project
implementation and the potential benefits accrued to the community
with the particular project in place.
The cost of implementing a project is just one aspect of the
justification for funding these Proposed Projects. Conversely, another
important variable is the future costs of not implementing these
projects ‐‐ which have the potential to negatively impact the long‐term
viability of both the Village and its neighboring South Shore

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

While these costs are more difficult to quantify, they are no less
important to our analysis, and are therefore addressed qualitatively.

Project Benefits
The types of benefits considered in the CBA include:
o

Risk Reduction: The extent to which a project reduces the risk of
damage to a community asset from a future storm event
(discussed further below under “Risk Reduction Analysis”).xii

o

Economic Resiliency: The project’s potential to help minimize
economic costs and reduce the time it takes for the local economy
to rebound from a storm event. Economic data included, where
applicable, an estimate of permanent jobs secured/added;
relationship to, and/or furtherance of, Regional Economic
Development Plan goals; potential for additional economic
activity; and the net effect on local municipal expenditures.xiii

Page | 73

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
o

Health, Social and Public Safety Services: Qualitative information
was provided on the overall population benefits of improved
access to health and social service facilities and public safety
services; type and size of socially vulnerable population secured;xiv
and degree to which essential health and social service facilities
are able to provide services to a community during a future storm
or weather event as a result of the project.

o

Environmental Protection: Benefits include the protection of
crucial environmental assets or high‐priority habitat, threatened
and endangered species, migration, or habitat connectivity; any
cleanup resulting from the action; creation of open space or a new
recreational asset.

o

Temporary jobs: All job estimates assume labor at 50% of total
project costs, divided by $40,000 per Full Time Equivalent (FTE)
job.xv

risk reduction looks at the potential for reduced risk assuming the
project is implemented under future environmental conditions.
For this risk reduction analysis, projects were evaluated under a three‐
foot rise in sea level scenario for their potential to reduce an asset’s
level of exposure and/or vulnerability to future storms. This helps
communities and decision‐makers understand the potential
environmental, social, and economic outcomes associated with
implementing the project. (For a more detailed discussion of the
methodology and factors used in the risk reduction analysis, see
Section 5).

Risk Reduction Analysis
A Risk Reduction Analysis estimates the extent to which Proposed and
Featured Projects will reduce storm damage (environmental, social,
and economic) and flooding risk to specific community assets when
the project is in place. (The extent to which a project reduced such
risk is also considered as a benefit in the Cost Benefit Analysis – see
“Project Benefits” above.)
Risk “reduction” is different from the risk “assessment” in the previous
section in a very important way – risk assessment looks at storm and
flood risks to community assets before the project is implemented;

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 74

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: “Living” Marsh – Grand
Canal Levee Improvement
Figure 4: Living Marsh – Grand Canal Levee Improvement

“Living Marsh” – Grand Canal Levee Improvement
Recovery Support Function: Natural and Cultural Systems
Estimated Cost: $410,000
Assets made more Resilient:
Pickman‐Remmer Wetlands and residential housing located in
Extreme Risk Area of Oakdale
Risk Reduction and Benefits:
Reduced risk of flooding to homes; increased resiliency of
wetlands; increased public access to recreational opportunities;
reduced mosquito population (disease vector) and reduced
pesticide use to control mosquito population
The wetland, owned by the New York State and known locally as the
Pickman‐Remmer Wetlands, was closed off from regular tidal
exchange by the creation the Grand Canal in Oakdale. As a result,
approximately, 31% (27 acres) of this marsh is now dominated by the
invasive species Phragmites australis.

Project Description
The purpose of the project is to improve tidal exchange to an
approximately 87‐acre salt marsh wetland area so as to increase its
capacity to absorb storm surges and stormwater runoff as well as
provide an improvement in the health of the wetlands, including a
reduction of invasive species.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

The Grand Canal Levee is an earthen berm structure that was built
over a hundred years ago when the canal was excavated as part of the
development of the W.K. Vanderbilt Estate. The excavation occurred
through a large tidal wetland area and significantly altered the
hydrology of the area. The levee runs in a north‐south direction along
the Grand Canal. The portion of the wetland located east of the levee
was the area that was most affected by the structure, in which tidal

Page | 75

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
exchange was almost completely cut‐off and restricted to a few
relatively small pipes and openings that were added later, possibly as
part of as a vector control project. These openings have deteriorated
over time and have become blocked with silt and organic debris.
The project will reestablish tidal exchange by inserting strategic
openings within the levee located along the east side of the Grand
Canal. The project would also provide limited public access such as
wildlife viewing and hiking trails in environmentally compatible
locations. The project is anticipated to provide public benefits for the
community through storm surge protection, improvement of publicly
owned wetlands and the addition of recreational and tourism benefits
through the development of a hiking trail along the top of the levee.
The installation of drainage pipes though the levee or excavated
openings along with the construction of a hiking trail are both
considered technically feasible.
The proposed project includes funding for an engineering study to
determine the most appropriate method to increase tidal flow. The
proposed project specifically includes the installation of seven new
pipes through the levee to hydraulically improve the tidal exchange
between the Grand Canal and the wetlands. The study will consider
alternatives such as appropriate openings in the levee. The
construction would include temporary cofferdams, excavation,
installation of the seven‐ 24‐inch reinforced concrete pipes with
associated materials and work. The project also includes the
installation of hiking trail on the top of the levee for a significant
portion of the levee length (approximately 3,400 feet).The hiking trail
will improve upon an informal trail that currently exists along the top
of the levee (the levee is within a “paper street” known as Central

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Boulevard). Since the properties to the south of the levee are privately
owned, the trail would terminate before these properties. As part of
the hiking trail study proposed in a separate project (Multimodal
Transportation/Tourism Development), the connection of the trail to
Shore Drive would be examined. It is noted that some of the private
properties will potentially be included in the NY Rising Buyout Program
and could be used for a linkage of the trail to Shore Drive.
In addition, a relatively high percentage of design and permitting costs
have been allocated to address any unforeseen issues that may arise.
This was done since the project has not yet been engineered and the
full scope of work and permit conditions are not known.

Grand Canal, Oakdale, looking north—levee extends along the right
side of the canali

Page | 76

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Estimated Project Costs
The capital and soft costs of this project are estimated at $410,000.
About half of this estimate is for construction of the seven culverts.
The balance is for “soft” costs including an environmental engineering
study, design, permitting, and contingency. Annual operating and
maintenance costs are estimated at $4,500. With an expected useful
life expectancy of 30 years, the conceptual life cycle cost is estimated
to be $545,000.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
The proposed project will involve the construction and installation of
seven 24” reinforced concrete drainage pipes that would extend from
the Grand Canal, through the levee and into the wetlands,
substantially increasing tidal flow, including storm surge flow. The
length of the pipes is estimated to be 75 feet. One of the most
significant benefits of the project will be the increased ability of the
wetlands to store stormwater. This is expected to reduce the risk of
potential flooding of residences located west of the canal along streets
known as Tower Mews, Canal Road, and Edgewater Avenue. The
project addresses flooding by providing capacity for the storage of
storm surge water that would otherwise inundate residential
neighborhoods in the community. While the project would not
eliminate all flood risks, it would reduce risk, especially for moderate
level storm events.

Economic Benefits

Benefits include the economic activity created during the construction
phase including the purchase of the materials and the labor associated
with the installation. It is estimated that approximately 5.0 Full Time
Equivalent (FTE) jobs

xvi

will be created during the construction period.

On a more long‐term basis, economic activity would be generated
through improvements to the levee, the installation and maintenance
of conduit pipes, and the construction and maintenance of the hiking
trail. The trail will also help to stimulate tourism as the first phase of a
proposed “South Shore Gold Coast Heritage Trail” system, which is
proposed to extend from the Bayard Cutting Arboretum in Great River,
through Oakdale to Green’s Creek in West Sayville.

Environmental Benefits
The project will result in a substantial environmental benefit to a
significant natural asset. These wetlands are dependent on tidal flow
(notably, salt/ brackish water) to maintain a diverse population of
plant and animal species. Restricted tidal flow alters the natural
balance of tidal wetlands resulting in a change of vegetation including
the proliferation of invasive species. This is visible in the wetlands
today with approximately 27 acres of the 87‐acre Pickman—Remmer
wetlands being dominated by Phragmites (Phragmites australis).
Phragmites, also known as common reed, can out‐compete native salt
marsh vegetation and can reduce the available food and shelter for
saltmarsh dependent wildlife. The improvement of health of the
wetlands is vital to the important role they serve of filtering out
pollutants and excess nutrients, thereby improving surface and
groundwater quality.

The proposed project will provide economic benefits in several ways.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 77

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
This will directly benefit critical fish and wildlife habitat. It also offers
the associated benefit of storm surge protection through periodic
inundation. As an added benefit, the project will also reduce the
mosquito population and reduce the need for the use of pesticides.

Health and Social Benefits
The proposed trail atop the levee will enable improved public access to
this important environmental resource. This benefit will be available to
all residents and the trail will be compliant with the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA). Access to the hiking trail will provide health and
education opportunities, including environmental interpretation and
wildlife viewing.

Cost‐Benefit Analysis
The Community recognizes the importance of their natural systems,
particularly wetlands, as a means to reduce the intensity of storm surge
in extreme storm events in addition to all the other substantial
environmental benefits that these systems provide. The benefits of this
project are considered to outweigh the medium cost of
implementation.

Risk Reduction Analysis
Due to the low elevation topography of the Idle Hour section of
Oakdale, many properties are highly exposed to coastal storm hazards.
A small rise in the elevation of seawater associated with storm tides
and surges can travel significant distances inland due to the low
ground elevation. This exposure is a significant problem in the
Community.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

One of the most significant benefits of the Living Marsh/Grand Canal
Levee project will be the increased ability of the Pickman—Remmer
wetlands to store storm surge and tidal water. This is expected to
benefit developed properties in the area including residences located
west of the canal along streets known as Tower Mews, Canal Road, and
Edgewater Avenue. As a result of the project, the vulnerability of these
streets and residential properties will be reduced due to increased
storm retention capabilities of an improved and healthy wetland that
could reduce flooding impacts in the residential areas of Oakdale.

General Timeframe for Implementation
The proposed project, from the time that implementation begins,
could be completed in the intermediate term (12 to 36 months).

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Permits would be required from NYS Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYS DEC) under Articles 24 and 25, Freshwater and
Tidal Wetlands. Permits would also be required from the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (US ACE) and the NYS Department of State (DOS)
for Coastal Consistency. Permits may also be required from the Town
of Islip, depending on jurisdiction (Wetlands and Watercourses
Permit). The Committee Co‐Chairs and State planner have met with
representatives of the regional office of NYS DEC to preliminarily
review the project. It is likely that the permit review process would be
extensive.

Jurisdiction
This project is located on land owned by New York State, under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Environmental Conservation.

Page | 78

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Public Access to the
Waterfront and Coastal Restoration

Public Access to the Waterfront and Coastal
Restoration
Recovery Support Function: Economic, Natural and Cultural
Resources
Estimated Cost: $620,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Residential housing; Waterfront commercial assets
Risk Reduction and Benefits:
Storm surge protection;
Increased resilience and environmental benefits of coastal
natural habitats; Increased public access to recreational
opportunities

Great South Bay, West Sayvillei

Project Description
Oakdale and West Sayville are coastal communities with extensive
shorefront areas on both the Great South Bay and the Connetquot
River. While much of the shorefront is natural, significant portions
have been modified to include structures such as bulkheads, docks,
and pilings as well as modifications to the shoreline as a result of
dredging, filling, and the removal of vegetation.
This project will include a shoreline assessment of parcels that could
be candidates for restoration projects.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

It would involve site‐specific engineering and design followed by
demolition and shoreline restoration (removal of structures and the
restoration of a natural shoreline grade with appropriate soils and
indigenous vegetation). It could potentially include parcels that are
acquired through the NY Rising Buyout Program, in addition to other
parcels. The Committee has identified about 1100’ of shoreline that
could be included in the program. The exact geographic scope would
be identified in the planning study in first phase of the project. No
technical challenges are anticipated for implementation of this
project.

Page | 79

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Demolition of the existing shorefront structures is expected without
difficulty from the landward side using heavy equipment such as a
crane and backhoe. The removal of fill and the re‐grading of the
shoreline are also feasible. The planting of vegetation will need to be
done with the appropriate plant material, seasonal timing, protection
of seedlings, and infill planting to replace lost material in successive
seasons. Additionally, the parcels to be included in the project will be
identified and will be in public ownership. For this analysis, parcels
that may be included in the NY Rising Buyout program were
considered. These parcels are all located along the shoreline of the
Connetquot River.
One or more of the parcels may be suited to public access to the river.
The river shoreline is not conducive to a bathing beach use but, other
uses such as passive recreation and a small craft launching facility may
be possible (see Multimodal project description). The planning study
will include the identification of parcels that may be suitable based
upon ownership (public), site conditions, adjacent land uses (and
shorefront structures) and the dynamics of the coastal environment
including wave energy and erosion.
The coastal areas of the NYRCR Community were severely impacted by
Superstorm Sandy and many structures were flooded and heavily
damaged. The restoration of the natural coastal environment will help
to reduce future storm damage caused by flooding and wave action. In
addition, the restored intertidal zone and shore profile would increase
important habitat that would benefit the coastal environment.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Estimated Project Costs
The capital and soft costs of this project are estimated at $620,000.
This includes an estimated $367,000 for site work (demolition, re‐
grading, planting, etc.) and approximately $250,000 for soft costs such
as contingency, the planning study, design, and permitting. The annual
operating and maintenance costs are estimated at $2,800 with a
useful life expectancy of 20 years, for a total of $56,000. Accordingly,
the conceptual life cycle cost is $676,000.
This is based upon the potential use of eight lots that have been
identified by the Committee, including sites that may opt into the NY
Rising Buyout Program. The program is voluntary and therefore it is
not known which lots will ultimately participate. The opportunity costs
for the project potentially include the loss of the use of the waterfront
structures (bulkheads, docks, pilings, etc.). The structures, if they were
to remain, could potentially be used for berthing of boats and
hardened shore protection.
Note: This project may overlap with two other projects:



Road raising (page 83) ‐ the landward portions of the parcels in
question may be used for storm drainage retention
Multimodal transportation/tourism (page 103) where a parcel or
parcels may be considered for a small craft launching ramp and
water taxi dock with a small gravel parking lot.

Neither of the latter projects is proposed to include land acquisition.

Page | 80

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Project Benefits

Environmental Benefits

Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits

The environmental benefits of the project are direct and significant.
The properties considered for this project are along the Connetquot
River and most are intensively developed with engineered shorefront
structures such as bulkheading, piers, pilings, and docks. In most
cases, these structures predate current environmental regulations but
are allowed to remain as nonconforming uses (“grandfathered in”).
The proposed project would present a unique opportunity to return
these sites to their natural state, thus restore their potential function
as a natural shore defense. The restored intertidal zone and shore
profile would increase important habitat that would benefit the
coastal environment.

This project involves the use of selected shorefront properties for
coastal restoration that would provide a storm surge buffer, shoreline
protection and, potentially, drainage runoff retention areas. This
would occur for parcels that are adjacent to roads that are proposed
to be raised if the sites are suitable based on drainage design. For
those waterfront locations that are currently constructed with
bulkheads, docks, pilings, etc., the project will include the removal of
these structures and the installation of appropriate natural shore
profiles and dune‐type structures landward of the high water line
(approx. three feet above sea level). The project will reduce the risk
and frequency of storm damage to these shorelines and shorefront
development by absorbing wave energy.

Economic Benefits
The project will also provide economic benefits in several ways.
Benefits would include the economic activity created during the
construction phase including the demolition and removal of the
existing structures along the shorefront and re‐grading, along with the
construction of the berm/dune and planting of native vegetation. It is
estimated that this would result in approximately 7.6 full time
equivalent (FTE) jobsxvi during the construction period. In addition, the
increased and enhanced public access to the waterfront would aid
tourism to the community and would enhance the quality of life in the
neighborhood.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project will enable improved public access to the
waterfront. This is especially important in Oakdale, which is a
waterfront community with very little public access available. This has
also been a long‐standing issue in the community and a fact noted in
the Town’s 1978 comprehensive plan for Oakdale. It will also provide
education opportunities for a better understanding of the coastal
environment.

Cost Benefit Analysis
This project represents a medium investment of capital that has many
potential public benefits for the community as a whole, including risk
reduction, economic development, environmental benefits, and public
health, as well as enhanced public access and wetland habitat.

Page | 81

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Risk Reduction Analysis

Jurisdiction

The project is anticipated to reduce the risk and frequency of storm
damage to key waterfront structures and systems, including
residential housing located in the Extreme Risk Area in Oakdale,
streets in the Extreme Risk Area, and waterfront commercial
properties in Oakdale. Also as a result of the project, the removal of
damaged and vulnerable housing will reduce the number of potential
residents in harm’s way in future storm events. The reduced
vulnerability will also be detrimental to the restoration of the natural
shoreline, including dune‐type structures which would provide storm
surge protection, as well as the introduction of bioswales suitable for
stormwater retention and recharge.

The jurisdiction for the project will depend on the selection of parcels.
However, it is likely that the parcels will be under the jurisdiction of
the State, County, or the Town of Islip.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
implemented in the intermediate term (12 to 36 months).

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
NYS DEC permits would be required under the Tidal Wetlands Act.
Permits may also be required from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) for the removal of the in‐water structures, and the NYS
Department of State for Coastal Consistency. Permits may also be
required from the Town of Islip, depending on jurisdiction (Wetlands
and Watercourses Permit).

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 82

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Infrastructure
Hardening: Raising Roads
Figure 5: Infrastructure Hardening Locations #1
Potential Road Raising Locations

Infrastructure Hardening: Raising Roads
Recovery Function: Infrastructure
Estimated Cost: $1,760,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Secondary streets; Oakdale housing; West Sayville housing
Risk Reduction and Benefits: Decreased vulnerability to flooding
Improved roadway access and evacuation

Project Description
NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville is characterized by a low ground
elevation along with a high groundwater table. Much of the
Community lies within four feet of sea level including large portions of
Oakdale, the waterfront of West Sayville and portions of a
neighborhood located east of Green’s Creek in Sayville.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

These areas include local streets and collector roads. Many of the
roads are vital for access to properties and for emergency response
and evacuation. Due to the low‐grade elevation, many of these roads
are subject to frequent and severe flooding. This presents a public
safety threat, can be an impediment to business activity and can also
be a significant inconvenience to residents. This project will identify
the locations of roads where pavement levels should be raised, and
will undertake engineering and design of specific road sections,
permitting, and construction. This project will also identify optimal
elevations, identify issues related to road raising including drainage
and grading to adjacent properties. The Committee preliminarily
identified several road sections that would be high priorities for the
project. These included portions of Shore Dive and Vanderbilt
Boulevard in Oakdale and Sunset Drive and Jones Drive in Sayville (see
Figure 5 and Figure 6). Specific road sections and the reconstruction
needs will be identified in the planning study.

Page | 83

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Figure 6: Infrastructure Hardening Locations #2
Potential Road Raising Locations

The project is technically feasible as an established civil engineering
practice that has been implemented in the community in other
locations. However, the higher a road is elevated, the greater the
potential for drainage and grading issues on adjoining properties. The
engineering and design phase of the project will address these issues
and any technical challenges that may occur.

Estimated Project Costs

During Superstorm Sandy, road flooding occurred throughout the
coastal portions of the Community and was often severe. In some
locations, four feet of water was observed on local roads, rendering
them completely impassable. While Superstorm Sandy was an
extreme storm event, the Committee did receive extensive input from
the Community and from Town representatives on the prevalence of
chronic flooding in coastal locations throughout the area.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

The capital and soft costs of this project are estimated at $1,760,000.
Of this amount, about $900,000 would be for construction with the
balance (about $860,000) for a planning study to identify priority
roads to be considered for raising; design and engineering of the
specific road sections; and preparation of cost estimates and
resolution of legal issues (e.g., permitting, easements). Construction
costs were based on Vanderbilt Boulevard in Oakdale, a significant
north‐south collector road that assumes a 6” pavement increase for a
road length of 3900’. This is illustrative only. The project is scalable
and additional phases of work could be conducted with a
commensurate increase the costs.
Operations and maintenance costs were not estimated since these
would not change over the current costs of maintaining the roads in
question.

Page | 84

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Opportunity costs/ negative externalities may include the impact of
raised road elevations to adjacent properties. This impact will be
considered in the planning and design process as a direct function of
the degree of elevation increase. Significant elevation in road surface
could have proportionally more significant impacts. While impacts
such as drainage can be easily identified, other impacts are more
subjective. This would include, for example, the visual impact of a
substantially raised road on neighborhood character.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
The raising of road elevations will reduce the incidence of flooding for
critical access routes in these communities. These roads are flooded
on a frequent basis due to storm events, related high tide flooding,
and inadequate storm drainage systems (often rendered ineffective
due to high groundwater conditions). The proposed locations are
those that are close to the water and are subject to tidal inundation
due to the high exposure to storms caused by the low elevation
topography of the area.

Economic Benefits
The project will provide economic benefits in several ways. This
includes the economic activity created during the construction phase
including the purchase of the materials and labor.
Approximately 22 FTE jobsxvi are estimated during the construction
period. In addition, the project will decrease the frequency of when
roads are impassable and properties are inaccessible. For business
properties, this will mean that business activity will be impacted less
frequently by storm flooding.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

The project is consistent with the Long Island Regional Economic
Development Council’s plan, The Strategic Economic Development
Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties
(http://regionalcouncils.ny.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2013/HI
‐RESFINALLIEconomyBookPRINT.pdf). Specifically, it would “Protect
Long Island from the perils of climate change at the same time we
encourage new “cleaner, greener” industries by leading collaborative
regional efforts to harden our infrastructure, businesses and homes
against the next major storm and to encourage transportation, energy
and construction policies that reduce our vulnerability, as well as our
xvii
carbon footprint.”

Environmental Benefits
A potential environmental benefit of the project is the use of storm
drainage systems that are designed to reduce the adverse
environmental impact of road runoff. This would include the potential
reduction of nutrients, hydrocarbons, and other contaminants that
threaten water quality. In the planning and design process,
consideration will be given to the use of bio‐filtration type drainage
retention systems and/or vortex‐type drainage structures.
The exact solutions that will be suited to a particular location will be
assessed during the design process.

Health and Social Benefits
The raising of road elevations will benefit public health and safety by
enabling better access to the community during certain types of storm
events. This will allow for improved emergency response and
evacuation. In addition, it will also enable better access for public
service agencies (e.g., public works, fire and rescue departments) and

Page | 85

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
utility providers. Improved access will also enable a faster recovery
following a storm since road blockages due to flooding will be reduced.

Cost‐Benefit Analysis
This project represents a high investment of capital that has many
potential public benefits for the community as a whole, including risk
reduction through improved access within coastal areas of the
community. The project also provides direct benefits to property
owners in the vicinity of the elevated road sections for improved
access to their properties. The exact number of properties and
population to be directly benefitted can be determined when the
specific road sections are identified. The potential benefits of this
project are considered to outweigh the cost of implementation.

Risk Reduction Analysis
The raising of road elevations would directly reduce the incidence of
flooding for critical access routes in the communities. These roads are
flooded on a frequent basis due to storm events, related high tide
flooding, and inadequate storm drainage systems (often rendered
ineffective due to high groundwater conditions). The vulnerability of
residential housing assets will be reduced, as there is an increased
capacity for residents to leave and return to their homes safely and
quickly in an emergency situation due to decreased flooding on
roadways. The vulnerability of secondary streets is also reduced due to
their increased service capacity if select road raising projects were
completed. The Committee has preliminarily identified several
locations in the community that have roads that should be raised.
Based on these locations, several areas would see a reduction in risk.
These include Shore Drive in Oakdale, a major collector Road in the

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

community with commercial and residential development. The
commercial uses are important economic generators to the local
economy and contribute to the marine economy of the South Shore
Estuary. A second area is located along the east side of Green’s Creek
in Sayville. This includes sections of Sunset Drive and Jones Drive, an
area of residential uses.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
implemented in the intermediate term (12 to 36 months).

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Permitting and approvals required‐ Permitting requirements will have
to be determined based upon the specific road locations identified in
the planning study, the first phase of the project. Possible permit
requirements include NYS DEC Article 24 and 25, Freshwater and Tidal
Water, permits for construction in proximity to wetlands. For locations
that are close to the coast, Coastal Consistency determinations from
the NYS Department of State may be required. Town Highway permits
may also be required for certain construction including utility
relocations. A Town of Islip Wetland and Watercourses permit may
also be required in any work falls within areas regulated by the Town.

Jurisdiction
Final project locations have not been identified and will be done in the
first phase in the planning study component. Since most of the roads in
the coastal locations of NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville are under Town of
Islip jurisdiction, it is likely that the Town will have jurisdiction.

Page | 86

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Backflow
Prevention/Check Valves for Storm
Drainage Systems

Backflow Prevention/Check Valves for Storm
Drainage Systems
Recovery Support Function: Infrastructure
Estimated Cost: $300,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Oakdale housing; West Sayville housing in Extreme and High Risk
Areas
Risk Reduction and Benefits:
Flood control/ storm surge protection; Reduced property
damage; Reduced pollutant loading in runoff

A low ground elevation relative combined with a high groundwater
environment characterizes NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville.

At times of storm surges and extreme high tides, the outfall pipes can
become conduits for the flow of seawater back into the drainage pipes
and subsequently into neighborhoods. Drainage systems that are
intended to move stormwater out of streets and neighborhoods
instead function in a reverse manner with seawater flowing in the
opposite direction. So instead of removing water, the drainage pipes
can convey seawater into an area. This occurred in several locations
during Superstorm Sandy and resulted in flooding of streets and
neighborhoods that did not previously have flooding problems.

Much of the Community is within four feet of sea level and
groundwater is often within a couple of feet of the ground elevation.
As a result, drainage infrastructure that collect and transport
stormwater runoff often do so with only a small slope to the outfall
location.

For example, residences in the vicinity of Russell Road and Connetquot
Road in Oakdale reported water flowing out of catch basins and into
the street. The volume of water that entered this neighborhood in this
manner was so significant that properties that were never previously
flooded were inundated with water.

Drainage outfall pipe, Oakdalei

Project Description

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 87

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The proposed project will identify drainage outfall locations that are
vulnerable to reverse flow caused by tidal surges; prepare design and
engineering documents; prepare cost estimates; and resolve legal
issues (e.g., permitting, easements).
The locations would then be studied for the suitability for the
installation of backflow check valves. Such valves are designed to
function by allowing water to move in one direction only. Stormwater
that is collected in catch basins would flow through the drainage pipe
to the outfall point.
The anticipated construction would include a catch basin, in‐line check
valve, excavation, pavement repair, grading and topsoil and seed and
the installation of an oil‐water debris separator hood.
The valve would open to allow the stormwater to travel through the
pipe. However, in times of storm surges and extreme high tides, any
seawater that enters the pipe from the outfall location would be
stopped at the valve since it would only operate in one direction. This
would prevent seawater from moving up the pipe and catch basins
into interior neighborhoods.
From a technical standpoint, the project is likely feasible in that the
design has been used effectively in many other locations, including
within the Town of Islip. It is also a standard product that is available
from multiple vendors.

Estimated Project Costs
The capital and soft costs of this project are estimated at $300,000 for
the proposed quantity of twelve installations. This includes a cost of

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

construction of approximately $196,000 and soft costs estimated at
$98,000. Annual operations and maintenance costs are estimated at
$20,400. For a five year estimated useful life, the total cost of
maintenance would be $102,000. Accordingly, the conceptual life
cycle cost is $402,000.
As noted, the estimated costs are for the installation of twelve
structures. This would break down to a unit cost of $25,000 for
construction and a unit life cycle cost of $33,500.
The project is scalable and could be increased or decreased
proportionate to the number of installations.
Opportunity costs/ negative externalities are not expected to be
significant since this is a retrofit of the existing drainage system.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency
Backflow prevention check valves on drainage outfalls could prevent
seawater from entering into stormwater infrastructure and inundating
interior residential neighborhoods, an occurrence that caused
significant damage during Superstorm Sandy. This would reduce
flooding and resultant damage to property and, commonly, loss of
road access.

Economic Benefits
The project would provide an economic benefit during the construction
phase including the purchase of the materials and labor Approximately
3.7 full time equivalent (FTE) jobsxvi during the construction period.

Page | 88

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The project is consistent with the Long Island Regional Economic
Development Council’s plan “The Strategic Economic Development
Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties.” As noted above, it would
specifically “Protect Long Island from the perils of climate change at
the same time we encourage new “cleaner, greener” industries by
leading collaborative regional efforts to harden our infrastructure,
businesses and homes against the next major storm and to encourage
transportation, energy and construction policies that reduce our
vulnerability, as well as our carbon footprint.”xviii

Environmental Benefits
The valves would include a structure to separate oil and water from
runoff to reduce pollutant discharge directly into surface water bodies
or wetlands. This will reduce pollutants (hydrocarbons) in the local
environment.

Health and Social Benefits
The installation of backflow prevention check valves will benefit public
health and safety by enabling better access to the community during
certain types of storm events. It will also aid emergency response and
evacuation and will improve access for public service agencies (e.g.,
public works, fire, and rescue departments) and utility providers. This
improved access will enable a faster recovery following a storm since
crews can be deployed more quickly.

number of properties and population to be directly benefitted will be
determined during the planning phase of the project. However, given
the relatively low cost of $25,000 per installation, the potential
benefits of this project are considered to outweigh the cost of
implementation.

Risk Reduction Analysis
Backflow prevention check valves on drainage outfalls could prevent
seawater from entering into storm drainage pipes and inundating
interior residential neighborhoods, an occurrence that caused
significant damage during Superstorm Sandy. This would reduce
flooding and resultant damage to property and, commonly, loss of
road access.
Although specific locations for all twelve valves will be determined as
part of the pre‐construction process, one location often cited by the
Committee serves well to illustrate the reduction of risk that would be
associated with this project. The location is the neighborhood in the
vicinity of Connetquot Road and Russell Road, Oakdale. This is a
cluster of residences on parcels of approximately one‐third of an acre
to a half acre for many of the lots. The topography is very flat and a
modest rise is sea level as a result of a storm surge can impact a large
area of the neighborhood. The proposed project would significantly
reduce the risk of flooding since it does so at the point source of the
problem.

Cost‐Benefit Analysis
This project represents a low investment of capital that would benefit
the neighborhoods within which the valves were installed. The exact

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 89

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
General Timeframe for Implementation
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
implemented in the intermediate term (12 to 36 months).

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Permitting requirements will be determined based upon the specific
locations and scope of work for the installations that are identified in
the planning study, the first phase of the project. Possible permit
requirements include NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
(DEC) Article 24 and 25, Freshwater and Tidal Wetlands, permits for
construction in proximity to wetlands. NYS Department of State
Coastal Consistency approval could be required for any activity within
the coastal zone. Town Highway permits may also be required for
certain construction and utility relocations.

Jurisdiction
Final project locations have not been identified and will be done in the
first phase of the project in the planning study component. However,
since most of the drainage systems in the coastal locations of the
Community are under the jurisdiction of the Town of Islip, it is likely
that the Town will have jurisdiction.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 90

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Emergency Shelter:
Identification and Hardening

Emergency Shelter: Identification and Hardening
Recovery Support Function: Community Planning and Capacity
Building
Estimated Cost: $380,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Community overall especially vulnerable populations
Selected emergency shelter
Risk Reduction and Benefits:
Public safety

Example of a facility that can be used as an Emergency Shelteri

Project Description
This project will identify all emergency shelters that currently serve
NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville and review of the adequacy of the
shelters to determine any needs and would do so working with
emergency response authorities. The present shelters are all located
in existing, publicly owned buildings (schools).

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

If additional facilities are needed or existing shelters should be
relocated, alternative locations would be assessed. The project will
review on‐site supplies at each evacuation center and plan for a
permanent on‐site generator in at least one shelter location.
There were no emergency shelters open during or after Superstorm
Sandy in either West Sayville or Oakdale. The nearest shelters were
out of the local area and the Committee noted that many residents
were reluctant to travel significant distances from their homes.
The project is likely to be feasible. It would involve a study to identify
all of the local shelters, an evaluation of the need for an alternate
shelter, an assessment of needs (supplies, etc.), and the installation of
a generator (750kw) at the chosen site.

Page | 91

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
At least one site would be planned for the installation of a
permanently installed generator, possibly as a retrofit of an existing
facility. The site selected for the generator placement would have to
receive approval from the property owner. This would likely involve a
long‐term agreement.

Estimated Project Costs
The capital and soft costs of this project are estimated at $380,000.
The costs include the planning study in the amount of approximately
$50,000. The generator is estimated to cost about $328,000.
Operations and maintenance costs are estimated at $6,500. With an
assumed useful life span for the generator of five years, the
conceptual life cycle cost would be $412,500.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency
The project will reduce the risk of personal injury to residents within
locations that are affected by hazardous conditions during storm
events. This could include, for example, areas that are flooded or
subject to loss of electrical power. By having a publicly accessible place
that can double as a local shelter, its utilization during storms and
other emergencies would likely be increased. Further, the risks to fire
and rescue personnel would also be reduced since fewer residents
would remain in their homes during storms resulting in a reduced
demand on rescue services.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Economic Benefits
The reduction of cases of personal injuries would result in a reduction
in health care costs. In addition, the reduction in population within
areas affected by hazardous conditions would reduce the costs to
provide rescue and police service necessary to respond to
emergencies.

Health and Social Benefits
A local emergency shelter with a back‐up power supply will provide
reduce the risk of personal harm and injury related to storms and
other emergency events. This would be of particular importance to
vulnerable populations including the people with disabilities, low and
very‐low income populations, elderly, young children, homeless, and
people at risk of becoming homeless. A local shelter would also
provide a sense of security to the residents of the community.

Cost‐Benefit Analysis
The project represents a low investment of capital to provide a critical
life safety facility. The potential benefits of this project are considered
to outweigh the cost of implementation.

Page | 92

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Risk Reduction Analysis

Jurisdiction

There were no emergency shelters open during or after Superstorm
Sandy in either Oakdale or West Sayville. A local shelter that is
equipped with a stand‐alone power supply is important to the
provision of basic health and safety services. The implementation of
the proposed project would reduce the vulnerability of the shelter site
and would benefit the community through the provision of a more
resilient facility. Such a facility would be of particular importance to
vulnerable populations that are most at risk during storm events.

The final selection of a shelter site through the planning study process
will determine the ownership and jurisdiction of the facility. Possible
locations include the existing designated shelters at Oakdale—
Bohemia Middle School, Sayville High School, and Cherry Avenue
Elementary School. The jurisdiction of these sites is held by the
respective school districts. These sites would be examined along with
other sites depending on the results of the planning study.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
implemented in the immediate term (less than two years).

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Permits would be required for the generator installation, including
electrical systems and a raised concrete slab foundation. The permit
authority could be the Town of Islip or the NYS Department of
Education for those shelters identified at school sites.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 93

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Annual
Education/Coordination
Figure 7: FEMA2 Emergency Supply List

Annual Education/Coordination
Recovery Support Function: Community Planning and Capacity
Building
Estimated Cost: $100,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Oakdale and West Sayville residential housing; Oakdale and
West Sayville downtown
Risk Reduction and Benefits:
Public safety; Reduced property damage
The Committee noted that significant problems occurred in the
Community during Superstorm Sandy because of the lack of adequate
preparation.

Project Description
This project would focus on improving storm preparedness in the
community through a program to educate and inform the population
in a targeted and consistent manner. It would also include an element
to improve coordination with emergency response agencies.

2

FEMA = Federal Emergency Management Agency

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Many residents did not fully comprehend the seriousness of the storm
and/or underestimated the potential impacts, especially with the storm
surge. Most residents had never seen flooding at the levels that
occurred and many were completely unprepared for both the storm and
its aftermath. Many felt vulnerable and isolated.
The project is anticipated to operate through an existing local entity. It
would enable capacity building to be able to develop and implement the
program for a two‐year period. Specific tasks would be to develop of
educational materials, e.g., handbooks, brochures, a website, signage,
etc. The materials would be designed to reach different segments of the
population including, in particular, vulnerable populations.

Page | 94

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
An annual Storm Preparedness Day would also be a project
component that would feature programs and events throughout the
community, which could occur on the anniversary of Superstorm
Sandy, October 29. The Committee expressed that various activities
could be conducted to increase awareness of storm preparation
issues.
The local implementing entity would also work with the emergency
response agencies to conduct a review of current agency coordination
protocols.
The project is likely feasible. It would involve the development of an
educational/storm awareness program that could include printed and
electronic materials, a website, and signage. It would also involve
coordination with emergency response, civic and other agencies. All
activities are technically simple to accomplish.

Estimated Project Costs
The project cost is estimated at $100,000. This would fund two years
of the program. There are no operations and maintenance costs
associated with the project.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits
The program will reduce risk through a more knowledgeable and
informed public. Residents will have a better understanding how to
prepare for significant storm event s and will be able to better protect
themselves from the hazards associated with storms.

Economic Benefits
A more informed and better prepared public may result in reduced
overall storm damage costs. As an example, residents may take steps
to better protect their homes in advance of a storm as a result of
understanding the storms present to properties.
An estimated 0.6 FTE temporary jobsxvi for the staffing associated with
the program is could be created by this project.

Health and Social Benefits
The project will provide a clear and vital health and social benefits to
the residents of Oakdale and West Sayville and especially to the most
vulnerable segments of the population. The project would help to
improve the awareness of the dangers of storms and would provide
important, locally relevant, information on preparation, evacuation,
and recovery. The program would be targeted to reduce the risk of
both personal injury and property damage.

Page | 95

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Cost‐Benefit Analysis
The project represents a low investment of $50,000 a year to fund a
public service program for two years. The potential benefits of this
project are considered to outweigh the cost of implementation.

Risk Reduction Analysis
Not applicable.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
implemented in the immediate term (less than two years).

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
No permits are required for the project. Approvals may be required to
distribute materials in certain locations, such as schools.

Jurisdiction
There are several agencies that have jurisdiction to conduct a public
education program. These include the Town of Islip and Suffolk
County.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 96

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Community
Sustainability/Energy Conservation

Community Sustainability/Energy Conservation

Figure 8: Depicts sustainable energy practices

Recovery Support Function: Economic Development
Estimated Cost: $300,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Oakdale and West Sayville residential housing in the Extreme,
High, Moderate and Residual Risk Areas
Oakdale downtown, West Sayville downtown

Project Description
This project is also known as the “Greening of Oakdale” initiative. The
concept was developed by the community several years ago to
encourage energy conservation and economic growth. The project is
being proposed to improve the economic resiliency of the Community.
While it was originally conceived for Oakdale, it could be applied to
West Sayville as well.
The project is intended to be the incubator for how a local hamlet in
the Town of Islip can work with their local government towards
sustainability and create “green collar” jobs within the local
community. The program would work with residential and commercial
consumers by creating a resource center where the consumer can
learn the various ways that they can reduce their carbon footprint and
achieve sustainability.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Risk Reduction and Benefits:
Reduced energy consumption
Reduced run‐off to wetlands/waterways
Improved community sustainability
It is the mission of the program to educate and/or facilitate actions
that could reduce the net consumption of energy and create a greater
awareness to the concept of sustainability in the Community.
The program would, in part, address storm resiliency issues in the
community. This would occur through initiatives to “sequester”
stormwater for water recycling purposes such as lawn irrigation or
other “gray water” uses. The effect of this would be to help to reduce
flooding and pollutant loading into the wetlands and waterways within
the community. This would help to protect and reinvigorate the
wetlands, strengthening their capacity to function as storm buffers.

Page | 97

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The development of the program is feasible. It is an administrative
program that would provide a public service as opposed to
constructing infrastructure.

The cost is for establishing a community program to encourage energy
conservation and sustainability is estimated at $300,000. This would
fund the program for two years. There are no operations and
maintenance costs with the program.

containers, etc. The project is consistent with the Long Island Regional
Economic Development Council’s plan, “The Strategic Economic
Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties.” As noted above,
it would specifically “Protect Long Island from the perils of climate
change at the same time we encourage new “cleaner, greener”
industries by leading collaborative regional efforts to harden our
infrastructure, businesses and homes against the next major storm and
to encourage transportation, energy and construction policies that
reduce our vulnerability, as well as our carbon footprint.”xix

Project Benefits

Environmental Benefits

Risk Reduction and Resiliency

The project is directly linked to an overall objective to improve the
quality of the natural environment in Oakdale so that vital wetlands
would be better able to absorb any future storm surge.

Estimated Project Costs

The “Greening of Oakdale” will develop programs to reduce energy
consumption and grow the local economy. It will improve the
economic resiliency of the community and also reduce the risk of
more significant economic disruption following future storms and
other natural disasters.

One of the key aspects of the initiative is to recapture rainwater that
will go a long way to reduce flooding as well as reduce pollutants that
go into our wetlands and waterways through rainwater runoff.

Economic Benefits

Health and Social Benefits

This is a pilot project initiative that is intended to demonstrate how a
hamlet can work with local government to attain sustainability and
create “green collar” jobs within the community. The proposal intends
to work with both residential and commercial consumers by creating a
resource center where the consumer can learn the various ways that
they can reduce their carbon footprint and achieve sustainability
regardless of whether their motivation is altruistic, geared towards
saving money or a combination of both motives. A retail component is
also considered to supply items such as light bulbs, recyclable waste

The conservation of energy would benefit the residents of the
Community including vulnerable populations. It would accomplish this
through reduced costs of living associated with household expenses.
For fixed income, low income and very low income households the
reduction of household expenses can provide affordable of living in
the Community.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 98

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Cost‐Benefit Analysis
The project represents a low investment of capital. The potential
benefits of this project are considered to outweigh the cost of
implementation.

Risk Reduction Analysis
Not applicable.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
implemented in the immediate term (less than two years).

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
It is expected that the operation will take place in an existing building.
Depending on the specific location, a building permit/ change of use
permit may be needed for the specific occupancy.

Jurisdiction
As a new program, there is no specified entity with jurisdiction.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 99

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Enhanced Electronic
Mapping/Emergency Management
System

Enhanced Electronic Mapping System
Recovery Support Function: Community Planning and Capacity
Building
Estimated Cost: $50,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Oakdale and West Sayville residential housing in the Extreme,
High, Moderate, and Residual Risk Areas
Oakdale downtown, West Sayville downtown
Risk Reduction and Benefits:
Public safety
Reduced property damage

Electronic map of Long Island using GIS technology

Project Description
This project would help to fund the development of an enhanced
Geographic Information System (GIS) for the Town of Islip to improve
storm preparedness planning, as well as response and recovery from
severe storm events.
The Town of Islip experienced a devastating shock to the Emergency
Management Information System during Superstorm Sandy. The call
center was inundated with phone calls from residents who were
reporting damages to their homes, electrical outages, and medical
emergencies.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

The Town was tasked with recording these reports, assessing the
severity of the incident, and then dispatching the appropriate
resources to the location.
To compound the problem, the electrical power to the Town’s
Information Technology (I.T.) Department was lost and the emergency
generators could not provide adequate power to the computer
system. Floodwaters entered the I.T. department and prevented the
use of the network. Therefore, the existing GIS could not be used to
track the locations of the incidents nor could the crews be tracked. A
makeshift system was cobbled together at the Town Hall West site

Page | 100

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
and the information was collected and mapped. This was a herculean
effort that helped with deploying resources to the correct locations.

•

However, this emphasized the need to seek out solutions to provide a
more robust GIS system to manage this information and track
damages and document costs associated with storm events. While the
Town has had a GIS system for many years, the system is not adequate
to accommodate the needs of the Town to manage severe storm
events and other disasters.

•

The GIS system will enable better communication and record keeping
among Town agencies and emergency responders. The system will
track incoming reports of flooding, damages, utility outages and
blocked roads and enable more rapid and efficient deployment of
resources. The system will also allow for better record keeping of
storm response and damage, providing better accountability and
reimbursement of eligible costs to FEMA, the State, and any other
agencies. The project is technically feasible and involves the use of
demonstrated technology. By way of example, a similar system was
implemented for the State of Vermont and many other communities
with proven success.
The system will be based upon a full web GIS infrastructure. Proposed
applications would include:
• E911 Information Application – enabling e911 operators and
responders;
• Road Obstruction Application – tracking fallen trees, power
lines and other road obstructions;

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Damage Assessment Application – provide initial damage
assessment to FEMA as well as organize and track recovery
data essential for FEMA reimbursement; and
Public Information Application – provide key information to
the public in advance, during and after emergency events.

Estimated Project Costs
The Committee is proposing an allocation of $50,000 towards the
overall project costs. The total cost of the project is estimated at
$300,000.
The project will be implemented as an Islip Town‐wide asset. It is
expected that other NYRCR Communities in the Town of Islip may
provide the balance of funds. The required funds may also be
supplemented with other Town of Islip funds. Annual operations and
maintenance costs are estimated at $1,000 annually over a 20‐year
estimated useful life. As such, the conceptual life cycle cost is $70,000.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency
This project will fund part of the cost of an enhanced GIS‐enabled
program for the Town of Islip to improve planning, response and
recovery from severe storm events.

Page | 101

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The system will be able to track incoming reports of flooding,
damages, utility outages, and medical emergencies, and it will enable
rapid and efficient deployment of resources. The system’s ability to
track costs and resources is projected to enable the Town to
document and report actual costs to FEMA and the State for quick
reimbursement, thereby minimizing a future storm's impact to the
local government budget and services.

Economic Benefits
The project will improve the efficiency of municipal services associated
with storm preparedness, response, and recovery. It will enable better
utilization of staff resources and cost efficiencies.

Health and Social Benefits
An enhanced GIS program will allow the system to assign a specific
location to each structure in the Community, enabling emergency
responders to locate an address more quickly. This is vital for
accessing and providing services to vulnerable populations in the
Community. The program will also facilitate inter‐agency coordination
with the Suffolk County Emergency Preparedness Registry, which
includes a database of special and/or functional medical needs.
Additionally, the project is expected to help create better coordination
among first responders.

benefits of this project are considered to outweigh the cost of
implementation.

Risk Reduction Analysis
While this project does not directly reduce risk for any particular
assets in NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville, it does offer the ability to
manage information about asset risks, vulnerability, damage, and
repair. By having a centralized data management system in place,
NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville could more efficiently identify those
assets that are at most risk in the event of future storms for repair or
replacement.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
implemented in the immediate term (less than two years).

Regulatory Requirements
There are no anticipated regulatory requirements for this project.

Jurisdiction
This project falls under the jurisdiction of the Town of Islip.

Cost Benefit Analysis
The project represents a low investment of capital to provide a more
efficient data management system that would benefit Oakdale and
West Sayville as well as other communities in the Town. The potential

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 102

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Multimodal
Transportation/Tourism Development

Multimodal Transportation/Tourism
Development
Recovery Support Function: Economic
Estimated Cost: $230,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Oakdale and West Sayville Waterfront commercial, Oakdale
downtown, West Sayville downtown
Risk Reduction and Benefits:
Decreased economic vulnerability due to enhanced local
economy
Improved transportation opportunities

Example of a dedicated bicycle/hiking pathi

Project Description
This project is aimed at promoting tourism as a resilient economic
development strategy. The project includes a study to plan a hiking
and bicycle trail system linking Great River, Oakdale and West Sayville
and a bicycle share operation on Town property located at the
Oakdale railroad station.
It would also include docking facilities for a water taxi operation that
could provide lateral as well as cross bay seasonal transportation. The
water taxi site would be co‐located with a kayak/canoe launching
facility on a publicly owned site to be determined.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

The project would involve public/private partnerships. For the water
taxi and kayak/canoe launch, the development of a dock and parking
facility is proposed to be publicly funded (on publicly owned land),
while a private operator would be sought to provide the water taxi
and kayak/canoe operation. For the bicycle share operation proposed
on publicly owned land at the railroad station, a private corporation
could be licensed to provide the bike rental operation while public
funds are proposed for the facilities and equipment (kiosk, bikes,
racks, electronics, etc.)
Funding would also be allocated to obtain access to the Long Island
Rail Road (LIRR) website to promote NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville as a
tourism destination.

Page | 103

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The project is being proposed to improve the economic resiliency of
the Community.
In general, the project is likely to be technically feasible. The hiking
trail study presents no technical issues. The bike share is an
established commercial model with several vendors available to
provide a “turnkey” type of operation that is technically simple to
accomplish. The water taxi dock is not expected to have significant
issues but a final determination will have to be made when a specific
site is selected.
Similarly, a final determination would have to be made on any
technical or site challenges for the related facilities‐ the kayak launch
and the gravel parking area.

Economic Benefits
The project would create economic activity by increasing tourism. For
the planning and construction aspects of the project, approximately
2.6 FTE temporary jobsxvi would be created.
The project would be consistent with the Long Island Regional
Economic Development Council’s strategy to, “produce a new
generation of sustainable, well‐paying jobs in the legacy sectors
of…tourism…” Also, the strategy identifies as a critical issue the need
to, “enhance ecotourism activities and infrastructure.”

Environmental Benefits

Project Benefits

The potential environmental benefits of the implementation of the
plan include an increased awareness and understanding of the natural
environment. This could occur through the subsequent development
of the hiking trail system that will enable controlled access through
sensitive wetlands and facilitate wildlife viewing of the extensive
natural features in Oakdale and West Sayville. In addition, the bike
share operation can help to reduce vehicle trips to these public access
points, thereby reducing emissions and improving air quality.

Risk Reduction and Resiliency Benefits

Health and Social Benefits

This project involves several components aimed at promoting tourism
as an economic development strategy to improve both transportation
and economic resiliency. This would enable a diversification of the
local economy, providing better economic resiliency in the future. The
project would not directly reduce storm damage risk.

The promotion of alternative modes of transportation can help to
improve public health by encouraging walking and bicycling.
Additional recreational activities could be a result, too.

Estimated Project Costs
The project is estimated to cost $230,000. The cost does not include
land acquisition. Operations and maintenance costs are estimated at
$17,700 annually with a five‐year useful life expectancy (total
$88,500). The conceptual life cycle cost would be $318,500.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 104

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Cost‐Benefit Analysis

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project

The project represents a low investment of capital to provide a more
diversified, resilient local economy. The potential benefits of this
project are considered to outweigh the cost of implementation.

Approval would be needed from the Town of Islip for the bike share
operation if it is conducted from the LIRR Oakdale station (on Town
property). NYS DEC and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) permits
and NYS Department of State coastal consistency concurrence would
be needed for the water taxi dock and kayak launch. NYS DEC Article
25 permits for Tidal Wetlands would also be required for any site
improvements (including the proposed gravel parking lot) within 300’
of the waterfront or wetlands edge and may involve the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE) permits and NYS Department of State
coastal consistency concurrence.

Risk Reduction Analysis
This project involves several ideas aimed at promoting tourism as an
economic development strategy to improve both transportation and
economic resiliency. The vulnerability for all four assets will be
reduced on the assumption that project implementation will improve
multimodal networks within Oakdale and West Sayville making it
easier for activity to return to commercial districts after a storm when
vehicular transportation is difficult or there is a gasoline shortage.
The reduction of risk for economic assets will be the result of the
broad based components of the project that will promote tourism.
This will occur through the activities associated with the hiking/bicycle
trail system, the bicycle share operation, the kayak/canoe small craft
launching facility and the water taxi dock.

Jurisdiction
For the bicycle share operation proposed to be located at the Oakdale
Rail Road station, the jurisdiction would be the Town of Islip.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
implemented in the intermediate term (12 to 36 months).

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 105

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Electrical System
Isolation Switches/Smart Meter Feasibility
Study

Electrical System Isolation Switches/Smart Meter
Feasibility Study
Recovery Support Function: Housing
Estimated Cost: $50,000
Assets Made More Resilient:
Oakdale and West Sayville residential housing in the Extreme,
High, Moderate and Residual Risk Areas; Oakdale downtown,
West Sayville downtown; Waterfront commercial
Risk Reduction and Benefits:
Reduced danger when re‐energizing electrical grid; Increased
safety to fire and rescue service workers; Rapid recovery
following power outages

Project Description
Following Superstorm Sandy, the recovery of electrical service to many
homes and businesses was delayed due to problems with verifying
that all electrical systems within a service area were safe to re‐
energize.
This was a particular concern for unoccupied structures where the
occupants had evacuated or were out of the area.
Electric meteri

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

To reduce this problem in the future, this project would look at the
feasibility of installing electrical system isolation switches at each
meter that could be activated by authorized personnel, possibly
remotely. This would allow for faster overall recovery and provide an

Page | 106

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
ancillary benefit for other types of emergencies when shutting off
power is necessary for safety reasons. Project would examine the
feasibility of individual isolation switches or a pilot project as a Smart
Meter system for the area that would enable individual control. The
study will also consider whether these systems could be applied to
gasoline stations that may benefit from such a switch for the use of
generators.
The project would be for the purpose of conducting a feasibility study
and there are no technical issues with doing so.

Estimated Project Costs
The cost of the project is estimated at $50,000. There are no
operations and maintenance costs associated with the study.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency
The feasibility study will help to determine if electrical system isolation
switches or a Smart Meter/ Smart Grid system is feasible in Oakdale
and West Sayville. If determined to be feasible, such a system could
improve recovery time following a storm event.
It would also reduce risk associated with emergencies such as house
fires when the disconnection of electrical power is necessary for the
safety of first responders.

Economic Benefits
If shown to be feasible and implemented, electrical system isolation
systems could enable quicker recovery following a storm event. This

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

could provide economic benefits, especially to businesses in the area.
Approximately 0.6 FTE temporary jobsxvi could be expected as a result
of the planning study.

Health and Social Benefits
If shown to be feasible and implemented, electrical system isolation
systems could enable a quicker recovery following a storm event. This
could reduce the length of time that residents are without power,
thereby reducing the inconvenience and hardship.
If the project leads to implementation of an electrical system isolation
switch or smart meter, it could benefit vulnerable populations for
those that require electrical power for medical devices.

Cost‐Benefit Analysis
The project represents a low investment of capital to determine the
feasibility of electrical system isolation switches. The potential
benefits of this project are considered to outweigh the cost of
implementation.

Risk Reduction Analysis
The recovery of electrical service to many homes and businesses was
delayed due to problems with verifying that all electrical systems in a
particular area were safe to re‐energize. To reduce this problem in the
future, this project would look at the feasibility of a pilot project to
installing electrical system isolation systems or a “Smart Meter”
system so that individual properties that are safe to occupy could be
re‐energized without having to wait for all other properties to be

Page | 107

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
certified as safe. The Smart Meters would also be an advantage to the
fire department when dealing with a fire or other emergency at a site.
If the evaluation indicates that the project is feasible, implementation
could significantly improve the recovery time for the restoration of
electrical power. This could enable the more rapid resumption of
businesses and a faster re‐occupancy of dwellings.
The reduction of risk that could occur upon implementation of a
program would benefit large portions of the community. This would
include all residential and commercial areas that would utilize or have
access to the system. The vulnerability of the community would be
reduced since there would be the opportunity for a more rapid
recovery from power outages.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
implemented in the intermediate term (12 to 36 months).

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
No specific permitting is required to complete the study.

Jurisdiction
This project is under the jurisdiction of LIPA/PSEG and the Town of
Islip.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 108

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
PROPOSED PROJECT: Oakdale Central
Business District Master Implementation
Plan

Oakdale Central Business District Master
Implementation Plan
Recovery Support Function: Economic
Estimated Cost: $300,000
Assets Made More Resilient: Downtown Oakdale
Risk Reduction and Benefits:
Decreased vulnerability due to enhanced local economy that is
more resistant to fluctuations and economic downturn

Business District, Montauk Highway, Oakdalei

Project Description
The project involves the development of a detailed implementation
plan for Downtown Oakdale.
The development of a detailed Master Implementation Plan is
necessary in order to determine how best to implement the Oakdale
Hamlet Center Vision Plan (Vision Plan) that was prepared in 2008 by
the Town of Islip. While the Vision Plan was well considered, it has not
been a catalyst for change. Part of this is undoubtedly due to the
recent recession; however, other, more local factors appear to be at
play as well.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

The Implementation Plan would examine in detail the specific
impediments to the implementation of the Vision Plan and would map
out a clear strategy and series of actions to accomplish on‐the‐ground
change. The project would include the review and updating of land use
codes and the zoning district use classification, a market study,
infrastructure analysis of parking, drainage, wastewater treatment (to
be coordinated with the Town’s in‐progress sewer study), designing
and conducting a program to seek public participation, and the
necessary environmental reviews that will be required.
It is expected that this will include the preparation of a Generic
Environmental Impact Statement (GEIS) and the requirements and
procedures associated with that process. This will be important to
identify any environmental issues and necessary mitigation in order to
establish conditions and thresholds for subsequent development. It
will also allow going through the land use review process more quickly

Page | 109

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
for projects that fall within the parameters of the GEIS. The
development of a Master Implementation Plan is feasible with no
technical issues identified.

Estimated Project Costs

as well as developing a more resilient local economy. This long‐term
view by the Committee is aimed at rebuilding the Community in a
resilient manner while also maintaining and growing the property tax
base and local economy. The preparation of the Master implementation
Plan would be the first step in this process.

The cost for the development of the Master Implementation Plan is
estimated to be $300,000. This would include the cost of preparing the
plan and associated studies. There are no operations and maintenance
costs. The opportunity costs/negative externalities are only those
costs associated with the study and the other projects that could be
funded if this project did not go forward.

The project would create jobs associated with the preparation of the
plan. This is estimated at approximately 3.8 FTE temporary jobsxvi.
There are no operations and maintenance costs associated with the
preparation of the plan.

Project Benefits

Cost‐Benefit Analysis

Economic Benefits

The project represents a low investment of capital to prepare a master
The preparation of the Master Implementation Plan would not, in itself, implementation plan for Downtown Oakdale. The potential benefits of
this project are considered to outweigh the cost of implementation.
reduce risk. It is the implementation of the plan that would do so, as
discussed further in the Featured Project profile entitled Downtown
General Timeframe for Implementation
Oakdale Revitalization Program. By way of background, the Montauk
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
Highway business area was generally not directly flooded or damaged
implemented in the intermediate term (12 to 36 months).
by Superstorm Sandy. However, many businesses located in the coastal
areas along the waterfront were affected. Many of these businesses are Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
in the Extreme and High Risk Areas and were severely flooded and
There are no permits required to prepare the Master Implementation
damaged by the storm surge. This includes eight commercial properties
Plan. Approvals would be required to commence the planning process,
and two industrial properties. Some of the properties have multiple
from the Town Board of the Town of Islip. Approval of the plan once
businesses. As a result, many businesses were unable to operate for a
completed would be at the discretion of the Town Board.
protracted period of time, employment suffered, and sales tax
Jurisdiction
collections were reduced. The Committee has expressed the need to
direct business growth to the Montauk Highway Central Business
This project falls under the jurisdiction of the Town of Islip.
District as a means of minimizing future development on the waterfront

Risk Reduction and Resiliency

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 110

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
FEATURED PROJECT: Wastewater Collection
and Treatment System

Waste Water Collection and Treatment System
Recovery Support Function: Economic, Infrastructure
Order of Magnitude Estimate: $67,500,000
Assets Made More Resilient: Oakdale and West Sayville
residential housing in the Extreme, High, Moderate and Residual
Risk Areas, Waterfront and Downtown Commercial, senior
citizen residential, Oakdale and West Sayville downtowns
Risk Reduction and Benefits: Improved water quality, improved
marine environmental conditions, improved potential for
economic growth

Sewage treatment planti

Project Description
Oakdale and West Sayville are characterized by low elevation
topography and a high groundwater table. In addition, most of the
homes and businesses in the communities are reliant on conventional
on‐site septic systems. Many of these systems are, at times, inundated
with groundwater, reducing their effectiveness in removing
contaminants. This has adversely affected water quality to both
groundwater resources and surface water bodies.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

The reliance on on‐site septic systems has also had an economic
impact on the community. This has occurred as a result of
development restrictions that limit the amount of building area that
can be constructed on a particular parcel. The restrictions are
necessary since wastewater discharged into the ground without
treatment can degrade water quality.
So while Town zoning standards may allow a level of development
that is considered appropriate for the community, Health Department
standards may reduce that amount.
A specific example of this limitation is the proposed revitalization of
the Oakdale Central Business District that has been planned for
decades but has been hindered by the lack of sewers. The Town of

Page | 111

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Islip is conducting a planning study of the feasibility of installing a
wastewater collection and treatment system.

operations and maintenance would be $225,000,000. Accordingly, the
conceptual life cycle cost would be $292,000,000.

When this is complete, and subject to the findings, this project would
implement the development of a tertiary level wastewater treatment
system.

The opportunity costs/ negative externalities are primarily economic.
Depending on how much of the project costs are paid by the residents
of a future sewer district (i.e., how much is not subsidized), the annual
tax costs could be high. This will displace other spending that could
impact the purchase of goods and services in the area. When the cost
estimate is completed and the financing alternatives are defined, this
issue can be addressed in greater detail.

The feasibility of the project is being addressed in a planning study
currently being conducted by the Town of Islip. If the planning study
indicates that a system is feasible, an engineering study would be
conducted to get to a pre‐construction level of detail.
The project is consistent with recent initiatives by Suffolk County, such
as the Comprehensive Water Resources Management Plan, to
promote the expansion of wastewater collection and treatment
systems as a means of protecting water quality. This is reflected in
Suffolk County’s recent study entitled Comprehensive Water Resources
Management Plan.

Estimated Project Costs
Because the planning study has not been completed, only a
preliminary cost assessment was possible at this stage. Assuming a
flow volume of 75 gallons of wastewater per day, per person and a
cost of construction of both a collection and treatment system of $60
per gallon, this assessment resulted in a potential cost of $67,500,000.
Since this figure is not based on an engineering plan, it should not a
cost estimate and the actual cost could be significantly different.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency
Superstorm Sandy highlighted the risk of on‐site wastewater disposal
systems to the health and economic well‐being of the community.
The proposed project would improve resiliency through the
development of a centralized wastewater collection and treatment
system that would eliminate the need for on‐site septic systems. Such
systems were often problematic and non‐functional during
Superstorm Sandy. Further, such a system would improve economic
resiliency by allowing a greater level of development, especially in the
downtown commercial areas that are outside of the Extreme and High
Risk Areas. Such development would be in accordance with local
zoning and community planning standards.

Operations and maintenance costs have been estimated at $4,500,000
million annually. For a 50‐year expected useful life, the total cost of

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 112

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Economic Benefits
The project would provide economic benefits in several ways. This
would include the economic activity created during the construction
phase including the purchase of the materials and labor. Based on the
order of magnitude figure, the number of temporary jobs could be 844
FTExvi. In many cases it would also allow for potentially significant
increases in the density of development that could be built on
commercially zoned parcels that are currently restricted in
development yield based upon County Health standards. Residentially
zoned parcels would also benefit in a similar way, however, a less
dramatic change would be expected since most of the residential
areas are already developed. It is noted that the Town’s zoning
regulations would continue to apply.
The project would be consistent with the Long Island Regional
Economic Development Council’s 2013 plan, The Strategic and
Economic Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties.
Specifically, it would, “Rebuild and expand infrastructure to improve
job access, revitalize downtowns and transit hubs, speed trade, and
attract and retain dynamic regional businesses and highly skilled
workers.”xx

Environmental Benefits

This would improve both groundwater quality as well as surface water
bodies such as the Connetquot River and the Great South Bay.
Improved water quality is critical to the long‐term environmental
health and economic growth of Oakdale and West Sayville. It affects
the quality of the natural environment as well as the strength of the
local economy that is closely tied to the marine environment.

Health and Social Benefits
Potential health and social benefits of a sewer system include the
greater ability to provide more diverse and potentially affordable
housing. This can occur through the subdivision of existing lots into
smaller parcels than would be possible under current Health
Department standards (one acre per single‐family dwelling). Such lots
would have to meet local zoning requirements which are often more
dense than Health Department density standards. Further, the
opportunity to create more affordable housing could be made possible
through redevelopment in the downtown areas in the form of mixed‐
use development, condominiums, and apartments.

Cost‐Benefit Analysis
The project represents a high investment of capital. The potential
benefits of this project are considered to outweigh the cost of
implementation.

The project would provide significant environmental benefits in the
form of water quality improvement. This would be accomplished
through the elimination of onsite wastewater disposal systems (septic
systems, cesspools) that have minimal treatment capability, and the
operation of a tertiary level (nitrogen removing) treatment system.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 113

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Risk Reduction Analysis

Jurisdiction

A wastewater collection and treatment system in Oakdale and West
Sayville has the potential to have a significant, community—wide
benefit. For the risk reduction analysis, residential and commercial
assets, including senior citizen housing, in both communities was
assessed. The vulnerability for all assets would be reduced due to the
increased resiliency that would result from the collection and
treatment system that would reduce raw sewage from backing up into
homes during extreme flood events. As well as the economic resiliency
that sewers would bring to the commercial districts in the area.

This project falls under the jurisdiction of Suffolk County.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
implemented in the long term (more than three years).

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
Permitting requirements will have to be determined based upon the
specific engineering results. Preliminarily, it is likely that several
permits and approvals would be required, including approval for the
formation of a sewer district (Suffolk County Sewer Agency, Suffolk
County Legislature, NYS Comptroller), NYS DEC Article 24 and 25
permits for construction in proximity to freshwater and tidal wetlands,
NYS Department of State for Coastal Consistency for any portion in the
coastal zone, Town and County road opening/ highway permits,
easement or fee acquisition of required property for a treatment
plant, sewerage pump stations, possible permits from utility entities
for any work that impacts their facilities.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 114

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
FEATURED PROJECT: Oakdale Central
Business District Revitalization Program

Oakdale Central Business District Master
Revitalization Program
Recovery Support Function: Economic
Estimated Cost: To be determined upon completion of Master
Implementation Plan
Assets Made More Resilient: Downtown Oakdale
Risk Reduction and Benefits:
Decreased vulnerability due to enhanced local economy that is
more resistant to fluctuations and economic downturn

Estimated Project Costs
i

Business District, Montauk Highway, Oakdale

Project Description
The project involves the revitalization of Downtown Oakdale by the
implementation of the Oakdale Hamlet Center Vision Plan (2008) and
the Master Implementation Plan (Proposed Project above). The
project would include actions to promote economic development in
the downtown area.
The purpose would be to create a pedestrian scale, compact form of
development with a diverse and vibrant mix of land uses. In many
ways, it would seek to create the downtown environment that
Oakdale never had. The revitalization would be in contrast to the
automobile oriented, strip commercial development that is
characteristic of the downtown area presently.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

The cost for the implementation of a revitalization program is not
known. Cost estimates could be prepared upon completion of the
Master implementation Plan.

Project Benefits
Risk Reduction and Resiliency
While the Montauk Highway business area was not directly flooded or
damaged by Superstorm Sandy, many waterfront businesses in Oakdale
and West Sayville were affected. Many of these businesses are in the
Extreme and High Risk Areas and were severely flooded and damaged
by the storm surge. This includes eight commercial properties and two
industrial properties. Some of the properties have multiple businesses.

Page | 115

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
As a result, many businesses were unable to operate for a protracted
period of time, employment suffered and sales tax collections were
reduced. The Committee has expressed the need to direct business
growth to the Montauk Highway central business district as a means
of minimizing future development on the waterfront as well as
developing a more resilient local economy. This long‐term view by the
Planning Committee is aimed at rebuilding the community in a
resilient manner while also maintaining and growing the property tax
base and local economy.

Economic Benefit
The revitalization of the Downtown Oakdale would strengthen the
local economy through the growth of the property tax base and
through an increase in sales tax revenues. It would also increase jobs
as businesses locate or expand in the downtown.
The Vision Plan called for mixed use development in with residential
uses would be included in the downtown. This can also provide an
economic benefit through increased disposable spending in the
community.
The project would be consistent with the Long Island Regional
Economic Development Council’s 2013 plan, The Strategic and
Economic Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties.
Specifically, it would, “Develop innovation and industry clusters in
transformative locations across the region, including downtowns,
brownfields and university, research and medical centers, by
integrating the smart‐growth principles of transit oriented
development and vibrant community life.”xxi

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Environmental Benefits
The potential environmental benefits of the implementation of the
plan would be assessed upon completion of the report. With the goal
of a compact, walkable downtown in proximity to a rail station (Transit
Oriented Development), it is expected that environmental benefits
would accrue. These could include reduction in automobile trips and
related improvement in air quality, as well as reductions of land use
pressures to extend commercial development in a “strip” form, which
is wasteful of resources and destructive to community identity. This
would also work well with the Multimodal Transportation/Tourism
Development project proposed by the Committee.

Health and Social Benefits
The revitalization of Downtown Oakdale could potentially aid public
health through the use of a compact, walkable design. This would
encourage walking and the associated health benefits. It would also
reduce automobile trips, air pollution, and the risk of traffic collisions
and injuries. The development of mixed‐use development and
apartments could increase housing choice, both type and cost.

Cost‐Benefit Analysis
A cost benefit analysis should be completed when the Master
implementation Plan is completed.

Risk Reduction Analysis
The risk reduction analysis was based upon the implementation of a
revitalization program. As noted, the details of the program are to be
determined in the Master Implementation Plan noted above.

Page | 116

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The analysis determined that the economic vulnerability of the
downtown business district in Oakdale would be reduced after the
completion of the revitalization program. This would benefit the
residents, businesses, and property owners in the downtown district.
It would also benefit the community at‐large through an increased
property tax base and local jobs, providing a more resilient economy
that would be more resilient to the adverse economic effects of future
storms.

General Timeframe for Implementation
This project, from the time that implementation begins, could be
implemented in the long term (more than three years).

Regulatory Requirements Related to Project
The requirements for permits and approvals would have to be
determined based upon the specific recommendations contained in
the plan.

Jurisdiction
This project falls under the jurisdiction of the Town of Islip.

Section 4: Implementation – Project Profiles

Page | 117

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section 5. Additional Materials

i

Waterfront commercial on the Connetquot River, looking west to Great River

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 118

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Presented in the following table are Additional Resiliency Recommendations identified during the planning process.

Table 31: Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Strategy
Seek to increase the
capacity of local
government to undertake
projects or actions to
improve resiliency and
storm preparedness
Coordinate
improvements to
communication programs
and protocols during
severe storm events to
ensure that residents
secure necessary
assistance and
information
Ensure that all agencies
of government are
working cooperatively
and effectively

Project Name

Short Description

Estimated
Cost
$300,000

Regional
(Y/N)
Y

Grant
Writer/Recovery
Manager

Create two staff positions at the Town level: a
specialist in grants, and an expert in public sector
project management. The positions would be shared
among the NYRCR Communities and the Town in
general.

Improve
Communication at
the Community
Level

Improve communications before, during, and after
storms. Consider use of CB radios, neighborhood
block captains and other basic methods of
communications.

Management
Measure

N

Improve
Communication at
the Governmental
Level

Improve communication and coordination between
the levels of government involved in storm response
and recovery. Compile a list of all government
agencies; identify personnel at each agency for
coordination purposes. Invite all identified
personnel to meet to review comprehensive
strategy and to coordinate response.

Management
Measure

Y

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 119

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31: Additional Resiliency Recommendations (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name

Short Description

Seek methods to
increase the availability
of human capital in the
form of volunteers from
the community

Evaluate “CERT”
Program for Local
Use

Seek to update local
plans to conform to
Federal and State
coastal zone
management policies
Establish resiliency as an
objective in existing
planning and land use
approval process

Local Waterfront
Revitalization Plan

Land Use/ Building
Code Review

Identify and define regulatory code changes
necessary for improved resiliency and “green”
land development practices; implement the
recommended zoning changes in the Vision 2008
plan for Downtown Oakdale.

Improve synergies with
regional public water
provider

Identify Feasibility/
Benefit of
Cooperative
Agreement with
Suffolk County
Water Authority

Identify possible cooperative assistance
arrangements with the Suffolk County Water
Authority and the community. The Water
Authority is a public benefit agency with
headquarters in Oakdale. The Authority has
substantial resources on‐site including
warehouses, communication facilities, and
equipment. Explore the possibilities for

Section 5: Additional Materials

Identify organization methods to establish and
sustain a local Communication Emergency
Response Team (CERT). CERT is an organization of
volunteer emergency workers who have received
specific training in basic disaster response skills,
and who agree to supplement existing emergency
responders in the event of a major disaster. A
CERT exists at the County level; this proposal is
planned for the local level.
An important tool in the planning and protection
of waterfront communities. The Town of Islip has
completed considerable work necessary for the
completion of the LWRP planning process.

Estimated
Cost
Management
Measure

Regional
(Y/N)
N

$100,000

N

$50,000

Y

Management
Measure

Y

Page | 120

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31: Additional Resiliency Recommendations (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Seek to provide
wastewater treatment
facilities to protect
water quality and
promote economic
growth

Enhance existing
facilities to serve as
temporary shelters

Improve delivery of
health services following
storm events

Improve Neighborhood
and community based
communication

Wastewater
treatment systems

Alternative
wastewater
treatment options

Utilize Local Fire
Stations as
Command Centers
and Refuges of Last
Resort
Post Storm Health
and Safety Needs

Physical Message
Center

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description

Monitor the progress and early results of a sewer
planning study that is being conducted by the
Town of Islip with funding from New York State. If
study indicates that sewers are feasible, support
funding for engineering and construction.
Evaluate methods for improving on‐site
wastewater treatment including the use of
innovative systems. Evaluate regulatory issues and
costs associated with systems. Consider impact of
rising groundwater levels.
Identify fire houses as command centers and
refuges of last resort.

Identify local medical professionals that could be
available immediately after a storm event to
provide basic service assistance to the population
in the immediate area. Include professionals in
medical, dental, and psychiatric care.
Provide a kiosk‐type message center in a central
location to be a communication point and provide
a means of exchanging information when
electronic communication is not functioning after
a storm. The message center could also serve the
public year‐round as an information point for
storm preparedness.

Estimated
Cost
Monitor
Town Study

Regional
(Y/N)
Y

$30,000

N

Management
Measure

N

$30,000

N

$15,000

N

Page | 121

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31: Additional Resiliency Recommendations (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Examine chronic
flooding locations in a
comprehensive manner

Neighborhood
Drainage Studies

Provide better
management of
stormwater

Storm Surge/ Storm
Runoff Retention
Areas

Improve response time
for building and safety
inspections after a
storm event

Post‐storm
inspections

Ensure availability of
evacuation routes to
remain in service during
and after storm events

Maintain Critical
Transportation
Routes
Coordinate with
LIRR on Possible
Evacuation
Strategies

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description

Define the drainage contributory area and the
scope of an engineering study to comprehensively
analyze the area’s drainage problems and
recommend solutions, costs, and potential funding
sources. Consider natural options along with
engineered options.
Identify locations for storm surge retention basins.
Design the basins to collect and store storm surge
water to reduce flooding on adjacent streets,
homes, and businesses. The basins would also be
designed to function in a natural manner via
grading, soil preparation, and vegetation. The
basins would serve two purposes:
stormwater/surge detention and environmental
restoration.
Following a significant storm, recovery can be
delayed by several factors, e.g. delays in
inspections. This project would identify and
establish procedures that could be followed after
a storm to enable safe but prompt inspections to
restore re‐occupancy of homes and businesses.
Designate responsible party to keep roads open,
especially critical access and evacuation routes.
Coordinate with LIRR possible evacuation
strategies and operation of crossing gates to
ensure they do not remain down, thereby closing
off egress routes.

Estimated
Cost
$250,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

$50,000

N

$30,000

N

Management
Measure

Y

Management
Measure

Y

Page | 122

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31: Additional Resiliency Recommendations (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Ensure availability of
safe evacuation routes

Identify Evacuation
Routes

Seek environmentally
appropriate dredging
options including spoil
removal

Dredging

Provide serve to identify
and disseminate
information concerning
resilient construction
methods

Improve Building
Resiliency

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description

Identify current evacuation routes and assess if
any changes are needed. Work with appropriate
emergency response authorities. Ensure adequate
signage for all routes‐ identify needed signage and
location.
Review effectiveness of dredging as a means of
mitigating the effects of storm surges. Review
other benefits of dredging as well as impacts/
issues including the disposal of spoil material and
regulatory/ public policy issues. If deemed to be
effective seek funding for specific projects. Project
locations to potentially include canals and
channels.
Identify properties within the floodplain and
provide information on programs and regulations
that can improve resiliency. This could include
information on the NY Rising Housing Recovery
Program, Town Building Code, and National Flood
Insurance Program requirements, including the
‘Biggert Waters Act’. Design a communication
program and identify materials that need to be
produced and distributed to communicate the
messages.

Estimated
Cost
$30,000

Regional
(Y/N)
Y

$30,000

N

$50,000

N

Page | 123

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31: Additional Resiliency Recommendations (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Improve and harden
utility infrastructure,
including electric,
telephone, and cable

Improve and harden
utility infrastructure,
including electric,
telephone, and cable

Overhead Utilities‐
Assess Needs

Underground
Utilities‐ Assess
Needs
Wireless Utilities ‐
Assess needs

continued
Ensure adequacy of
existing flood plain
management techniques
and investigate methods
to improve existing
programs and policies

National Flood
Insurance Program
(NFIP) Community
Rating System (CRS)

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description

Evaluate options for a more resilient overhead
utility infrastructure system. Consult with regional
utility providers and independent engineers.
Evaluate methods to improve resiliency including
underground service, stronger poles, hardened
substations, more aggressive tree trimming, local
staging of supplies, etc. Consider costs of
alternative options.
Inventory current underground utilities within the
CR and evaluate any deficiencies/needs. Consider
impact of raising roads.
Evaluate current system for resiliency needs.
Consult with cellular service providers and
independent engineers to assess needs. Evaluate
options for improving service in Oakdale and West
Sayville, especially Verizon as the primary
provider. Consider need for generators.
The NFIP CRS would provide floodplain
management activities that exceed minimum NFIP
standards, to reduce flood insurance premium
rates up to 45%. CRS floodplain management
activities include programs to provide public
information, mapping and regulations, flood
damage reduction, and flood preparedness.
Participating in the CRS provides an incentive to
maintaining and improving a floodplain
management program.

Estimated
Cost
$30,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

$30,000

N

$30,000

Y

$50,000

N

Page | 124

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31: Additional Resiliency Recommendations (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Ensure the health,
safety, and well‐being of
vulnerable populations
that are most at risk
during and after storm
events
Reduce inflow of tidal
surges at vulnerable
outfall locations

Short Description

Identify and Plan
for Vulnerable
Populations that
Would be Most
Served by Shelters

Identify vulnerable populations by working with
social service agencies, fire department, religious
organizations, senior citizen clubs, etc. Review
current plans to address needs of vulnerable
populations and ensure there are no unmet needs.

Raising Bulkheads

Significant portions of the waterfront in the CR are
bulkheaded. These include both coastal properties
and canal front properties, most of which are
developed sites consisting of houses or
businesses. Most have been in place for decades,
reflecting a land development practice that is
generally not permitted for newly developed sites
based on regulations that seek to protect the
natural environment. Bulkheading that has been in
place since the 1970s is typically nonconforming
(‘Grandfathered’) and can usually be maintained
and replaced ‘in‐kind’. To address rising sea levels
and storm surge conditions, examine the
feasibility and criteria for raising the height of
existing bulkheads. Look at problem from the
perspective of the various ownership interests‐
private homeowners, private business owners,
non‐profit associations, and public. Look at
optimal elevations and methods of
implementation. Consider alternatives including
the possible removal of bulkheading in some
locations where appropriate.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Estimated
Cost
$50,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

TBD

N

Page | 125

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 31: Additional Resiliency Recommendations (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Provide for periodic
inspection, maintenance
and upgrades of
stormwater drainage
systems

Water flow
maintenance

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description

Identify locations in creek and stream corridors
that are impacted by debris, sediment, siltation,
etc., which impacts flow and drainage. Develop a
description of work necessary to address problems
including, possibly, dredging, debris removal,
cleaning, or replacement of culverts.

Estimated
Cost
$30,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Page | 126

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
B. Master Table of Projects
Presented in the following table are all projects identified by the NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Planning Committee (Committee). This table
includes Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional Resiliency Recommendations.

Table 32: Master Project Table
Strategy
Investigate
conservation and
management
measures to protect
and improve the
natural environment
Reduce inflow of tidal
surges

Provide low‐ impact
recreational
opportunities and
public access to the
waterfront while
restoring degraded
shorefront areas

Project Name

Short Description

‘Living Marsh’‐Grand Canal
Levee Improvement

Improved tidal flow to adjacent
wetlands/ storm surge protection/
wetlands improvement

Check Valves on Drainage
Outfalls

Identify stormwater outfall pipes
that are subject to tidal/storm surge
inundation via reverse flow;
implement in selected locations
Identification of locations suitable
for coastal restoration; implement
including removal of shorefront
structures, restoration of natural
shoreline

Public Access to
Waterfront/Coastal
Restoration

Section 5: Additional Materials

Project
Category
Proposed

Estimated Cost
$410,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Proposed

$300,000

N

Proposed

$620,000

N

Page | 127

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name

Short Description

Project
Category
Proposed

Estimated Cost
$230,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Increase
opportunities that
can provide economic
growth and resiliency
that also improves
access to and
awareness of
environmental assets
Invest in
infrastructure
improvements at the
community and
neighborhood level
while addressing
individual needs

Multimodal
Transportation/Tourism
Development

This project involves several ideas
aimed at promoting tourism as a
resilient economic development
strategy including a bicycle share
program, hiking trails, and facilities
for a water taxi

Infrastructure
Hardening/Raising Roads

Identify roads subject to chronic
flooding; implement road raising
program in selected locations

Proposed

$1,760,000

N

Ensure emergency
shelters are located
within the community

Emergency Shelter
Hardening

Proposed

$380,000

N

Ensure storm
preparedness and
resiliency of
community residents

Annual Education/
Coordination Program

Proposed

$100,000

N

Develop a sustainable
and energy conscious
community

Community
Sustainability/Energy
Conservation

Review emergency shelters in
Community, identify priority site,
plan for emergency power and
supplies
Improve preparedness in
community and coordination with
response agencies; develop
educational materials, programs for
a 2‐year project
Implement a program to reduce
energy consumption, protect the
environment and grow the
economy

Proposed

$300,000

N

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 128

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Increased awareness
of and access to
resources for hazard
mitigation,
preparedness, and
response
Plan for resiliency at
the community and
neighborhood level
while addressing
individual needs
Support the growth
of the business
district

Enhanced GIS Emergency
Management System

This project would be for enhancing
a Town‐wide Geographic
Information System (GIS) system
that would improve storm response
and recovery

Electrical System Isolation
Switch‐Smart Meter‐
Feasibility Study

Look at the feasibility of installing
electrical system isolation switches
at each meter location that could be
easily activated by authorized
personnel, possibly remotely
Completion of a study to examine in
detail the impediments to
implementation of the Oakdale
Vision 2008 Plan; map out a clear
strategy and actions to accomplish
on‐the‐ground change. Update land
use, a market study, infrastructure
analysis, public participation, and
environmental review
Implement the Oakdale Master
Implementation Plan identified as a
Proposed Project
The project would install a waste
water collection and treatment
system for Oakdale and West
Sayville

Oakdale Central Business
District Master
Implementation Plan

Oakdale Central Business
District Revitalization
Seek to provide
wastewater
treatment facilities to
protect water quality
and promote
economic growth

Short Description

Waste Water Collection and
Treatment System (Sewers)

Section 5: Additional Materials

Project
Category
Proposed

Estimated Cost
$50,000

Regional
(Y/N)
Y

Proposed

$50,000

N

Proposed

$300,000

N

Featured

TBD

N

Featured

$67.5 million

Y

Page | 129

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Ensure adequacy of
existing flood plain
management
techniques and
investigate methods
to improve existing
programs and policies

NFIP Community Rating
System (CRS)

Seek to update local
plans to conform to
Federal and State
coastal zone
management policies

Local Waterfront
Revitalization Plan

Establish resiliency as
an objective in
existing planning and
land use approval
process

Land Use/ Building Code
Review

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
The NFIP CRS would provide
floodplain management activities
that exceed minimum NFIP
standards, to reduce flood insurance
premium rates up to 45%. CRS
floodplain management activities
include programs to provide public
information, mapping and
regulations, flood damage reduction,
and flood preparedness.
Participating in the CRS provides an
incentive to maintaining and
improving a floodplain management
program
An important tool in the planning
and protection of waterfront
communities. The Town of Islip has
completed considerable work
necessary for the completion of the
LWRP planning process.
Identify and define regulatory code
changes necessary for improved
resiliency and “green” land
development practices; implement
the recommended zoning changes
in the Vision 2008 plan for
Downtown Oakdale.

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
TBD

Regional
(Y/N)
Y

Additional

$100,000

Y

Additional

$50,000

Y

Page | 130

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Coordination and
improvements to
communication
programs and
protocols during
severe storm events to
ensure that residents
secure necessary
assistance and
information
Ensure that all
agencies of
government are
working cooperatively
and effectively

Short Description

Improve Communication at
the Community Level

Improve communications before,
during, and after storms. Consider
use of CB radios, neighborhood
block captains and other basic
methods of communication.

Improve Communication at
the Governmental Level

Improve communication and
coordination between the levels of
government involved in storm
response and recovery. Compile a
list of all government agencies;
identify personnel at each agency
for coordination purposes. Invite all
identified personnel to meet to
review comprehensive strategy and
to coordinate response.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
TBD

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Additional

TBD

Y

Page | 131

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Seek methods to
increase the
availability of human
capital in the form of
volunteers from the
community

Evaluate “CERT” Program
for Local Use

Ensure availability of
safe evacuation
routes

Identify Evacuation Routes

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
Identify organization methods to
establish and sustain a local
Communication Emergency
Response Team (CERT). CERT is an
organization of volunteer
emergency workers who have
received specific training in basic
disaster response skills, and who
agree to supplement existing
emergency responders in the event
of a major disaster. A CERT exists at
the County level; this proposal is
planned for the local level.
Identify current evacuation routes
and assess if any changes are needed.
Work with appropriate emergency
response authorities. Ensure
adequate signage for all routes‐
identify needed signage and location.

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
TBD

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Additional

$30,000

Y

Page | 132

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Improve synergies
with regional public
water provider

Identify Feasibility/ Benefit
of Cooperative Agreement
with Suffolk County Water
Authority

Seek to increase the
capacity of local
government to
undertake projects or
actions to improve
resiliency and storm
preparedness
Seek to provide
wastewater
treatment facilities to
protect water quality
and promote
economic growth

Grant Writer/Recovery
Manager

Wastewater treatment
systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
Identify possible cooperative
assistance arrangements with the
Suffolk County Water Authority and
the community. The Water
Authority is a public benefit agency
with headquarters in Oakdale. The
Authority has substantial resources
on‐site including warehouses,
communication facilities, and
equipment. Explore the possibilities
for cooperative arrangements in
emergency situations.
Create two staff positions at the
Town level: a specialist in grants,
and an expert in public sector
project management. The positions
would be shared among the NYRCR
Communities and the Town in
general.
Monitor the progress and early
results of a sewer planning study by
the Town of Islip with funding from
NYS. If study indicates that sewers
are feasible, support funding for
engineering and construction.

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
TBD

Regional
(Y/N)
Y

Additional

$300,000

Y

Additional

TBD

N

Page | 133

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Seek to provide
wastewater
treatment facilities to
protect water quality
and promote
economic growth
continued
Seek environmentally
appropriate dredging
options including spoil
removal

Ensure the health,
safety, and well‐being
of vulnerable
populations that are
most at risk during
and after storm
events

Short Description

Alternative wastewater
treatment options

Evaluate methods for improving on‐
site wastewater treatment including
the use of innovative systems.
Evaluate associated regulatory
system issues and costs. Consider
impact of rising groundwater levels.

Dredging

Review effectiveness of dredging as
a means of mitigating the effects of
storm surges. Review other benefits
of dredging and impacts/ issues
including the disposal of spoil
material and regulatory/ public
policy issues. If deemed to be
effective seek funding for specific
projects.
Identify vulnerable populations by
working with social service
agencies, fire department, religious
organizations, senior citizen clubs,
etc. Review current plans to
address needs of vulnerable
populations and ensure there are
no unmet needs.

Identify and Plan for
Vulnerable Populations that
Would be Most Served by
Shelters

Section 5: Additional Materials

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
$30,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Additional

TBD

N

Additional

$50,000

N

Page | 134

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Improve Neighborhood Physical Message Center
and community based
communication

Enhance existing
facilities to serve as
temporary shelters
Improve delivery of
health services
following storm events

Utilize Local Fire Stations as
Command Centers and
Refuges of Last Resort
Post Storm Health and
Safety Needs

Increase staff capacity Post‐storm inspections
to improve response
time for building and
safety inspections
after a storm event

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
Provide a kiosk‐type message
center in a central location to be a
communication point and provide a
means of exchanging information
when electronic communication is
not functioning after a storm. The
message center could also serve the
public year‐round as an information
point for storm preparedness.
Identify firehouses as command
centers and refuges of last resort.
Identify local medical professionals
that could be available immediately
after a storm event to provide basic
service assistance to the population
in the immediate area. Include
professionals in medical, dental,
and psychiatric care.
Following a significant storm,
recovery can be delayed by several
factors, e.g. delays in inspections.
This project would identify and
establish procedures that could be
followed after a storm to enable
safe but prompt inspections to
restore re‐occupancy of homes and
businesses.

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
$15,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Additional

TBD

N

Additional

$30,000

N

Additional

$30,000

N

Page | 135

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Encourage provision
of storm/ flood
resilient housing

Improve Building Resiliency

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
Identify properties within the
floodplain and provide information
on programs and regulations that
can improve resiliency. This could
include information on the NY
Rising Housing Recovery Program,
Town Building Code, and NFIP
requirements, including the
“Biggert Waters Act.” Design a
communication program and
identify materials that need to be
produced and distributed to
communicate the messages.

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
$50,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Page | 136

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Reduce inflow of tidal
surges at vulnerable
outfall locations

Raising Bulkheads

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
Significant portions of the CR
waterfront are bulkheaded. These
include both coastal and canal front
properties, most of which are
developed sites with houses or
businesses. Most have been in place
for decades, reflecting a land
development practice that is
generally not permitted for newly
developed sites. Bulk heading in place
is typically nonconforming
(‘Grandfathered’) and can usually be
maintained and replaced ‘in‐kind’.
Examine the feasibility and criteria for
raising existing bulkheads. Look at
problem from the perspective of the
various ownership interests‐ private
homeowners, private business
owners, non‐profit associations, and
public. Look at optimal elevations and
methods of implementation. Consider
alternatives e.g. possible removal of
bulk heading in some locations where
appropriate.

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
TBD

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Page | 137

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Examine chronic
flooding locations in a
comprehensive
manner

Neighborhood Drainage
Studies

Storm Surge/ Storm Runoff
Retention Areas

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
Define the drainage contributory area
and the scope of an engineering study
to comprehensively analyze the
area’s drainage problems and
recommend solutions, costs, and
potential funding sources. Consider
natural options along with
engineered options.
Identify locations for storm surge
retention basins. Design the basins
to collect and store storm surge
water to reduce flooding on
adjacent streets, homes, and
businesses. The basins would also
be designed to function in a natural
manner via grading, soil
preparation, and vegetation. The
basins would serve two purposes:
stormwater/surge detention and
environmental restoration.

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
$250,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Additional

$50,000

N

Page | 138

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Improve and harden
utility infrastructure,
including electric,
telephone, and cable

Overhead utilities‐ Assess
Needs

Underground utilities‐
Assess Needs

Wireless utilities ‐ Assess
needs

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
Evaluate options for a more
resilient overhead utility
infrastructure system. Consult with
regional utility providers and
independent engineers. Evaluate
methods to improve resiliency
including underground service,
stronger poles, hardened
substations, more aggressive tree
trimming, local staging of supplies,
etc. Consider costs of alternative
options.
Inventory current underground
utilities within the CR and evaluate
any deficiencies/ needs. Consider
impact of raising roads.
Evaluate current system for
resiliency needs. Consult with
cellular service providers and
independent engineers to assess
needs. Evaluate options for
improving service in Oakdale and
West Sayville, especially Verizon as
the primary provider. Consider need
for generators.

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
$30,000

Regional
(Y/N)
N

Additional

$30,000

N

Additional

$30,000

Y

Page | 139

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 32: Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy
Project Name
Maintain evacuation
plans

Maintain Critical
Transportation Routes
Coordinate with LIRR on
Possible Evacuation
Strategies

Provide for periodic
inspection,
maintenance and
upgrades of
stormwater drainage
systems

Water flow maintenance

Section 5: Additional Materials

Short Description
Designate responsible party to keep
roads open, especially critical access
and evacuation routes.
Coordinate with LIRR possible
evacuation strategies and operation
of crossing gates to ensure they do
not remain down, thereby closing
off egress routes.
Identify locations in creek and
stream corridors impacted by
debris, sediment, siltation, etc.,
which impacts flow and drainage.
Develop a description of work
necessary to address problems
including, possibly, dredging, debris
removal, cleaning, or replacement
of culverts.

Project
Category
Additional

Estimated Cost
TBD

Regional
(Y/N)
Y

Additional

TBD

Y

Additional

$30,000

N

Page | 140

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
C. Public Engagement Process
Governor Cuomo has been a strong proponent of bottom‐up,
community‐driven planning; in other words, the real “experts” are
the residents of the communities that have been confronted first‐
hand by these natural disasters. A critical component, therefore, of
the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program is the
exchange of information between the NYRCR Consultant Team, the
NYRCR Committee, and the public to identify appropriate projects,
strategies, and solutions that are likely to carry community support.
The public in this case is defined as area residents, employees, civic
groups, neighborhood and homeowner associations, environmental
and other interest groups, business interests, governmental agencies,
educational, medical, religious, and other institutions, the media,
elected/ appointed officials, as well as other stakeholders who
express interest in the process.
The Public Engagement Strategy:
 Established the means to engage and facilitate information
sharing with the public throughout the development of the
NYRCR Plan;
 Educated the public and elicited public comments and
suggestions regarding all aspects of the Plan within the NYRCR
Communities;
 Employed outreach techniques that allowed for collection and
coordination of public communication and comments; and
 Reached out to groups that might normally be underrepresented
in a planning study, such as minorities, non‐English speaking
residents, low‐income residents, seniors, youth, and the disabled

Section 5: Additional Materials

Outreach Techniques for Disseminating and Receiving
Information
The Committee utilized a number of dissemination techniques to
achieve a thorough, responsive, open, and transparent
communication process.

Committee Meetings
All Committee Meetings were open to the public, with meeting dates
and times posted on the NYRCR website
(http://www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr). For each Committee
Meeting, notifications were sent and meeting materials were
prepared. They included agendas, sign‐in sheets, minutes, comment
log, PowerPoint presentations, graphics/boards, and handouts. The
Public was invited to comment on the work of the Committee by
filling out a comment form available at each Committee Meeting. The
Committee held 10 meetings.

Public Engagement
While the Committee represents the interests of many, it was
important to provide opportunities for the public to participate in the
development of the NYRCR Plan. While the primary means of
outreach was public engagement events, additional outreach
opportunities for comment were provided at different venues in the
NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville Community and through the NYRCR
website.

Page | 141

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
development of the Plan, so when it is time to implement the Plan,
the public and the elected decision‐makers have had an opportunity
to participate in the decision‐making process. Members of the public
who were informed and engaged in the process were more likely to
support a recommended course of action. Event materials were
available in English and if requested, in Spanish.
Presentation materials were developed for each event that illustrated
the key points of the information presented using plain language,
graphics, simulations, etc. These were available following the event
on the NYRCR website for download. An annotated summary of
events was prepared and available for public distribution.
The process included a series of four public engagement events:
Residents and NYRCR staff at Public Engagement Event held in the
Communityi

Public Engagement Events
Each public engagement event included a presentation of work done
to date and an opportunity for attendees to provide feedback. For
each event, the following was provided: public notice (including press
releases, announcements, individual mailings, and other appropriate
means); outreach to underserved communities and displaced
stakeholders; information gathering from those attending; and the
collection and inclusion of feedback into the ongoing planning
process. A summary of each public outreach session is available in
hard copy and electronically. Public engagement events were
scheduled to coincide with major milestones. A good public
involvement process educates, or brings people along, during the

Section 5: Additional Materials

1. To define the Community Vision and solicit initial input on the
asset inventory and assessment of risk to community assets;
2. To solicit input from the public concerning the content of the
Conceptual Plan;
3. To confirm projects and implementation frameworks; and
4. To present the investment and action strategies and the
NYRCR Plan.
Outreach for public engagement events included: posting on State
NYRCR webpage and other electronic media; ads in weekly print
media when time and budget allowed; flyers and posters at strategic
locations throughout the community including libraries, community
centers, and other centers of activity; and e‐mails and/or texts to lists
available from chambers, civics, school districts, churches,
synagogues, fraternal organizations, and other community leaders.

Page | 142

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Outreach also included requests to community organizations to post
information on their websites. Phone calls were made to: elected
officials and other key players in the local residential and business
community and calls to each Committee member to assist them with
their outreach effort (e.g., calls/e‐mails to their contacts and
announcements at their events).
Each event was formatted as an open house that the public could
attend during any part of the allotted two to three hours. Stations
were positioned around the room for the various topics. Committee
members, municipal representatives, State planners and the NYRCR
Consultant Team were present at each station to provide opportunity
for the community to exchange ideas in a comfortable setting. This
structure provided an opportunity for each attendee to work within
their own schedule and comment on all or some of the specific
aspects of the process in a meaningful way.
As the project progressed, the public was presented with maps, a
geographic scope, community assets, risk to assets, and a vision
statement, needs and opportunities, strategies and projects that had
been vetted and/or created by the Committee. The desired outcome
of each public engagement event was to obtain the public’s reactions
and feedback to the Committee’s work in order to incorporate their
input. Comments were compiled by the NYRCR Consultant Team and
provided to the Committee in a clear and comprehensive manner at
follow‐up Committee meetings. The Committee reviewed the public’s
feedback and incorporated it into the NYRCR Plan. The fourth public
engagement event is planned for after the release of this Plan. The

Section 5: Additional Materials

following summarizes the total participation for each of the public, in‐
person events:





Event #1, Tuesday, September 17, 2013– 150 participants
Event #2, Tuesday, November 12, 2013 – 85 participants
Event #3, Tuesday, February 11, 2014 ‐ 50 participants
There will be a fourth Public Engagement event in Spring
2014 to present this NYRCR Plan to the public.

Expert Sessions
A Power (Electric/Gas) Resiliency Education Session which was held
on Tuesday, December 17, 2013 at the West Islip Community Center.
Over 30 members from the various Suffolk County NYRCR Planning
Committees were in attendance. The education session focused on
National Grid/LIPA (operated by PSEG Long Island as of January 1,
2014) lessons learned post‐Superstorm Sandy as well as current and
future hardening projects/initiatives that are being undertaken by the
utilities within the County. Committee members who attended stated
that the session was valuable in understanding how hardening
infrastructure or raising a road can impact the utilities below the
road. Other Committee members indicated that it was valuable to
meet other Suffolk NYRCR Committee Members from adjacent
Communities.
A Flooding and Erosion Protection Education Session held on January
21, 2014, at the West Islip Fire Department, 309 Union Boulevard in
West Islip. Representatives from New York Sea Grant gave an
innovative presentation about ongoing and future treatments of the

Page | 143

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
natural shoreline. The presentation also noted that Long Island’s
coastline is home to a dynamic variety of habitats that supports a
range of plants and animals, some of which are endangered and
threatened. This variety ranges from heavily developed urbanized
barrier islands to the Otis Pike Fire Island High Dune Wilderness, the
only Federally‐designated wilderness area in New York State.
Sea Grant stressed the interplay between the natural and built
environments that converge at the “living edge.” The Nature
Conservancy provided information about wetlands restoration and
the NYSDEC discussed the permitting requirements and thresholds
for approval for various types of projects being considered by the
Committees.

Other Considerations
Although the events were advertised as events for the NYRCR
Program, there were attending community members who were more
interested in assistance with individual property concerns. To
accommodate these individuals, at each public engagement event
tables were available in a separate area for State, FEMA, and NGO
staff from the various intake centers to provide individual assistance.
These community members were subsequently encouraged to
participate in the NYRCR planning process.

Online Meetings
Suffolk County NYRCR Communities utilized an online meeting format
to accompany the third public engagement event. The overall format
for the online events provided a digital open house which could be
attended at any time 24 hours a day, seven days a week, for a ten‐day
timeframe.
The Online Public Meeting provided identical stations to the in‐
person meeting. Respondents were asked to identify their community
and were able to view the Planning process and comment on all of
the materials provided. The Online Meetings provided valuable
comments that were summarized for the Committee’s review and
consideration in the planning process. There were 57 respondents to
the online meeting survey for Oakdale and West Sayville.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Individual assistance teams meeting with residents at a Public
Engagement Eventi

Page | 144

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Website

Print and Broadcast Media

The NYRCR website will serve as a repository for downloadable
versions of all public information, events, and event notifications.
Posted materials include an overview of the planning process,
reports, maps, and documents, summaries of public engagement
events, notices of public engagement events, and contact
information. The website includes an area to accept public comment,
as well as a section for Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs). All
materials and information on the website is kept up to date. The
address is: http://www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr.

Study information was also disseminated through selected local,
print, radio, and TV media to keep the community informed and to
respond to media inquiries. A particular effort was made to include
publications, radio, and TV stations that targeted traditionally
underrepresented populations.

Figure 9: Virtual Meeting

Outreach Techniques for Receiving Input
An important component of the outreach program was to understand
public sentiment and to be able to answer questions and address
public concerns. Several methods were provided for the public to
make comments and ask questions. The NYRCR Consultant Team
used these comments to enhance and improve the NYRCR Plan. The
team documented all comments received and added them to the
record. The Committee also reviewed comments.

NYRCR Staff Communication
The NYRCR staff was available to directly answer specific questions
and receive comments. The primary contact for the Community was
the NYRCR Suffolk County Regional Lead.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 145

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
E‐Mail
E‐mail comments and requests for information can be sent to the
State’s e‐mail address at: info@stormrecovery.ny.gov. This email
address is prominently displayed on the website so that it is widely
disseminated and available for public use. The NYRCR Consultant Team
incorporated input and/or responded, as appropriate.

Comment Forms
Comment forms were available at Committee meetings and public
engagement events and on the State’s website to provide an
opportunity for the public to contribute their thoughts, which were
then passed along to the Committee and the NYRCR Consultant Team.

Requests for Information
All requests for information were acknowledged by the NYRCR
Consultant Team within a week with a letter or email accompanied by
the materials requested or by a referral to the State’s website where
the material can be downloaded. If a response to the request required
more than a week, the individual making the request would be
contacted with an estimate of the anticipated delivery date. An offer
was always made to provide further assistance should it be necessary.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 146

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
D. Community Asset Inventory
The NYRCR Consultant Team used the asset inventory compiled as
part of the NYRCR Conceptual Plan as a baseline in which to identify
assets that may potentially be inputted into the Risk Assessment Tool.
The pre‐screening was designed to advance assets that were either:
 Situated in Extreme and High Risk Areas;
 Critical Assets (FEMA‐critical) in Moderate Risk Areas;
 Locally‐significant community identified (High Community
Value) in Moderate Risk Areas;
 Assets with High Community Value in Non Risk Areas; or
 Life safety services
The asset inventory included in the NYRCR Conceptual Plan was based
both on Community‐identified assets and State‐identified assets. The
assets catalogued in the draft Conceptual Plan included basic data
such as community, asset name and type, asset category, as well as
risk area and asset class. As previously indicated, as an initial data
management step, the NYRCR Consultant Team consolidated all
Community‐identified assets and State identified assets into one
database.
Assets filtered out include those that fell outside of Extreme, High, or
Moderate Risk Areas or were non‐critical assets located in Moderate
Risk Areas. As previously mentioned, Committee‐identified or locally
significant high value assets were also included.

Group Similar Assets
Similar assets were grouped as a single asset to the maximum extent
possible because these assets would likely experience the same
effects from storm events and have similar vulnerabilities. Examples
included:



Road network or electric infrastructure with similar
construction and exposure
Residential neighborhoods or business districts by risk area

In the event that a building or parcel spanned multiple risk areas, the
“worst‐case or more at‐risk” risk area was used for the purposes of
analysis.

Determining Community Value
The value that a community places on an asset may differ by
community and/or region. As a result, NYSDOS has indicated that a
suitable identification methodology for NYRCR Communities should
be determined in consultation between the State and the NYRCR
Consultant Team. Although, the “community value” field in the Risk
Assessment Tool did not directly impact risk, it was useful in terms of
identifying locally significant assets as determined by each respective
NYRCR Committee and community.

Community Value in Oakdale / West Sayville
The NYRCR Consultant Team engaged their respective NYRCR
Committees in preliminary “pilot” community value identification
exercises throughout the course of the planning process. During a

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 147

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Committee Meeting held on November 5, 2013, the Committee
participated in a Community Value and Critical Asset pilot exercise.
During this exercise, a Critical Assets Worksheet containing roughly
24 asset classes was distributed to the Committee to complete. The
contents of critical asset classes were developed using a collaborative
approach with the Committee. Similarly, asset classes were also
presented at the second Public Engagement Meeting (November 12,
2013) in order to solicit verbal commentary from the public on the
community value placed on assets and its importance relative to the
resilience of the locality. The various asset classes included a number
of functions ranging from life safety services to residential housing
and infrastructure. The purpose of this exercise was to get the
Committee to think about each asset class and its importance relative
to the resiliency of NYRCR Oakdale/West Sayville. Committee
members were presented with worksheets with asset value
definitions (see below) and then asked to identify each asset class as
high, medium, or low value.
A High Value Community Asset is determined by the community to be
so significant in the support of that community’s day to day function
that the loss of that asset or extended lack of functioning would
create severe impacts to the community’s long‐term health and well‐
being or result in the loss of life or injury to residents, employees or
visitors. High Value Community Assets will also generally be limited in
number within a community and be difficult to replace in the short‐
to mid‐term.
A Medium Value Community Asset is an individual asset or grouping
of assets that are determined by a community to be important to the
functioning of that community’s day to day life and that the loss of

Section 5: Additional Materials

that asset or extended lack of functioning would cause hardship to
the community’s well‐being but who’s function could be replaced or
duplicated in a mid‐term time frame without significant burden to a
community’s long‐term health. Median Value Community Assets are
generally more frequent in occurrence in a community than a High
Value Asset.
A Low Value Community Asset is an individual asset or grouping of
assets that are determined by a community to play a role in the
functioning of a community’s day to day life but whose loss could be
managed and overcome within a community without substantial
impact to that community’s functioning. These assets are generally
more frequent in a community than a High or Medium Value
Community Asset and can be restarted, replaced or temporarily
duplicated in a short‐term time frame with limited burden to a
Community’s long‐term health.
The NYRCR Consultant Team tabulated Committee responses that
included:
 Low Value Assets (7): Great South Baby, Rivers and Wetlands,
Beaches and Dunes, Canals, Historic Buildings,
Cultural/Community Centers, Parks and Recreation Facilities;
 Medium Value Assets (7): Business Areas, Industrial Areas,
Marinas, Government Buildings, Schools, Cable and Internet
Infrastructure, Secondary Roads; and
 High Value Assets (9): Residential Housing, Downtown Business
District, Homes and Facilities for Vulnerable Populations, Fire,
Police, Emergency Facilities, Hospitals, Electric and Gas
Infrastructure, Telephone/Cellular Communications
Infrastructure, Major Roads, Railroad

Page | 148

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
The purpose of this exercise was to get the Committee to identify the
“highest” of the priority assets in order to better inform the risk
assessment process.

Using the Risk Assessment Tool
The dual purpose of the Risk Assessment Tool was: (1) to provide risk
information as a means to identify and prioritize management
measures; and (2) to provide a standardized risk assessment process
for the NYRCR Program.
As previously mentioned, the assets catalogued in the NYRCR
Conceptual Plan included preliminary data such as community, asset
name and type, asset category, as well as risk area and asset class.
This task included a review of GIS datasets, aerial imagery, and
Community/Committee input. Most of the risk assessment tool fields
were populated using appropriate data from the consolidated
database. Two important aspects to the tool are how to accurately
determine the exposure and vulnerability scores.

Vulnerability Score
The vulnerability score of each asset was determined using the State
guidance (based on Table 3: Vulnerability Based on Impact on Service
or Function of Community Assets contained in Guidance for
Community Reconstruction Zone Plans) as well as local background
knowledge. Vulnerability generally pertains to length of time that a
resource is out of service or a reduction in service capacity.

Risk Score Range
After populating the Risk Assessment Tool with attribute information
(basic data/hazard area/exposure/vulnerability, etc.) a Risk Score was
automatically generated. The Risk Score relied on past experience as
a predictor of future risk and included some subjective analysis.
The tables below outline the Asset Risk Assessment table for Oakdale
and West Sayville.

Exposure Score
The exposure score was automatically populated in the Risk
Assessment Tool based on landscape attribute information. Grouped
assets based on similar exposure were given the same exposure
score. Data that informed the exposure score included a review of
Coastal Erosion Hazard Area (CEHA) maps, aerial imagery, and site
reconnaissance as well as a reliance on local knowledge and input
from the Project Manager and/or Committee.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 149

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
* The following three Landscape Attributes have the same value for every asset, and are therefore not included in Table 33:




Erosion Rate ≥1 foot per year or unknown (all values are “No”);
Shore defenses absent, not constructed to anticipated conditions, or deteriorating (all values are “Yes:); and
Dunes absent, below BFE, eroding, little vegetation; Bluff slope unstable, little vegetation (all values are “Yes”)

* The following Asset Attribute has the same value for every asset (“Yes”) and is therefore not included in Table 33:
 Socially Vulnerable Populations

Table 33: Risk Assessment Tables
Asset Information

Asset

West Avenue
Town Dock
West Sayville
Residential
Housing ‐
Extreme Risk
Area
West Sayville
Residential
Housing ‐ High
Risk Area
West Sayville
Residential
Housing ‐
Moderate Risk
Area

Risk Area

Extreme

Asset Class

Asset
Sub‐category

Landscape Attributes * (see note)
Critical
Facility

Infrastructure Marine commerce No, Locally
facilities
Significant
Systems

Waterline
Asset on
Protective
frequently at
coastal
vegetation
Community
shore
barrier
between asset
defense or
island or
Value
and flood
upland
filled
source absent
vegetation
wetland

Risk Assessment

Landscape
Hazard
Attribute
Score
Score

Exposure Vulnerability Risk
Score
Score
Score

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

1

14

Extreme

Housing

Single‐Family
Residence

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

41

High

Housing

Single‐Family
Residence

No, Locally
Significant

High

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

Moderate

Housing

Single‐Family
Residence

No, Locally
Significant

High

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

3

23

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 150

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 33 (cont’d)
Asset Information

Asset

West Sayville
Waterfront
Commercial
Idle Hour
Taxpayer
Association
Beach Club
Adults and
Children With
Learning and
Developmental
Disabilities
Facility
West Sayville Fire
Station #1
Greenview Court
Senior
Apartments
West Sayville Fire
Department
Headquarters
Long Island
Maritime
Museum

Landscape Attributes * (see note)
Waterline
Asset on
Protective
frequently at
coastal
vegetation
Community
shore
barrier
between asset
defense or
island or
Value
and flood
upland
filled
source absent
vegetation
wetland

Risk Assessment

Landscape
Hazard
Attribute
Score
Score

Asset
Sub‐category

Critical
Facility

Economic

Marina/Water
Based Business

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

41

Extreme

Economic

Marina/Water
Based Business

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

41

Moderate

Housing

Supportive
Housing
Emergency
Operations/
Response

No, Locally
Significant

High

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

2.00

3

18

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

2

9

High

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

3

14

High

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

Low

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

41

Risk Area

Asset Class

Extreme

Health and
Moderate Social Services

No, Locally
Senior Housing
Significant
Emergency
Health and
Operations/
Moderate Social Services
Response
Yes, FEMA
Natural and
Museums,
Cultural
Performing Arts No, Locally
Extreme
Resources Centers, Stadiums Significant
Moderate

Housing

Section 5: Additional Materials

Exposure Vulnerability Risk
Score
Score
Score

Page | 151

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 33 (cont’d)
Asset Information

Asset

Oakdale
Residential
Housing ‐
Extreme Risk
Area
Oakdale
Residential
Housing ‐ High
Risk Area
Oakdale
Residential
Housing ‐
Moderate Risk
Area

Landscape Attributes * (see note)
Waterline
Asset on
Protective
frequently at
coastal
vegetation
Community
shore
barrier
between asset
defense or
island or
Value
and flood
upland
filled
source absent
vegetation
wetland

Risk Assessment

Landscape
Hazard
Attribute
Score
Score

Asset
Sub‐category

Critical
Facility

Housing

Single‐Family
Residence

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

41

High

Housing

Single‐Family
Residence

No, Locally
Significant

High

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

3.00

3

27

Moderate

Housing

Single‐Family
Residence

No, Locally
Significant

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.00

3

27

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.00

3

27

Yes, FEMA

0

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

1

5

Schools

Yes, FEMA

Medium

No

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

3

18

Schools

Yes, FEMA

Medium

No

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

3

18

Water Supply

Yes, FEMA

0

No

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

1

6

Risk Area

Asset Class

Extreme

St. Johns
Health and Higher Education
University
Moderate Social Services
Institutions
SCWA ‐ Montauk
Highway
Treatment Plant
Infrastructure
and Wells
Moderate
Systems
Water Supply
Sayville High
Health and
School (Shelter) Moderate Social Services
Oakdale Bohemia
Health and
Middle School
Moderate
Social
Services
(Shelter)
Infrastructure
SCWA Facility
Moderate
Systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Exposure Vulnerability Risk
Score
Score
Score

Page | 152

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 33 (cont’d)
Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Landscape Attributes * (see note)
Waterline
Asset on
Protective
frequently at
coastal
vegetation
Community
shore
barrier
between asset
defense or
island or
Value
and flood
upland
filled
source absent
vegetation
wetland

Risk Assessment

Landscape
Hazard
Attribute
Score
Score

Asset
Sub‐category

Critical
Facility

Exposure Vulnerability Risk
Score
Score
Score

High

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

3

14

Greenview Senior
Apartments
Moderate

Housing

Senior Housing

No, Locally
Significant

Fairfield Senior
Apartments

Moderate

Housing

Senior Housing

No, Locally
Significant

High

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

3

14

Moderate

Housing

Senior Housing

No, Locally
Significant

High

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

3

14

Transportation

Yes, FEMA

High

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

1

5

Parks and
Recreation

No, Locally
Significant

Low

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

1

8

Wetlands and
marshes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

Parks and
Recreation

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

Wetlands and
marshes

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

Wetlands and
marshes

Low

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

Transportation

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

0

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

2.50

1

8

Transportation

Yes, FEMA

High

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

Ocker's House
Senior Housing
LIRR Oakdale
Station +
Buildings
Byron Lake Town
Park
Pickman‐Remmer
Wetlands
West Sayville
County Park and
Golf Course
Ludows Creek
State Tidal
Wetlands
Pepperidge Hall
Marsh State Tidal
Wetlands
Byron Lake Park
Pedestrian Bridge
LIRR Montauk
Branch Rail Line

Moderate
High
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
Extreme
High
Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 153

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 33 (cont’d)
Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Connetquot
Brook

Extreme

Green's Creek

Extreme

Indian Creek

Extreme

West Brook
Shore Drive
Bridge at Grand
Canal ‐ Scour
Critical Bridge
Hollywood Dr.
Bridge at Grand
Canal ‐ Scour
Critical Bridge

Extreme

Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Extreme

Infrastructure
Systems

State Hwy 27
Secondary
Streets
Green's Creek
County Park

Infrastructure
Systems
Infrastructure
Moderate
Systems
Infrastructure
Extreme
Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Extreme
Resources
Extreme

Section 5: Additional Materials

Landscape Attributes * (see note)
Waterline
Asset on
Protective
frequently at
coastal
vegetation
Community
shore
barrier
between asset
defense or
island or
Value
and flood
upland
filled
source absent
vegetation
wetland

Risk Assessment

Landscape
Hazard
Attribute
Score
Score

Asset
Sub‐category

Critical
Facility

Exposure Vulnerability Risk
Score
Score
Score

Water Bodies

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

Water Bodies

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

Water Bodies

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

Water Bodies

No, Locally
Significant

Low

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

1

12

Transportation

No, Locally
Significant

0

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

0

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

High

No

No

No

1

3

1.50

2

9

Transportation

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

41

Parks and
Recreation

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

2

27

Transportation
Transportation

Page | 154

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 33 (cont’d)
Asset Information

Asset

W.O.R.C. Marina
(Private)
W.O.R.C.
Beach/Recreation
Oakdale
Waterfront
Commercial
Cell Tower ‐ West
Sayville Fire
Department
West Sayville
Downtown
Oakdale
Downtown

Risk Area

Extreme

Asset Class

Extreme

Economic
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Extreme

Economic

Landscape Attributes * (see note)

Section 5: Additional Materials

Landscape
Hazard
Attribute
Score
Score

Critical
Facility

Marina/Water
Based Business

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

2

27

Parks and
Recreation

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

2

27

Marina/Water
Based Business

No, Locally
Significant

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

41

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

3

23

Medium

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.50

3

41

Medium

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

3

23

Medium

No

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

3

18

0

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

4.00

2

24

Infrastructure
Tele‐
Systems
communications

Cell Tower
Biltmore Ave
Bridge
Dutchman's Cove
Townhouses ‐
Wastewater
Infrastructure
System
Moderate
Systems
Dowling College ‐
Wastewater
Infrastructure
System
Moderate
Systems

Risk Assessment

Asset
Sub‐category

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Extreme
Economic Downtown Center Significant
No, Locally
Moderate Economic Downtown Center Significant
Tele‐
No, Locally
Infrastructure
Moderate
communications Significant
Systems
Infrastructure
No, Locally
Extreme
Transportation
Systems
Significant

Moderate

Waterline
Asset on
Protective
frequently at
coastal
vegetation
Community
shore
barrier
between asset
defense or
island or
Value
and flood
upland
filled
source absent
vegetation
wetland

Exposure Vulnerability Risk
Score
Score
Score

Wastewater

No, Locally
Significant

0

No

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

2

12

Wastewater

No, Locally
Significant

0

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

2.50

2

15

Page | 155

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Table 33 (cont’d)
Asset Information

Asset

Risk Area

Asset Class

Greenview Court
Senior
Apartments ‐
Wastewater
Infrastructure
System
Moderate
Systems
Oakcreek
Commons ‐
Wastewater
Infrastructure
System
Moderate
Systems

Section 5: Additional Materials

Landscape Attributes * (see note)
Waterline
Asset on
Protective
frequently at
coastal
vegetation
Community
shore
barrier
between asset
defense or
island or
Value
and flood
upland
filled
source absent
vegetation
wetland

Risk Assessment

Landscape
Hazard
Attribute
Score
Score

Asset
Sub‐category

Critical
Facility

Exposure Vulnerability Risk
Score
Score
Score

Wastewater

No, Locally
Significant

0

No

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

2

12

Wastewater

No, Locally
Significant

0

No

Yes

No

1.5

3

2.00

2

12

Page | 156

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
E. Glossary
Acronyms
ADA ‐ Americans with Disabilities Act
CBA ‐ Cost‐benefit analysis
CDBG‐DR ‐ Community Development Block Grant‐Disaster Recovery
CDP ‐ Census Designated Place
CRS ‐ Community Rating System
FEMA ‐ Federal Emergency Management Agency
FIMP – Fire Island to Montauk Point
FTE ‐ Full‐time equivalent
GIS ‐ Geographic Information Systems
HUD ‐ Housing and Urban Development
LIRR ‐ Long Island Rail Road
NFIP ‐ National Flood Insurance Program
NGO ‐ Non‐governmental organization
NYRCR ‐ NY Rising Community Reconstruction
NYS DEC ‐ New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
NYS DOS ‐ New York State Department of State
OPWDD ‐ Office for People with Developmental Disabilities
USACE ‐ U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 157

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Terms
Asset ‐ Places or entities where economic, environmental and social functions of the community occur.
Asset Inventory ‐ Completing an inventory of the community’s social, economic, and natural resource assets that have been, or will be,
affected by coastal or riverine hazards.
Community Vision ‐ The overall goal of the community throughout the NYRCR planning process.
Conceptual Plan ‐ A snapshot of the current thoughts of the community and planning committee. The plans will evolve as communities
analyze the risk to their assets, their needs and opportunities, the potential costs and benefits of projects and actions, and their
priorities.
Exposure ‐ Local landscape characteristics that tend to increase or decrease storm effects.
Geographic scope ‐ The Community identified by the community and State guidelines where assets are most at risk; where future
construction or reconstruction of existing development should be encouraged or discourage; or where key investment to improve the
local economy can be instituted.
Hazard ‐ The likelihood and magnitude of anticipated hazard events.
Hazus ‐ Hazus is a geographic information system‐based natural hazard loss estimation software package developed and freely distributed
by FEMA.
Implementation Schedule ‐ Preparing an implementation schedule of the actions needed to implement the strategies.
Need ‐ Infrastructure and services that were damaged or rendered inoperable by Superstorm Sandy as well as methods and operations that
failed to work during the storm event or experienced insufficient capacity to respond effectively.
Needs and Opportunities Assessment ‐ Determining needs and opportunities to improve local economic growth and enhance resilience to
future storms.

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 158

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Opportunity ‐ Additional resiliency benefits, whether economic, environmental, social or cultural, that may be achieved through the
integration of new methods, procedures and materials into the normal course of rebuilding.
Public Engagement ‐ Offering opportunities for public input and involvement at key milestones in the planning process.
Resilience ‐ The ability of a system to absorb impacts while retaining the same basic structure and ways of functioning, the capacity for self‐
organization, and the capacity to adapt.
Risk ‐ The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate variability
and extremes.
Risk Area ‐ Geographic areas at risk from coastal hazards according to differences in the exposure of the landscape.
Risk Assessment ‐ Assessing risk to key community assets based on the three factors contributing to risk: hazard, exposure, and
vulnerability.
Risk Assessment Tool ‐ Evaluation of risk based on the formula: Hazard x Exposure x Vulnerability
Risk Score ‐ The result of the risk assessment tool evaluation
Strategy ‐ A specific way or ways to address the needs and realize opportunities presented by the committee.
Strategies for Investment and Action ‐ Developing strategies and the projects and actions needed to implement the strategies; identifying
potential costs and benefits of chosen projects and actions, as well as potential funding sources.
Vulnerability ‐ The capacity of an asset to return to service after an event

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 159

Oakdale/West Sayville NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
F. End Notes
i

Photographs contained in this document were taken by Consultant Team or reprinted with permission from NYRCR Committee Members or others.
Maclean, Norman, The River Runs Through It and Other Stories, 25th Edition 2001. University of Chicago Press
iii
U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA, National Weather Service. Extreme Weather 2011 Hurricane Irene, August 20‐29, 2011.
iv
Factual information incorporated into this section of the report has been gathered through review of the NOAA website for the days leading to and directly after Superstorm
Sandy, as well as review of pertinent Newsday and local Patch articles.
v
Raster processing of average USGS peak surge elevations at Oakdale and high resolution LiDar ground elevations, estimated mathematically as “peak surge, less the ground
elevation.”
ii

vi

vii

US ACE FIMP Study http://www.nan.usace.army.mil/Missions/CivilWorks/ProjectsinNewYork/FireIslandtoMontaukPointReformulationStudy.aspx

Long Island Regional Planning Council. Long Island 2035 Visioning Initiative Final Report. December 2009. p. 38.
Ibid. p. 38
ix
FEMA. Recovery Support Functions: Leading Coordinating Agencies and Key Aspects.
x
Aggregated GIS data provided by NYSDOS. Bridge data developed and maintained by NYSDOT State Highway Bridge Program, which inspects all bridges every two years.
xi
The maximum possible score is 75, as the hazard score is 3 for a 100 year storm; exposure score ranges up to 5 depending on whether the asset in question is located in an
Extreme, High, or Moderate Risk Area and on the presence and condition of nearby protective landscape attributes, and the vulnerability score ranges up to 5 depending on how
well the asset is able to return to service after an event.
xii
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program. NYRCR Program Guidance to Firms, Project Evaluation, December 30, 2013. p.3
xiii
These costs could relate to reduced emergency and recovery expenditures in the future less implementation costs for the life of the project.
xiv
Socially vulnerable population may be derived from the following criteria: poverty/low income, immigrant status, education level, institutionalization, renter‐occupied
household status, single senior‐citizen household status.
xv
This income figure was provided by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
xvi
All job estimates assume labor at 50% of total project costs, divided by $40,000 per Full Time Equivalent (FTE) job.
xvii
Long Island Regional Economic Development Council, The Strategic Economic Development Plan for Nassau and Suffolk Counties. 2013, p.8
xviii
Ibid, p.8
xix
Ibid, p.8
viii

xx

xxi

ibid, p. 31
ibid, p. 23

Section 5: Additional Materials

Page | 160

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr

