Bergen Beach, Georgetown,
Marine Park, Mill Basin,
Mill Island

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

December 2014

   

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
Bergen Beach, Georgetown,
Marine Park, Mill Basin,
Mill Island

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

December 2014

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

This document was developed by the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Planning Committee as part of the NYRCR Program within

the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program
is supported by New York State (NYS) Homes and Community
Renewal and NYS Department of State.

This document was prepared by the following consulting firms:

HR&A Advisors, Inc.
Parsons Brinckerhoff
SCAPE Landscape Architecture

Members of the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Planning Committee:

Joseph Dai (Co-Chair)
Alicia Hamill (Co-Chair)
Maria D’Alessandro
Jim lvaliotis

John M. Piccirillo
Shea Rubenstein

A. Sinesi

Tom Whitford

All Photos taken by Consultant Team unless otherwise noted.
Further reproduction prohibited without permission of photographer.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Foreword Introduction

In the span of approximately one year, beginning in August 2011, the State
of New York experienced three extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the lives
of New Yorkers and their communities. These tragic disasters signaled
that New Yorkers are living in a new reality defined by rising sea levels
and extreme weather events that will occur with increased frequency and
power. They also signaled that we need to rebuild our communities in a
way that will mitigate against future risks and build increased resilience.

To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M. Cuomo led the
charge to develop an innovative, community-driven planning program on
a scale unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program, within the Governor's
Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR), empowers the State’s most impacted
communities with the technical expertise and funding resources needed to
develop thorough and implementable reconstruction plans to build phys-
ically, socially, and economically resilient and sustainable communities.

Program Overview

The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor Cuomo in April of 2013, isa
more than $700 million planning and implementation program established
to provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities severely
damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy.
Drawing on lessons learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR
Program is a unique combination of bottom-up community participation
and State-provided technical expertise. This powerful combination rec-
ognizes not only that community members are best positioned to assess
the needs and opportunities of the places where they live and work, but
also that decisions are best made when they are grounded in rigorous
analysis and informed by the latest innovative solutions.

Launched in the summer of 2013 and completed in March 2014, Round
| of the NYRCR planning process included 50 NYRCR Planning Areas,
comprising 102 storm-impacted localities. In January 2014, Governor
Cuomo announced a second round of the planning process, serving
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

an additional 22 storm-impacted localities. Four of these localities were
absorbed into existing Round | NYRCR Planning Areas, bringing the
number of localities participating in Round | up to 106; the other 18 local-
ities formed 16 new Round Il NYRCR Planning Areas. Between Rounds
| and Il, there are 66 NYRCR Planning Areas, comprising 124 localities.
The program serves over 2.7 million New Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500
square miles, which is equivalent to 14% of the overall State population
and 12% of the State’s overall geography.

In Rounds | and Il, the State allotted between $3 million and $25 million to
each participating locality for the implementation of eligible projects identi-
fied in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for these projects is provided through
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community
Development Block Grant - Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program."

Each NYRCR Planning Area is represented by a NYRCR Planning
Committee composed of local residents, business owners, and civic
leaders. Members of the Planning Committees were identified in con-
sultation with established local leaders, community organizations and, in
some cases, municipalities. The NYRCR Program sets a new standard for
community participation in recovery and resiliency planning, with com-
munity members leading the planning process. Across the State, more
than 650 New Yorkers have represented their communities by serving
on Planning Committees. Nearly 650 Planning Committee Meetings have
been held, during which Planning Committee members worked with the
State’s team to develop community reconstruction plans, which identify
opportunities to make their communities more resilient. All meetings
were open to the public. An additional 250+ Public Engagement Events
attracted thousands of community members, who provided feedback on
the planning process and resulting proposals. The NYRCR Program’s out-
reach has included communities that are traditionally underrepresented,
such as immigrant populations and students. All planning materials are
posted on the program’s website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), pro-
viding several ways for community members and the public to submit
feedback on the program and materials in progress.

Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were supported
by staff from GOSR, planners from New York State (NYS) Department
of State and NYS Department of Transportation, and consultants from
world-class planning firms that specialize in engineering, flood mitigation
solutions, green infrastructure, and more.

The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR Plan. Governor
Cuomo has allotted over $700 million for planning as well as imple-
menting eligible projects identified in NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Planning
Areas are also eligible for additional funds through the NY Rising to the
Top Competition, which evaluates applications from Round II NYRCR
Planning Committees across three categories—Regional Approach,
Inclusion of Vulnerable Populations, and Use of Green Infrastructure. The
winner of each category will be allotted a share of the competition’s $3.5
million to fund additional eligible projects.

In April 2014, Governor Cuomo announced that projects identified in
NYRCR Plans would receive priority consideration through the State’s
Consolidated Funding Application (CFA) process and charged the
Regional Economic Development Councils (REDCs), which play an advi-
sory role in the CFA process, to support NYRCR projects. In December
2014, Governor Cuomo announced that 24 NYRCR projects received
nearly $12 million in CFA funding. This announcement is an example of the
Governor honoring his commitment to leverage the work of the NYRCR
Planning Committees to incorporate resilience into other State programs
and to find additional sources of funding for NYRCR projects. The NYRCR
Program is also working with both private and public institutions to iden-
tify existing funding sources and to create funding opportunities where
none existed before.

The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated with State and Federal
agencies to help guide the development of feasible projects. The program
has leveraged the REDC State Agency Review Teams (SARTs), composed
of representatives from dozens of State agencies and authorities, for feed-
back on projects proposed by NYRCR Planning Committees. The SARTs
review projects with an eye toward regulatory and permitting needs, policy
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources. The NYRCR Program
is continuing to work with the SARTs to streamline the permitting process
and ensure shovels are in the ground as quickly as possible.

On the pages that follow, you will see the results of months of thoughtful,
diligent work by the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning
Committee, which is passionately committed to realizing a brighter, more
resilient future for its community.

The NYRCR Plan

This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more resilient
community. Each NYRCR Planning Committee began the planning pro-
cess by defining the scope of its planning area, assessing storm damage,
and identifying critical issues. Next, the Planning Committee inventoried
critical assets in the community and assessed the assets’ exposure
to risk. On the basis of this work, the Planning Committee described
recovery and resiliency needs and identified opportunities. The Planning
Committee then developed a series of comprehensive reconstruction and
resiliency strategies, and identified projects and implementation actions
to help fulfill those strategies.

The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan are divided into
three categories. The order in which the projects and actions are listed in
this NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the Planning Committee’s
prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are proj-
ects proposed for funding through an NYRCR Planning Area’s allotment of
CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee has identified as important resiliency recommenda-
tions and has analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding through
the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are
projects and actions that the Planning Committee would like to highlight
and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects.
The Proposed Projects and Featured Projects found in this NYRCR Plan
were voted for inclusion by voting members of the Planning Committee.
Those voting members with conflicts of interest recused themselves
from voting on any affected projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics

Handbook and Code of Conduct.

As part of Round Il of the NYRCR Program, the Southeast Brooklyn Water-
front NYRGR Planning Area has been allotted up to $4.38 million in CDBG-
DR funds for the implementation of eligible projects identified in this plan.

While developing projects for inclusion in NYRCR Plans, Planning
Committees took into account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the
effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical
assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees also
considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be eli-
gible for CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented with this
source of Federal funding must satisfy a Federally-designated eligible
activity category, fulfill a national objective (i.e., meeting an urgent need,
removing slums and blight, or benefiting low- to moderate-income individ-
uals), and have a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding is linked.
These are among the factors that GOSR will consider, in consultation with
local municipalities and nonprofit organizations, when determining which
projects and actions are best positioned for implementation.

The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR Plan exceeds the
NYRCR Planning Area’s CDBG-DR allotment to allow for flexibility if some
Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental review,
HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the
projects and actions found in this NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with
Disabilities Act. Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan does not
guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for CDBG-DR
funding or that it will be implemented. Projects will be implemented on a
staggered timeline, and the NYRCR Program will choose an appropriate
State or local partner to implement each project. GOSR will actively seek to
match projects with additional funding sources, when possible.

In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions out-
lined in this NYRCR Plan will become a reality, helping New York not only
to rebuild, but also to build back better.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

NY Rising Communities

A

i
| \ j

_r | d ly
| | Capital District / North Country /
a fans ) Mohawk Valley

 

Niagara County

  
  
 
   
 
       

ee | Southern Tier / f
ial Central New York =~

 

Hudson Valley /
Catskills

 
 

Greater
New York

City

 

 

Map displays the 66 NYRCR Planning Areas from Rounds | and Il. (Five of the Round | Planning Areas — Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery Counties—are not
funded through the CDBG-DR program.)
Contents

Foreword 2.1... cece eee eens
NY Rising Communities ........... 00.00
Executive Summary ......0. 0000 c eee eee eee eee

Community Overview

Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan. ..............0000005
Community Overview .. 0.0.0.0... ccc ee
Description of Storm Damage............. 000: e eee eae
Critical ISSuUeS 2.0. ae
Community Vision... 2... ee
Relationship to Regional Plans..............0.000 cea

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Description of Community Assets.............. 00.0000:
Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems...............
Assessment of Needs and Opportunities.................

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies ................

Implementation—Project Profiles

Projects Overview... 0... eee ete
Project List 0.0.0... 0. cette teens
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Coastal Protection Study ....
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront and Canarsie Stormwater
Study and Pilot Projects ... 0.0.0... 0. cece ee
Bergen Beach Stormwater Retention/Detention System ....
Alternative Power Hotspot .......... 00.000 cee eee eee
Emergency Preparedness Education Program............
Recovery Community Centers ....... 0.00.00: c eee
Critical Facility Upgrades Program. .............0-000005
Homeowner Assistance Program........ 0-000 cee eee eee

Additional Materials

Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations ......... V-1
Table V-2: Master Table of Projects ...... 0.0.0... cece eee V-2
Public Engagement Process...... 0.00.00: cece ees V-6
Endnotes... eee eee V-18
GIOSSALY . 6 tee V-20
vi

Figures

Figure I-1: Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRGR Planning Area... 0.0.0.0... 00 e eee I-5
Figure |-2: Superstorm Sandy Inundation Levels .... 0.00.00... cece ct eee I-9
Figure II-1: NYS Department of State Risk Map... 1.0... 0... cee II-3
Figure II-2: Health and Social Services Assets Map..... 0.00... c cee cette ee lI-5
Figure II-3: Economic Assets Map ....... 000.0 c et tte eee \l-7
Figure Il-4: Housing Assets Map... 0.0... ccc tee ll-9
Figure II-5: Infrastructure Assets Map... 1.0... tte I-11
Figure II-6: Natural and Cultural Resources Assets Map .......... 0000: cee eens I-13
Figure IV-1: FEMA Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) ............-..-.-200005 IV-5
Figure IV-2: Locations of Stormwater Flooding Complaints (via311)..................00. IV-9
Figure IV-3: Bergen Beach Stormwater Retention/Detention System Site Plan............ V-17
Figure IV-4: Potential Locations of Alternative Power Hotspots..............:020000 00s IV-25
Figure IV-5: Potential Locations of Recovery Community Centers...............0.00005 IV-31
Figure IV-6: Health and Social Services Asset Map ..... 0.000.000 cece cette ee IV-37
Tables

Table Ill-1: Strategy Table... 6... eee Ill-3
Table Ill-2: Strategy Table... 0... eee Il-5
Table IlI-3: Strategy Table... 0... eee Ill-7
Table Ill-4: Strategy Table... 6... eee Ill-9
Table IlI-5: Strategy Table... 2.6... eee I-11
Table IlI-6: Strategy Table... 6.0... ee eee I-13
Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations. ............. V-1
Table V-2: Master Table of Projects 20... 0.0.0... cece ee eee V-2
Table V-3: Community Asset Inventory.............. 0000s V-10

vii
 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Executive Summary
Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront Community

Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, and Mill Island are
close-knit communities with strong civic ties and comprise the Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Community (Community). These five neigh-
borhoods are characterized by their proximity to Jamaica Bay, tree-lined
residential blocks, vast swaths of recreational facilities and open space,
and vibrant commercial corridors. The Community also has a wealth
of large publicly-owned waterfront and natural spaces, including Floyd
Bennett Field, Marine Park, and the Gateway National Recreation Area.
Located just to the north of Jamaica Bay, five creeks and basins from
the Bay flow into the Community— Marine Park Creek, Mill Basin, East
Mill Basin, Shellbank Creek, and Paerdegat Basin. Some neighborhoods,
like Mill Island, are bounded by water on three sides; some homes even
accommodate private docks.

Home to a population of 53,000, residents of the Community are relatively
well-educated and high-earning. In fact, median household incomes
across all five neighborhoods exceed City and State levels. The majority,
or 63%, of the Community’s primarily single-family and two-family homes
are owner-occupied. These housing typologies, combined with lack of
local subway access, contributes to a car-oriented, suburban character.

Superstorm Sandy impacted the Community in unprecedented ways.
Homes and streets that had never experienced significant flooding were
inundated. Jamaica Bay waters rose over bulkheads and banks of the
four basins in the area. Low-lying neighborhoods adjacent to the Bay—
Bergen Beach and Mill Island—faced the greatest levels of inundation,
with six-to-nine feet of flooding reported in some areas. Wastewater
sewer backup caused stormwater to jet out from manholes and flood
streets, especially in low-lying areas. Sewer backup flooded basements
and blocked sewers, some exacerbated by overgrown tree roots. Power
loss was experienced through much of the Community, with some homes
and businesses losing power for a few hours while others were off-line
for weeks. The effects of Superstorm Sandy also impacted the delivery
of critical supplies: gas stations were unable to pump gas due to loss of
power or lack of access to gas, while grocery stores lost merchandise
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

The Mill Island neighborhood, which sits on the Mill Basin waterbody, suffered considerable damage during Superstoerm Sandy.

without working refrigerators. Gridlock on major roadways during the
days following the Storm hampered access.

The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program was estab-
lished to provide additional rebuilding and revitalization assistance to
communities severely damaged during Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane
Irene, and Tropical Storm Lee. Through Community Development Block
Grant-Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding from the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development, New York State has allotted up to
$4.38 million to the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Community,
which is defined by the following boundaries: Gerritsen and Nostrand
Avenues to the southwest, Paerdegat Basin to the northeast, Avenue N
and Flatlands Avenue to the north, Floyd Bennett Field to the south, and
Jamaica Bay to the east. The community-driven process has resulted
in the identification of projects and policy recommendations intended to
enhance the physical, environmental, social, and economic resiliency of
the Community. The projects identified in this Plan address Superstorm
Sandy-related impacts and better prepare communities for future severe
weather-related events.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Community Vision Statement

“Through the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Program, the Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront Community aims to
increase preparedness around severe
weather-related events and climate change
through education, planning, infrastructure
development, and leveraging the ties that
bind the community together.”

The Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee) is comprised of eight volunteer members who are local
homeowners, civic leaders, and business leaders. In order to create a
framework for developing projects, the Committee drafted a vision state-
ment at the outset of the process.

Over the course of six months, over 150 residents, elected officials, busi-
ness owners, and other community stakeholders participated in three
Public Engagement Events. Technical information on issues related to
coastal protection strategies, stormwater management measures, and
public emergency education best practices, among others, was shared at
these events to help inform public feedback on project ideas. In addition
to these events, presentations were made to the five civic organizations
representing the Community. A web-based and paper survey was widely
distributed and a toll-free voicemail line was established to solicit addi-
tional feedback or questions. Committee members participated in nine
planning meetings to learn more about the resiliency issues facing their
communities, develop a vision for their Plan, identify strategies, and rec-
ommend projects. City, State, and Federal agency input also was solic-
ited throughout this process in order to leverage opportunities to tie into
existing or proposed public projects or vet independent project ideas.

As part of the planning process, an assessment of risks and needs was
conducted. The coastline bordering the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
Community remains exposed to coastal flooding from future storms and
sea-level rise. Much of the waterfront and some low-lying inland areas—
primarily in the neighborhoods of Bergen Beach and Mill Island—are
located within either the high or extreme risk zones. These areas remain
at high risk of damage from future coastal hazards due to inundation
from surge or wastewater and stormwater sewer backup. In addition,
the Community's residents (particularly vulnerable populations) and
assets are vulnerable due to a lack of social and technical preparedness.
The lack of a comprehensive emergency preparedness plan, as well as
unclear or incomplete information about emergency response procedures
and resources, hinders effective emergency response and recovery, thus
increasing potential damage to assets.

xi
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

xii

 

Top, The Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area is home to a wide array
of recreational spaces, including Marine Park. Bottom, One of the greatest assets —
and vulnerabilities—of the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area is its housing
stock, mostly comprised of 1- and 2-family homes.

Based on discussions held at Planning Committee meetings, as well as
public feedback received at two Public Engagement Events, strategies
were developed that would ultimately influence and shape the Proposed
Projects. The discussions that led to the development of the following
strategies were based on a review of Community needs, risks, and vul-
nerable assets.

e Reduce neighborhood flooding through stabilizing the coastal edge,
discouraging development at at-risk locations, and mitigating any
potential negative impacts of new projects.

Improve stormwater and wastewater management to prevent flood-
ing and backup.

e¢ Make power supply more resilient and redundant.
e Enhance emergency preparedness and response.
¢ Improve resiliency of commercial corridors and critical supply chains.

e Improve residential resiliency through education, technical assis-
tance, and funding.

This process resulted in the eight Proposed Projects described in the
Plan. Projects fall under three categories: Proposed Projects, Featured
Projects, and Additional Resiliency Recommendations. Proposed
Projects are projects proposed for funding through an NYRCR Planning
Area’s allotment of CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are projects
and actions that the Planning Committee has identified as important
resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in depth, but has not
proposed for funding through the NYRGR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are projects and actions that the Planning Committee
would like to highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects
or Featured Projects. The following projects address the previously stated
strategies and are not listed in order of priority.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Committee members brainstormed
needs, opportunities, strategies, and project ideas over the course of several Commit-
tee meetings and Public Engagement Events.

To address the first strategy related to the reduction of neighborhood
flooding, the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Coastal Protection
Study would develop a comprehensive coastal protection strategy for
the Community. A joint project with the Canarsie NYRCR Community —
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront and Canarsie Stormwater Study
and Pilot Projects—would examine the feasibility, costs, and benefits
for stormwater capture and retention. The Bergen Beach Retention/
Detention System also would contribute to the strategy of improving
stormwater management the construction of a stormwater retention/
detention system within a naturalized park area in Bergen Beach, and tie
into City plans to construct new sewers and outfall in the area. To address
the need to make power more resilient and redundant, a project to install
Alternative Power Hotspots in privately-owned parking lot(s) would
provide a reliable source of lighting in the event of an outage and create a
meeting space where residents could power mobile devices.

In addition, community education and technical assistance programs
would address the needs of homeowners, businesses, and critical care
providers. To address the strategy to enhance emergency preparedness
and response, a Community Preparedness Education Program would
develop a local preparedness and response guide as well as educa-
tional programming to help inform community members of what to do
before, during, and after a severe weather event. Recovery Community
Centers would be created and based out of existing community facilities
and organizations to provide emergency-related supportive services and
supplies to residents after a severe event. Funding would help health
and social service providers make building-level capital upgrades to
ensure continuity of service during and after an emergency through the
Critical Facility Upgrades Program. Finally, a Homeowner Assistance
Program would fund resiliency educational programming, counseling,
and audits for homeowners in the Community and address the strategy
to improve residential resiliency.

xiii
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

xiv

Recovery Support Functions

The Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery has structured each plan to
focus on a set of criteria, known as the Recovery Support Functions.
These Recovery Support Functions were utilized when developing
needs, opportunities, strategies, and projects to ensure that a com-
prehensive approach is reinforced throughout the effort to shape a
well-rounded resiliency strategy for the Community.

Health & Social Services

Community Planning & Capacity Building

Economic Development

Natural & Cultural Resources

Housing

Infrastructure Systems

DOMOO®

Proposed and Featured Projects

Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Coastal Protection Study

This project would develop a study to determine the cost and feasibility
of coastal protection measures along the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
shoreline in order to protect the Community from a severe weather event.
The scope of the study would include an assessment of populated areas
that are most at risk from coastal flooding, a comparison and feasibility
analysis of potential alternatives, the conceptual design of protection
measures, community engagement, and agency coordination. The study
would require coordination with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and
the City of New York in order to recommend targeted strategies and
approaches that leverage existing plans and initiatives by these agencies.

Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront and Canarsie Stormwater Study and
Pilot Projects

This project would fund: 1) a study to examine the feasibility, costs, and
benefits for various stormwater capture and retention projects in the joint
Planning Areas of Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront and Canarsie, followed
by 2) the implementation of recommended scalable pilot projects within
the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area.

Bergen Beach Stormwater Retention/Detention System

This project would construct a stormwater retention/detention wetland
within a natural area of southern Bergen Beach on land owned by New
York City Department of Parks and Recreation. This stormwater retention
system would link to City plans to construct a new storm sewer and outfall
along Avenue Y, providing stormwater flooding abatement for a low-lying,
at-risk residential community, while also removing pollutants from storm-
water that may otherwise enter nearby East Mill Basin. This project would
mitigate stormwater runoff in an area that recurrently experiences this issue.

Alternative Power Hotspot
This project would fund the installation of alternative energy infrastructure

along critical thoroughfares throughout the Planning Area to serve as pilots
for similar interventions in the neighborhood. Alternative power hotspots
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

The Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area has an extensive edge, and many Community assets, including supermarkets and shopping centers, sit along the water.

would provide a reliable source of lighting in the event of an outage and
create a space where residents could meet and power mobile devices,
while also accessing food and other services nearby. In locating the
hotspots, the project would leverage the large number of big-box retailers
and associated street-facing parking lots within the Planning Area.

Emergency Preparedness Education Program

This project would develop a local emergency preparedness and response
guide, online hub, and educational programming to help inform commu-
nity members throughout the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Planning Area of what to do before, during, and after a storm event.
Materials would focus on preparedness measures, evacuation protocol,
and where to go to access supplies and information, among other topics.

XV
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

xvi

 

Some residents in the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area own boats
which they keep docked in Mill Basin.

Recovery Community Centers

This Proposed Project would fund the development of Recovery
Community Centers to be based out of existing community facilities
and organizations. Centers would facilitate disaster preparedness coor-
dination across community-based organizations (CBOs) in advance of
an event. Centers could provide power, information, and supplies for
residents, among other services. These would be located outside of the
floodplain, have a parking lot, and be compliant with the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA).

Critical Facility Upgrades Program

This project would help health and social services providers to make crit-
ical building-level capital improvements. Providers could include medical
clinics, hospitals, voluntary emergency/ambulance organizations, and
senior living facilities, among others. Funding for upgrades would help to
prevent disruption in the essential services these organizations offer as
a result of power outages or structural damages in the event of a storm.
Potential capital improvements may include: 1) backup power (natural
gas); 2) floodproofing measures, such as elevating mechanicals and
applying waterproof coatings to the basement and ground floor, among
other measures.

Homeowner Assistance Program

This project would fund educational programming and one-on-one
counseling, as well as audits for high-risk homeowners, in the Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area. Project components may
include: 1) education to eliminate confusion around retrofitting for
resiliency, flood insurance, and other financial questions; 2) individual
counseling to provide one-on-one assistance; and 3) audits, performed
by specialized engineers, to recommend specific measures to enhance
home resiliency.
| OUTDO LeDT DIA AO. s (ay
 

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan

The NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Program was established to pro-
vide additional rebuilding and revitalization
assistance to communities severely dam-
aged during Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane
lrene, and Tropical Storm Lee. New York State
has allotted up to $4.38 million to fund eligible
projects developed by the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NYRCR_ Planning Committee
(Committee), which includes the neighbor-
hoods of Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine
Park, Mill Basin, and Mill Island, in Community
Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery
(CDBG-DR) funding from the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The
Committee, comprising volunteer members from
the aforementioned neighborhoods, has under-
gone an extensive planning process to identify
short- and long-term resiliency projects that
may be funded with this allotment and promote
longer-term recovery. The Committee has also
identified a broader vision for the Community to
guide this longer-term recovery effort.

For the purposes of this program, the
Committee has defined the Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR_ Planning
Area (Planning Area) as the area bounded
by Gerritsen and Nostrand Avenues
to the southwest, Paerdegat Basin to
the northeast, Avenue N and Flatlands

 

ra

The Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area is home to a unique waterfront geography, including the
Marine Park salt marsh.

Avenue to the north, Floyd Bennett Field
to the south, and Jamaica Bay to the east.
Represented by Brooklyn Community Board
18, the Planning Area is composed of five
neighborhoods with active civic associations,
and is home to approximately 53,000 residents.

The Planning Area features a unique water-
front geography that varies across neigh-
borhoods, with some communities facing
water on three sides. Both Bergen Beach
and Mill Island are peninsulas that originated as
islands within Jamaica Bay. Bergen Beach was
connected to the Brooklyn mainland via landfill

Community Overview
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

in the first quarter of the 20th century and is now
separated from the neighboring Canarsie NYRCR
Community by the Paerdegat Basin channel. Mill
Island, part of Mill Basin, sits on the Mill Basin
Inlet of Jamaica Bay and was connected to the
Brooklyn mainland around the same time as
Bergen Beach. The neighborhood of Marine Park
is largely landlocked, but includes an eponymous
park and Floyd Bennett Field, which borders
Jamaica Bay to the south.

Along the coastal edge are several large
waterfront public and natural spaces, which
provide ample recreational amenities for the
surrounding communities. Paerdegat Basin
Park and McGuire Fields line Paerdegat Basin,
and provide athletic facilities and green space for
the adjacent neighborhoods of Georgetown and
Bergen Beach. The southern portion of Bergen
Beach, part of Gateway National Recreation Area,
is home to the Jamaica Bay Riding Academy.
Gateway National Recreation Area also includes
the Barren Island peninsula at the south of the
Planning Area, home to Marine Park and Floyd
Bennett Field. Mainly a salt marsh, Marine Park is
Brooklyn’s largest public park at nearly 800 acres
in size and is home to cricket fields, ballfields,
and a golf course. Floyd Bennett Field is the
former home of New York City’s first municipal
airport and now hosts a variety of uses, including
a campsite, the airfield of the New York City

Community Overview

 

Floyd Bennett Field, home to a variety of recreational and cultural amenities, is a unique asset in the Southeast Brook-
lyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area.

Police Department (NYPD), and Aviator Sports
and Events Center.

Public transportation primarily consists
of bus service, with nine bus lines running
through the Planning Area. Subway access
is limited, with the closest subway stations
located outside of the Planning Area: west of

Marine Park at Kings Highway (B and Q lines);
and north of the Planning Area at Flatbush
Avenue-Brooklyn College (2 and 5 lines).
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

La ces
is

 

McGuire Fields, in the Bergen Beach neighborhood, is one of many well-used recreational areas.

Community Overview

 
Community Overview

The Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
NYRCR Planning Area is home to roughly
53,000 residents in 19,000 households.
The Community’s population has remained
largely stable in the past decade, experiencing
0.5% population growth on an annual basis
from 2000 to 2010. The local community is
composed mostly of residents who identify
as White (73% of the population), with the
next most predominant racial group being
Black, representing 16% of the population.
Approximately 8% of residents identify as
Hispanic. The median age of the Community is
40 years old, with 25% between 25-44 years
of age and 29% between 45-64 years of age.
A sizable portion of the population is under 24
years of age (32%), with 20% under the age of
18. There is a relatively smaller proportion of
senior residents in the Community, with 15% of
residents 65 and over, and 7% 75 and over.'

The Community is relatively well-educated
and high-earning. Approximately 91% of the
population over 25 years of age has a high
school degree, which is higher than the rate
for New York City (79%) and New York State
(85%). Thirty-four percent of the population has
at least a bachelor’s degree, which is equal to
the rate for New York City (34%) and slightly
above the rate for New York State (83%). Area
median household income for the Planning

Community Overview

Area was estimated to be high at $76,015 for
2008-2012, which is substantially higher than
for residents of New York State ($57,683) and
New York City ($51,865) overall, as well as for
Brooklyn in general ($45,215).

The majority of Community residents are
homeowners who live in single-family or
two-family homes. Of the estimated 22,000
total (vacant and occupied) housing units in
the Planning Area, approximately 63% are
owner-occupied. The area’s housing stock
comprises mostly single-family homes (around
55%), with a slightly higher proportion of
attached single-family homes than detached.
Another 30% of the housing stock comprises
two-family homes, and an additional 12%
are three- to four-family homes. Only 2.5% of
housing units are located in structures with
more than five units. The median age of the
housing stock is 62 years (built in 1952), with
65% of housing built before 1959.?

A variety of commercial uses support
neighborhood residents. Strip malls and sin-
gle-standing chain stores dot Flatbush Avenue,
Avenue N, and Avenue U. Additionally, the
large Kings Plaza Shopping Center is located
at Flatbush Avenue and Avenue U in Mill Basin,
and contains over 150 retail and dining estab-
lishments. The Community is also supported by

| Ge
Ly tal

 

Top, The Kings Plaza Shopping Center, one of the larg-
est shopping centers in Brooklyn, is located in the Mill
Basin neighborhood; Bottom, Community members
benefit from a large network of supermarkets, including
Key Food.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure I-1: Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area

   
      
 
   
 
 

Island

%
Qe

Floyd Bennett
Field

Deep Creek

Dead Horse
Bay

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area

| Planning Area

 

New York City Department of City Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

!

 

 

  

 

Q 5,000 10,000
be be 1Feet

 

Community Overview I-5
small commercial storefronts along corridors
like Avenue T in Mill Basin and Quentin Road
in Marine Park.

The Planning Area is home to five distinct
neighborhoods:

Bergen Beach is a community characterized
by a median household income of $80,517. It
features high rates of homeownership (66%),
consistent with the high proportion of sin-
gle-family homes in its housing stock (63%).*
The primarily-residential community is char-
acterized by single-family and semi-attached
homes with driveways and garages on large
lots. Within the past decade, construction in
the northeast section of the neighborhood has
resulted in new single-family homes and small
condominium buildings. Most businesses and
retail uses are confined to small strips.

Georgetown, identified as a separate neigh-
borhood here but formally part of Bergen
Beach, has a median household income of
$77,930, well-above New York City and New
York State levels. Seventy-percent of the area’s
housing stock is composed of two-family and
multifamily housing, and features a homeown-
ership rate of 52%. Like many homes in the
Planning Area, most homes in Georgetown
have driveways and garages. The housing

Community Overview

stock is relatively new, with many homes
constructed after the 1970s. Attached, peak-
roofed, brick two-family homes are typical of
the area’s housing stock. The neighborhood
is also served by the Georgetown Shopping
Mall, a large outdoor strip mall located at
Ralph Avenue and Avenue L.

Marine Park is home to 40% of the Planning
Area’s population and is relatively high-earning,
characterized by a median household income
of $79,957. The neighborhood features a high
rate of homeownership (64%), reflective of
its high proportion of single-family homes
(68%), which includes attached houses and
the neighborhood's distinctive semi-attached
and detached brick Tudor-style houses. Larger
homes line Marine Parkway with private
driveways and garages. Small retail corridors
exist along Quentin Road and Avenue S, and
Flatbush Avenue offers more extensive retail
uses, including Kings Plaza Shopping Center,
on Flatbush Avenue, and Avenue U. The neigh-
borhood is also characterized by Brooklyn’s
largest park, Marine Park.

Mill Basin, which formally includes Mill Island
but is identified separately here, is hometo 21%
of the Planning Area’s population. It features a
median household income of $69,930, and a
high homeownership rate of 63%. Nearly 90%

of the neighborhood's housing stock comprises
single- and two-family homes, with a near-equal
distribution among each type. Avenue U is a
primary east-west commercial corridor in this
neighborhood, with big-box retailers including
The Home Depot, Lowe's, and the Kings Plaza
Shopping Center lining the southern edge of
the street along the Mill Basin waterfront.

Mill sland, formally part of Mill Basin, is charac-
terized by a high rate of homeownership (68%)
and a median household income of $62,441.°
The neighborhood is a peninsula jutting into Mill
Basin, dominated by detached single-family
and attached two-family houses on large lots
located on wide, circular streets. Large sin-
gle-family homes line the waterfront, often with
private boat slips facing the Mill Basin water
body. Retail uses are confined to a handful of
commercial corridors, including Avenue U and
Strickland Avenue.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

           

ey

The Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront is home to five distinct residential neighborhoods (clockwise from top left): Georgetown, Mill Island, Bergen Beach

 

, Mill Basin and Marine Park.

Community Overview l-7
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Description of Storm Damage

Summary of Storm Impacts

The greatest impact from Superstorm
Sandy in the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
NYRCR Planning Area came from extensive
flooding. The combination of high surge and
high tide—owing to a full moon—resulted in
waters rising above the height of bulkheads
and natural river banks at various water bodies,
including Mill Basin, East Mill Basin, Shellbank
Creek, and Paerdegat Basin. While the natural
landscape and wetlands of the Barren Island
peninsula, Marine Park, and Bergen Beach
served to lessen the strength and reach of
storm surge into the Community’s habitable
areas, water still flooded into the streets of
every neighborhood in the Planning Area, with
surge reaching as far upland as Avenue N.

The neighborhoods of Bergen Beach and
Mill Island—water-facing, and at low ele-
vations—experienced the greatest levels
of inundation. Bergen Beach, bordered by the
waterways of East Mill Basin to the southwest
and Paerdegat Basin to the northeast, was
entirely inundated. Water levels as high as 9 feet
were recorded in some areas, with the majority
of the neighborhood experiencing water levels of
3-6 feet. Surge from the East Mill Basin water
body traveled as far inland as East 74th Street,
having entered the area at a vulnerable point
along the shoreline at Avenue V, and traveling

Community Overview

along Avenues W and X. Eyewitness accounts
of the surge in this area recall that the water
was slow-moving, giving some residents time
to move their vehicles. Mill Island experienced
similar levels of flooding largely within the north-
west area of the neighborhood, between Avenue
U and Mayfair Drive North, where streets are
flatter. Waters within Mill Island originated pri-
marily from East Mill Basin and flowed into one
of the only residential areas of the Planning Area
not protected by natural landscape features or

wetlands. The neighborhoods of Marine Park,
Mill Basin, and Georgetown also experienced
flooding from storm surge, although water levels
rarely reached higher than 3 feet in these areas.
Community members have commented that
had Superstorm Sandy generated more rainfall,
flooding likely would have been far more exten-
sive throughout the Planning Area. Surge carried
away cars throughout the Community, particu-
larly along Gerritsen Avenue in the west.

 

Fires occurred in the aftermath of the storm. Courtesy of A. Sinesi.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure I-2: Superstorm Sandy Inundation Levels

  

® NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
J Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area

| Planning Area

Sandy Inundation
{Depth of Flooding)

| <3 feet
[I] 3s feet
GN 6-9 feet
iz >9 feet

    
  
  

  
  
  

et
NS

eT ci
. Ss RRS

  
  

Oe re al
eae

    

FEMA Sandy Modeling Task Force Final High Resolution Surge Area-Field-Verfified February
14,2013.
New York City Department of City Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

 

 

 

 

10,000
1Feet

 

Community Overview I-9
Wastewater sewer backup was a significant
issue during Superstorm Sandy, which may
have been caused, in part, by the temporary
shutdown of the Coney Island Wastewater
Treatment Plant in nearby Sheepshead Bay,
which services the Community’s wastewater
sewers. While the plant was out of service for
only a matter of hours, recovery from sewer
backup was an intense, slow process, and indi-
vidual homeowners and businesses were left to
pay for their own repairs. Stormwater sewers
were also overburdened during the storm,
causing stormwater to jet out from manholes
and inundate streets across the Planning Area.
According to residents, one particularly low-
lying area in Bergen Beach —the intersection of
East 74th Street and Avenue Y—had stagnant
stormwater pooling on the street for three days.
Street stormwater flooding was particularly a
problem for homeowners whose driveways
recess into their basement. While stormwater
overflow affected most of Bergen Beach,
instances of overflow also occurred in the
adjacent neighborhoods of Mill Basin and Mill
Island. In the two weeks following Superstorm
Sandy, residents within the Planning Area
reported 96 street-flooding complaints to the
City of New York’s 311 service, largely limited to
these neighborhoods.® Additionally, overgrown
tree roots blocked stormwater sewers in Mill
Basin and other areas, exacerbating backup.

Community Overview

The Planning Area has reported numerous
instances of widespread and extensive sewer
backup during periods of moderate-to-heavy
rainfall, both before and after Superstorm
Sandy made landfall. This remains a critical
issue facing this part of the Planning Area.

The properties most severely damaged as a
result of Superstorm Sandy were those that
experienced inundation from storm surge,
and stormwater and wastewater sewer
backup, with some residents experiencing
water levels up to 8 feet in their basements
from a combination of both surge and sewage.
For those properties that filed flood insurance
claims, the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) found the average cost of dam-
ages to be $8,853, with total damages esti-
mated at $17,244,843.’ Community members
have reported that these numbers are under-
stated and do not accurately reflect the actual
cost of repairs—a discrepancy that has been a
widespread source of frustration for many resi-
dents in the Community.

Power loss was a problem for some
neighborhoods before, during, and after
Superstorm Sandy, with Bergen Beach
experiencing some power loss prior to
Superstorm Sandy’s arrival. For the majority of
the Community, power loss was largely due to

 

 

——=
Top, Floodwaters entered the Malone Community Cen-
ter in Bergen Beach. Millennium Development Corpora-
tion; Bottom, Surge carried cars away. Photograph by
Steve Solomonson.
damage of overhead wires, typically from wind
force, and lasted for at most three days. The
duration and location of power outages after
Superstorm Sandy varied. Some residents in
Bergen Beach, for example, never lost power,
while some residents on East 72nd Street
reported having lost power for an entire week.
Others on East 73rd Street remained without
power for 28 days and were finally brought
back on line by out-of-state utility crews.

Key neighborhood retailers like gas stations
and supermarkets also experienced power
outages, reducing access to critical sup-
plies in the Community. In addition, several
gas stations could not open due to disruptions
in the fuel supply chain, which meant they were
without fuel to sell to customers, even if they
had power. Those gas stations that were open
initially had long lines, which contributed to
clogged roads. However, once an odd-even
rationing system was instituted, residents were
able to purchase gas more easily.

In addition to limited gas availability,
mobility of Community residents during
and after Superstorm Sandy was further
compromised by the lack of functioning
public transportation, in addition to traf-
fic-clogged roads. Buses went out of service
the night before Superstorm Sandy made

Sane

ee eS im ent

|

   

St. Bernard of Clairvaux Parish and School distributed clothing and welcomed students from the Rockaways in the

aftermath of Superstorm Sandy.

landfall, with limited service returning to the
B1, B3, B41 and B46 bus lines on the day after
the storm. The primary entry and exit road for
the western end of the Rockaway Peninsula is
the Marine Parkway Gil Hodges Bridge, which
becomes Flatbush Avenue, and is a major
thoroughfare in the Planning Area that divides
Marine Park from Mill Basin. During and after

Superstorm Sandy, Flatbush Avenue experi-
enced gridlock, with first responders traveling
to and from the Rockaways to deliver supplies,
as well as residents leaving the Rockaways to
seek refuge elsewhere.

Faced with limited transportation options,
many residents were stranded and without

Community Overview

I-11
supplies in the immediate aftermath of
the storm. With the closest overnight evac-
uation shelter—Franklin D. Roosevelt High
School—located around four miles away,
access was difficult. Furthermore, there was
confusion among residents about where the
closest evacuation shelter was; many believed
it was Brooklyn College, formerly the closest
evacuation shelter for the area, but no longer
in service by the time of Superstorm Sandy’s
landfall.2 To provide more temporary relief
and assistance, local community institutions
opened their doors, even while they were
recovering from damage themselves. St.
Bernard of Clairvaux Parish and School in
Bergen Beach, for instance, was closed for a
week following the storm, yet thereafter, wel-
comed students from the Rockaways so that
they would not have to miss school days.

Many homes and businesses in the
Community are still experiencing lingering
damage from Superstorm Sandy. Numerous
homeowners have not been able to pay for
remediation of mold infestation and other
damage to their homes that accompanied
flood inundation. Some have also struggled to
receive insurance benefits for damage related
to sewer backup and not surge inundation.
Additionally, select businesses have been
unable to reopen due to extensive damage.

Community Overview
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Cee

Strong wind forces during Superstorm Sandy swept trees onto cars throughout the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area. Courtesy of A. Sinesi.

Community Overview  |-13

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Critical Issues

Community residents and Committee
members identified numerous critical resil-
iency issues, brought to light in the after-
math of Superstorm Sandy. Through the
NYRCR planning process, the Committee and
public raised several issues that have informed
an assessment of needs and opportunities.

One of the most critical issues facing the
Community is vulnerability to inundation
from surge. This is particularly the case in
the low-lying areas of Mill Island and Bergen
Beach, where most residents experienced 3-6
feet of inundation during Superstorm Sandy.
Community members in Bergen Beach also
report that backfill is receding in the area,
softening the edge and possibly lessening the
neighborhood’s protection from surge.

In addition to surge inundation, another
issue frequently cited by area residents is
wastewater and stormwater sewer backup.
Unlike the majority of Brooklyn, the wastewater
and stormwater sewer systems in most of the
Planning Area are separate, meaning that sani-
tary and stormwaters are carried along different
water lines, with stormwater emptying directly
into the Bay. There are reports of backup of
both systems not only during Superstorm
Sandy, but during heavy rain events as well. In
some areas, residents have reported tree root

Community Overview

overgrowth obstructing the stormwater pipes,
blocking proper flow of the water and exacer-
bating backup.

During and after Superstorm Sandy, com-
munity members throughout the Planning
Area experienced power outages. For most
community members, outages lasted a few
days, though some experienced outages for a
week or longer. The outages often varied on a
property-by-property basis, and residents and
business owners lack information as to why
power outages occurred at some properties
and not others on the same block.

\, ( |
a AY ot

Lack of organized local emergency
response and information around available
resources are also major concerns for the
Community. Community members report not
knowing if and when emergency personnel
would come to the area, forcing residents
to rely on their neighbors for assistance.
Additionally, many residents lacked informa-
tion on resources that could be accessed
beyond the closest evacuation shelter. While
some schools and churches in the Planning
Area opened their doors to community mem-
bers to provide needed supplies and refuge,
residents reported the need for a more

  

Residents experience sewer backup not only during severe events, but during regular heavy rain events as well. Here,
a resident in Bergen Beach uses a sump pump to remove stormwater sewer backup from a basement in the aftermath

of Superstorm Sandy. Photograph by Steve Solomonson.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

extensive and coordinated relief effort, and for
greater access to information about available
resources.

For the Community, there are few trans-
portation options in the event of an emer-
gency. After Superstorm Sandy, community
members were isolated, with several gas
stations out of service, public buses not run-
ning, and gridlock on major entry and exit
thoroughfares. Cars also encountered traffic
throughout the Planning Area, particularly on
Flatbush Avenue, which was congested with
traffic from the Marine Parkway Bridge, the
main access road to the hard-hit Rockaway
Peninsula.

Homeowners throughout the Planning Area
face mounting repairs due to Superstorm
Sandy-related damage and flood insurance
premium increases. Residents report lacking
information around the types of improve-
ments to perform to enhance their home’s
resiliency, as well as frustration with existing
financial and technical assistance programs.
Community members have been unhappy
with the response rate of assistance programs
like Build It Back, though remain hopeful that
adjustments to the program will be beneficial.

 

Stormwater from the street flows easily into the driveways of many Planning Area homes.

Community Overview

I-15
1-16

Community Vision

The Committee established both a long-
term vision and overarching resiliency and
recovery goals for the Community.

Setting targets and aspirations for the future
helped the Committee look beyond the current
situation in order to develop a vision for a more
resilient, sustainable community. From a review
of assets, critical issues, needs, and opportuni-
ties, the Community defined a vision and goals.

Community Overview

Short Term Goals Long Term Goals

(2-5 Years) (5-10 Years)

e More informed about emergency e Stable stormwater sewer system
preparedness and response procedures e Improved surge protection
and resources ¢ Hardened power infrastructure

Emergency preparedness plan in place
More stable stormwater sewer system
Plan for more resilient power supply
Back-up generators in critical retail stores
and gas stations

Cellphone charging stations

Public knowledge of gas and utility
availability

Closer official evacuation center

No release of wastewater sewage under
any circumstances
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

~

Community Vision Statement

   

  
  
 
   
 
 
  

“Through the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Program, the Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront Community aims to
increase preparedness around severe

———.: weather-related events and climate change

a through education, planning, infrastructure

development, and leveraging the ties that

bind the community together.”

 

 

A Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Committee member contributes ideas for a more resilient future at Public Engagement Event #2.
Community Overview

l-17
1-18

Relationship to Regional Plans

Regional Perspectives: Jamaica Bay
From Sea Gate on the western edge of Coney
Island, to South Valley Stream at its head-
waters in Nassau County, Communities in
and around Jamaica Bay suffered enor-
mous damage from Superstorm Sandy.
Home to more than 800,000 people, Jamaica
Bay is a unique ecosystem in an urban land-
scape, famous for its salt marsh islands, inter-
tidal flats, horseshoe crabs, and migratory
birds that use the area as a refuge during their
seasonal travels. A New York State-designated
Significant Coastal Fish and Wildlife Habitat,
Jamaica Bay is home to numerous fish spe-
cies, including striped bass, fluke, flounder and
porgies. Beyond the water, the Bay is sur-
rounded by woodland and forests that host an
array of wildlife.

Allofthe Jamaica Bay communities suffered
significantly during and after Superstorm
Sandy, some from flooding or surge inunda-
tion, and some from wave action damage.
Homes, businesses, beaches and parklands,
schools, roadways, and mass transit were all
damaged; neighborhoods around Jamaica Bay
also endured one of the most extensive and
long-lasting power outages in New York City.

In the future, flood risk is likely to be exac-
erbated throughout the Bay by projected

Community Overview

sea-level rise associated with climate change.
According to FEMA's preliminary Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), the 100-year
floodplain has expanded since 1983. Floodplain
expansion has been especially dramatic for the
Jamaica Bay area, and it is anticipated that this
trend will continue, with the low-lying areas at
the edges of Bay communities experiencing
more frequent flooding at greater flood depths.

There are also ecological factors to con-
sider: Jamaica Bay is a tidal estuary. Though
severely degraded over the 19th and 20th
centuries, the Bay remains a dynamic eco-
system, providing critical habitat to a variety
of species, including a number of protected
and threatened birds that inhabit both the
beach and Bay. Habitat loss and degradation
of the Bay’s chemical, physical, and biological
environment has largely been due to human
activities, although New York City and Federal
policies and restoration efforts have yielded
dramatic improvements in the quality of the
Bay’s water and habitat.

Inthis hydrologically connected system, proj-
ects and interventions in one area of the Bay
can have ecological and coastal protection
ramifications across the estuary. The cumu-
lative impact of projects implemented in dif-
ferent locations around the Bay can be greater

than the sum of their individual impacts. At the
same time, interactions between projects can
sometimes have negative effects, including —
albeit rarely—induced wave or surge activity.

Planning for Jamaica Bay

The NYRCR Program recognizes that solu-
tions for Jamaica Bay will affect all of the
Communities that front its borders and
extended waterways. This includes commu-
nities from Brooklyn, Queens, and Long Island.
Acknowledging that strategies for Jamaica Bay
are complicated and that consensus building
will be achieved through dialogue, the NYRCR
Program formed the Jamaica Bay Regional
Working Group to bring affected communities
together to research current and planned proj-
ects, and to meet with local, State, and Federal
officials, and other groups working in Jamaica
Bay. The Working Group will continue to meet
over the next several months to analyze options
and opportunities, discuss goals and chal-
lenges, and strive to arrive at a consensus on a
long-term approach to resiliency in Jamaica Bay.

To maximize benefits and minimize risk,
NYRCR Communities as well as the various
City, State, and Federal agencies active
within the Bay will need to coordinate. In
addition to the NYRCR effort, there are many
agencies, organizations, and stakeholders
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

The salt marshes in Marine Park are some of the many natural areas in the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area managed by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.

Community Overview I-19
I-20

involved in Jamaica Bay. The newly formed
Jamaica Bay Resiliency Institute, established
through an initiative led by the City University
of New York in partnership with the City of New
York, the National Park Service (NPS), and
the Trust for Public Land, among other orga-
nizations, are potential partners and present
an opportunity for NYRCR Communities in
Jamaica Bay to collaborate with other organi-
zations and agencies.

Existing Plans, Studies, and Projects
Due to the many challenges and risks asso-
ciated with the region, plans and projects
to improve resiliency and the overall urban
environment existed before Superstorm
Sandy at the Federal, State, regional and
City levels. Attention on the region has only
grown since Superstorm Sandy, as have the
number of planned and active projects.

To avoid duplication of plans and to best
identify how the NYRCR Program may
fill existing gaps, it is essential to under-
stand and assess potential relationships
to existing initiatives. This includes overall
resilience and Superstorm Sandy-specific
recovery plans, as well as other hazard mit-
igation, waterfront, infrastructure, and sus-
tainability plans. The analysis and recommen-
dations included in these reports contribute

Community Overview

valuable information and ideas to the NYRCR
planning process and project definitions.

Unlike some of the other Jamaica Bay com-
munities impacted by Superstorm Sandy,
there has been considerably less planning
in Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront by outside
entities. While the area’s community-based
organizations have discussed issues, these
discussions have not yet resulted in action.
Key programs, plans, and projects—and
their linkage to the Community’s rebuilding
and resiliency strategies and projects—are
described below.

Federal Initiatives

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
is a major player in both coastal protection
and ecological restoration efforts within
Jamaica Bay and is currently conducting a
number of studies and projects that could pro-
vide resiliency benefits, including dredging and
ecosystem restoration studies. These include
studies that predated Superstorm Sandy as
well as post-Superstorm Sandy updates to
the previous plans and studies. While initiated
and led by USACE, the projects that stem from
these studies may have many implementation
partners, including multiple New York State and
New York City agencies.

Among ongoing USACE studies, the East
Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway Inlet
(Rockaway Beach) Reformulation Study is
of primary importance to coastal protection
planning in Jamaica Bay, as the results of
this study will inform and guide future USACE
coastal protection planning for the Community
and the rest of Jamaica Bay. While the study
was initiated prior to Superstorm Sandy, and
preliminary alternative and existing condi-
tions were developed by 2011, the study has
undergone significant revision since in light
of the impacts of the storm. By early 2015,
the USACE is expected to release a Draft
Reformulation Report with refined coastal
storm risk management alternatives for the
Atlantic Coast portion of the study area, as
well as preliminary risk management alterna-
tives for Jamaica Bay.

In addition to its coastal protection work, the
USACE is active in ecosystem restoration
projects throughout Jamaica Bay. Thirty-nine
potential ecosystem restoration opportunities
in the Bay are identified in the Hudson Raritan
Estuary (HRE) Comprehensive Restoration
Plan (CRP). Adopted in 2009, the USACE and
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey
developed the HRE-CRP in collaboration
with Federal, New York State, municipal, and
non-governmental organizations, as well as
other regional stakeholders. It sets forth a
consensus vision, master plan, and strategy
for future ecosystem restoration in the New
York/New Jersey Harbor.

Some of these ecosystem restoration oppor-
tunities are currently being reevaluated by the
USACE to assess post-Superstorm Sandy
changes and their potential to provide addi-
tional resiliency benefits as part of the Jamaica
Bay, Marine Park and Plumb Beach, NY
Feasibility Study, which is ongoing. This
Feasibility Study is a joint undertaking of the
USACE and the New York City Department of
Environmental Protection (NYC DEP).

The interim draft report identified eight pri-
ority restoration sites in Jamaica Bay (550
acres) from the HRE-CRP. One of these sites,
Dead Horse Bay in Marine Park, is located
within the Planning Area. Here, the plan rec-
ommends enhancing the local marsh habitat
and restoring 131 acres of marsh, creek, and
dunes, in order to undo area erosion that has
occurred over the past several decades.

Another restoration site within the Planning
Area identified in the HRE-CRP is Paerdegat
Basin, located next to Georgetown and
Bergen Beach. Enhancing water quality is the
primary restoration goal at Paerdegat Basin,

and significant work has been completed on
this site by NYC DEP since 2009 (see later
description).

In April 2014, the NPS released its Final
General Management Plan Environmental
Impact Statement for the Gateway National
Recreation Area. The report updates the prior
general management plan from 1979, and
presents several vision and management
strategies for Gateway National Park, which
includes Floyd Bennett Field, in the aftermath
of Superstorm Sandy. The report presents
potential general management strategies,
assesses Superstorm Sandy-affected envi-
ronments and environmental consequences,
and reviews the community participation
process the NPS undertook to develop the
General Management Plan.

City and Local Initiatives

In addition to the Federal initiatives and projects
centered on Jamaica Bay, there are a number of
New York City-wide initiatives relevant to resil-
iency planning in Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront.

Special Initiative for Rebuilding and
Resiliency (2013). The Special Initiative for
Rebuilding and Resiliency (SIRR) was initiated
by Mayor Bloomberg in December 2012 to
assess the damage wrought by Superstorm

Sandy and consider the implications going
forward for New York City in light of anticipated
sea-level rise. In June 2013, SIRR released
its findings in a comprehensive report, A
Stronger, More Resilient New York (SIRR
Report), which outlined New York City’s plan
for rebuilding post-Superstorm Sandy and
ensuring resiliency into the future. The plan
contains actionable recommendations for
communities affected by the storm as well as
chapters covering citywide issues, including
coastal protection, buildings, insurance, util-
ities, liquid fuels, health care, transportation,
parks, water and wastewater, and other critical
networks. While the SIRR report on Southern
Brooklyn does not include Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront, the report does make coastal
protection recommendations for Jamaica
Bay. It additionally prioritizes expanding
the Department of Parks and Recreation’s
Greenstreets program in Marine Park, which is
aimed at reducing flooding through stormwater
retention measures, with a goal of implemen-
tation by 2014. The report and latest updates
on implementation can be found on the SIRR
website: http://www.nyc.gov/htmi/sirr/.

NYC Hazard Mitigation Plan (2014).
Replacing the previous Hazard Mitigation
Plan from 2009, the new plan was developed
by the New York City Office of Emergency

Community Overview

I-21
|-22

Management (NYC OEM) in partnership with
the New York City Department of City Planning
(NYC DCP) and will be effective from April 17,
2014, to April 17, 2019. The plan first assesses
New York City’s risk related to hazards, which
include coastal storms, coastal erosion, and
flooding. It then lays out a citywide mitigation
strategy, focusing on measures to be taken by
New York City agencies to enhance response
and recovery efforts. The report also provides
a retrospective analysis of Superstorm Sandy.
The report can be found on the NYC OEM
website: Attp://www.nyc.gov/html/oem/htmi/
planning_response/planning_hazard_mitiga-
tion_2014.shtml

NYC Housing Recovery programs
(ongoing). The City of New York has launched
several initiatives under the NYC Housing
Recovery program to help residents across
the five boroughs recover from the damage
caused by Superstorm Sandy. Some of
these recovery programs support resiliency
investments and will help improve individual
homes and businesses in the communities
surrounding Jamaica Bay. For example, the
Build it Back program seeks to assist home-
owners, landlords, and tenants whose homes
were damaged by the storm. The City is also
pursuing a program that will offer incentives
to small businesses to invest in improvements

Community Overview

to protect against severe weather. More infor-
mation on NYC Housing Recovery programs
can be found here: htto://www.nyc.gov/htmi/
Recovery/.

NYC Revised Building Codes (2013).
Particularly relevant to NYRCR Communities
are ongoing and potential future updates to the
building and zoning codes. U.S. Green Building
Council’s Building Resiliency Task Force
made 33 recommendations for code updates
to the New York City Council. While several
recommendations are still in various states
of review, 16 initiatives have been passed. In
addition, NYC DCP’s Flood Resiliency Zoning
Text Amendment was approved by New York
City Council on October 9, 2013. The amend-
ment removed obstacles to homes that are
rebuilding in the flood zone, allowing homes
to build to the new standards.

NYC Regional Economic Development
Council’s (NYC REDC) Five-Year Strategy
Plan (2011). This plan entails a comprehen-
sive economic strategy to address and pro-
mote workforce development, government
fiscal responsibility, and infrastructure invest-
ment, to support New York City’s businesses.
The NYC REDC outlines four key objec-
tives to address these principles: improve
quality of life; create a pro-growth, pro-jobs

environment; invest in the future; and foster
innovation and inter-regional cooperation.
Specific approaches, like supporting small
businesses and neighborhood revitalization,
align with the goals of NYRCR.

NYC DCP’s Retrofitting Buildings for Flood
Risk (2014) and Designing for Flood Risk,
Urban WaterfrontAdaptive Strategies (2013).
NYC DCP recently published a comprehen-
sive guide that outlines retrofitting options for
housing in the 100-year floodplain. It specif-
ically provides a step-by-step guide for how
property owners, architects, and developers
should approach resiliency improvements for
several common housing typologies in New
York City.

NYC DCP began the Designing for Flood Risk
reports in 2012 as a follow-up to the Vision
2020 Waterfront Plan; when Superstorm
Sandy struck, these reports evolved to reflect
new, post-storm conditions and challenges.
Designing for Flood Risk offers architectural
strategies and design principles for complying
with higher flood protection standards in a
manner that reflects New York City’s diverse
neighborhoods and building typologies. The
Urban Waterfront Adaptive Strategies Report
identifies strategies for improving coastal
resilience, assesses the costs and benefits of
   

these strategies, and then provides a frame-
work for communities to evaluate the appli-
cability of a given strategy for their neighbor-
hood. While these documents are not targeted
toward Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront neigh-
borhoods specifically, the design strategies
for one- to two-family homes in Designing for
Flood Risk and the evaluation framework for
assessing resiliency strategies are particularly

NYC DEP’s Paerdegat Basin Ecosystem Park provides public access to Paerdegat Basin and features seating areas.

Sos

appropriate for Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
given the area’s building stock

NYC DEP’s Jamaica Bay Watershed
Protection Plan (2005, updated 2010)
outlines NYC DEP strategies and projects
aimed at restoring and maintaining the water
quality and ecological integrity of Jamaica
Bay. This plan included the Paerdegat

Basin Combined Sewer Outflow improve-
ments described below, and along with the
NYC DEP’s Green Infrastructure Program,
introduced a series of green infrastructure
projects and studies.

NYC DEP’s Paerdegat Basin Combined
Sewer Overflow Facility (2011).

In 2011, NYC DEP opened the Paerdegat
Basin Combined Sewer Overflow (CSO)
Facility, which they estimate will prevent up to
50 million gallons of CSOs during heavy rain
events from being discharged into Paerdegat
Basin, dramatically improving water quality
in the Basin and Jamaica Bay. In addition
to the CSO facility, NYC DEP is near com-
pletion on the Paerdegat Basin Natural Park
and Ecosystem Park. These projects, which
include restoration of wetlands and natural
grasslands, will help absorb stormwater
runoff, further improving water quality in the
basin and potentially reducing stormwater
flooding in surrounding neighborhoods.

NYC DEP’s Green Infrastructure Annual
Report and Plans (2014) provides an update
on NYC DEP’s Green Infrastructure Program,
created to address water quality impacts that
result from CSO events. Under this program,
NYC DEP and its partner agencies design,
construct and maintain a variety of sustainable

Community Overview

I-23
1-24

green infrastructure measures, including
green roofs, rain gardens, and right-of-way
bioswales on New York City-owned property
including, sidewalks, schools, and public
housing. The program also provides grants for
green infrastructure projects on private prop-
erty. Projects underway in Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront neighborhoods include a long-term
control plan to achieve specific water quality
standards for the Jamaica Bay CSO area
in Paerdegat Basin, as well as rain barrels
in Marine Park and bioswales in Mill Basin.
NYC DEP is also currently conducting addi-
tional demonstration projects in the Jamaica
Bay CSO tributary area to assess the benefits
of green infrastructure use at a neighborhood
level, the results of which will be published in a
2016 Performance Metrics Report.

NYC DOT’s Transportation Planning and
Improvements (2014). The New York City
Department of Transportation (NYC DOT) has
a variety of recently completed, under con-
struction, and planned street and infrastructure
projects in the Bergen Beach, Georgetown,
Mill Basin, Mill Island, and Marine Park areas.
In Mill Basin, NYC DOT is in the process of
reconstructing and landscaping the Mill Basin
Drawbridge, a project that started in 2013 and
is slated for completion in 2017. This is part of
a larger ongoing initiative to reconstruct seven

Community Overview

bridges along the Belt Parkway. In Georgetown,
NYC DOT and NYC DEP are in the design phase
of a Bergen Avenue Area street reconstruction
project, which has an expected completion date
of 2026. In Marine Park, NYC DOT is working
with the New York City Department of Design
and Construction (DDC) to install bus rapid
transit stations on Nostrand Avenue, a project
that was slated for completion in June 2014.

Another major NYC DOT project in the Planning
Area is the Jamaica Bay Greenway—an
in-development 28-mile multi-use path linking
communities surrounding Jamaica Bay. To
date, NYC DOT and partners have developed
10 miles of Greenway, including sections in
McGuire Fields and Floyd Bennett Field in
the Planning Area. NYC DOT is undertaking
community engagement efforts to determine
additional route development. Priorities for the
final route development and implementation
are expected to be released in spring of 2015.

NYC Department of Parks and Recreation’s
Remove and Replant Program. New York
City Department of Parks and Recreation
(NYC DPR) recently launched this program in
order to remove and replant trees damaged by
Superstorm Sandy. Foresters have conducted
a survey of trees within the Superstorm Sandy
inundation zone to identify those damaged by

saltwater inundation and wind, and in need
of removal. NYC DPR expects to remove
and replant around 10,000 trees through this
effort. Tree removals began in July 2014 and
are expected to continue through July 2015,
with all trees replanted within 12 months of
removal. Residents report that tree removal
has already begun in the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area.

Brooklyn Recovery Fund’s’ Brooklyn
Communities Speak: An Action Guide for
Local Decision-Makers (2014). This report
surveys conditions in six coastal Brooklyn
neighborhoods in the wake of Superstorm
Sandy and provides both borough-wide and
neighborhood-specific recommendations
for government recovery and resiliency pro-
grams. While Bergen Beach, Georgetown,
Marine Park, Mill Basin, and Mill Island were
not included in the six neighborhoods sur-
veyed, borough-wide recommendations
around housing and rebuilding, health, busi-
nesses, infrastructure, and immigrant and
undocumented populations provide context
for post-Superstorm Sandy challenges in
these communities. Additionally, two Brooklyn
Community Foundation Emergency Fast Track
grants of $10,000 each went to Mill Basin
area community-based organizations in the
immediate aftermath of Superstorm Sandy:
Millennium Development received funding for
restoring electricity in powerless homes; and
the Jewish Community Council of Canarsie,
which serves the Canarsie, Bergen Beach, Mill
Basin, and Mill Island areas, received funding
for emergency food needs and mental health
services.

Other Initiatives

Con Edison’s Fortifying the Future (2013).
Consolidated Edison (Con Ed), the electricity
provider in the Planning Area, put forth a plan
to protect Superstorm Sandy-affected power
infrastructure, which includes burying 30
miles of overhead lines around facilities that
provide critical emergency support functions,
including police and fire stations, hospitals,
pharmacies, and supermarkets. Con Ed’s
plan also includes reducing the number of
customers served by a single section of over-
head line.

The planning efforts above have produced con-
siderable work that can be leveraged throughout
the NYRCR planning process, though gaps still
remain. Key outstanding issues include:

e Addressing sewer backup in the area
through system-wide upgrades, educa-
tion, and technical and financial assistance

toward the installation of in-home check
valves and other measures.

Expanding the range of programs that are
targeted to housing, both for enhancing
structural resiliency, as well as helping
maintain affordability for homeowners
amidst rising flood insurance premiums.

Enhancing the resiliency of larger neigh-
borhood-supportive retail, which may not
be eligible for the City’s programs, includ-
ing supermarkets and shopping centers in
the area.

Strengthening the capacity of local orga-
nizations, including the wide network of
Civic Associations, to provide assistance
to community members before, during,
and after storm events.

Community Overview

I-25
 

|-26 Community Overview
II. Assessment of Risk and Needs
4

i

     

ace

  

ut 7 Va
ny ; i
| rl {
i |
I ! {|
TT ' i i \
ANB ela et !
‘ i \,
hf ( Ay
a ! Wh | 11 Ki
hy ) bh
} fii |
| |, or
| Nees
ea’ HI
1 | |
! vis | | y
eat a) ve
} | ty i}
Line {
i Li
\ Wik | Ki
WAT EE Aaa 94
| |
i |
’ ) }
4 } ene
Pa | ih
ni Piet
} } uy
(" } (Pai '
nyt y
i
+t }
' \
!
Fl 1 |
vent
I \ {
at
Wi
| iy |]
Hp i
hi ih
MS bE \
aT EE ty
Ni |
pan
if | \ ,
{ | i hile
| a |
anes)
| ’ i | i
{ bait
Cad td
( wn i
ny ;
ii i
|
hi Wale lit
\\ re ili!
| Y Ye
LE ea Pu
} } i! ]
ban yt '
i Wem ia
| st
iM A A
ey ‘4
ATL Mi t
te
ea
‘ ey
i rel dt
My Pt
} Thal \)
bet A | .
i heath
Vis |
| AT) ys)
MI if \
it +7) well
| Wee ly
Description of Community Assets

Assets are locations, features, infrastructure
and development located within or outside of
the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Planning Area (Planning Area) whose loss or
impairment due to flood or storm events would
compromise any essential social, economic, or
environmental functions and/or critical facilities
of the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Community (Community).

Assets may facilitate economic and social activ-
ities or refer to critical infrastructure required to
support those activities. Assets may also be part
of the built or the natural environment. The goal of
the asset inventory is to assemble a description of
the NYRCR Community’s most important assets
with sufficient information to assess risk to the
assets under current and future conditions. Assets
identified fall within at least one of two categories:

Community assets that have been damaged
from past storms or are at risk of damage from
future storms (i.e., assets within high or extreme
risk areas, as illustrated in figure II-1); and/or
Community assets that are critical in prepared-
ness, response, or recovery from future storms.

Assets were identified using a combination of pub-
licly available data and input from the Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Committee
(Committee) and the public. The inventory and

What Do The Risk Areas Mean?

New York State Department of State (NYS DOS),
with the assistance of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), mapped
geographic areas representing the likelihood for
coastal flooding. They identified three risk areas:

Extreme: Areas currently at risk of frequent inun-
dation and vulnerable to erosion and wave action
over three feet (FEMA V zone), subject to shallow
coastal flooding (within the National Weather
Service’s shallow coastal flooding advisory
threshold), or likely to be inundated in the future
due to sea level rise (assumes three feet).

High: Areas outside the extreme risk area that are
currently at risk of infrequent inundation (FEMA
A zone, meaning there is a 1% annual chance
of flooding) or at future risk of shallow coastal

associated maps were initially generated using
New York City land use and infrastructure data
to identify assets within the Planning Area.
The maps were refined by the Committee and
presented to the Community at the initial Public
Engagement Event for feedback. The assets
described here reflect the input and feedback

flooding with sea level rise (assumes three feet).

Moderate: Areas outside the extreme and high
risk areas but currently at moderate risk of inun-
dation from infrequent events (FEMA shaded X
zone, meaning there is a 0.2% annual chance of
flooding) or at risk of being in the 100 year flood-
plain with sea level rise (assumes three feet), and
any areas expected to be inundated by a category
three hurricane.

A more detailed description of the NYS DOS
Risk Assessment Area Mapping Methodology
can be found on the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program website, as can
a link to an online viewer for the risk assessment
area maps, at hitp://stormrecovery.ny.gov/com-
munity-reconstruction-program.

of the Committee and the public. The asset
inventory is organized by NYRCR asset class.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Il-1
Recovery Support Functions

Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Throughout this plan, six Recovery Support Functions are used to frame needs and opportunities identified by the
Community. These functions are derived from the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) National Disaster
Recovery Framework developed by President Barack Obama in 2011 and provide a structure for analyzing the community
recovery needs and the subsequent assistance that must be provided. They also tie closely to the asset categories used in
the asset inventory. They are defined as follows:

Infrastructure

This function relates to local and regional
transportation, water management, utilities, and
the ability of these systems to withstand and
recover from disruptive events. The economic
development and job creation capacity of these
systems are also critical to this function.

Natural & Cultural Resources

Natural infrastructure systems can play an
important role in resiliency and recovery. The
ability of natural features to withstand disruptive
events and mitigate damage is addressed by this
function. Cultural resources can play an important
role in recovery through provision of spaces and
forums for recovery.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Community Planning & Capacity Building

This function addresses a community’s ability to
implement immediate storm recovery activities
and organize long-term resiliency plans. Formal
and informal community networks, dedicated
emergency education and planning efforts, and
experience recovering from past emergency
events are characteristics that may enhance this
function.

Health & Social Services

This function addresses the ability of public health
services, health care facilities, and essential social
services to be restored after a disruptive event.

Housing
The resiliency of a community’s housing stock is

addressed by this function—including both phys-
ical resiliency and financial health and resources.

Economic Development
This function addresses the ability for economic

and business activities to return to normal.
Developing new economic opportunities that
result in a sustainable and economically strong
community is a component of this function.
Figure II-1: NYS Department of State Risk Map

 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area

 

NYSDOS Risk Areas
Moderate

HE Hin
|| Extreme

NYS DOS, with the assistance of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration ROAR), mapped geographic areas representing the likelihood
for coastal flooding. They identified three risk areas:

Extreme: Areas currently at risk of frequent inundation and vulnerable to erosion and
wave action over three feet (FEMA V zone}, subject to shallow coastal flooding
{within the National Weather Service's shallow coastal flooding advisory threshold),
or likely to be inundated in the future due to sea level rise (assumes three feet).

High: Areas outside the extreme risk area that are currently at risk of infrequent
inundation (FEMA A zone, meaning there is a 1% annual chance of flooding} or at
future tisk of shallow coastal flooding with sea level rise (assumes three feet}.

Moderate: Areas outside the extreme and high risk areas but currently at moderate
tisk of inundation from infrequent events (FEMA shaded X Zone, meaning there is a
0.2% annual chance of flooding} or at risk of being in the 100 year floodplain with sea
level tise (assumes of three feet}, and any areas expected to be inundated by a
category three hurricane.

Amore detailed description of the NYS DOS Risk Assessment Area Mapping Methodology
can be found on the NYRCR website, as can a link to on online viewer for the risk
assessment area maps, at http://stormrecovery.ny.gow/community-reconstruction-program.

Source: New York State Department of State (BOS) Risk Assessment Areas; New York City
Department of Gity Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

‘

    
 

Fs

Giaaiaere

e As -

     

 

 

 

5,000 10,000
a 1 Feet

 

 

Assessment of Risk and Needs Il-3
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

ll-4

Health and Social Services Assets

The Community identified six community
schools as assets, with half of them located in
Bergen Beach. Among these are both public
and private schools, including PS. 236 in Mill
Basin, PS. 312 in Bergen Beach, and J.H.S.
278 in Marine Park. Additionally, there are a
number of schools in the Community that are
affiliated with religious institutions, including
St. Bernard School in Bergen Beach and Mary
Queen of Heaven School in Old Mill Basin.
Schools have served as important centers for
information and response during emergencies.
For example, Saint Bernard of Clairvaux Parish
and School, a campus that is located between
Veterans Avenue and Avenue U, served as
a critical recovery center in the aftermath of
Superstorm Sandy.

There is one senior and assisted-living center
in the Community: Sunrise Senior Living Center
in Mill Island, which is critical in serving the
Community’s senior population. While there
are no major medical facilities located within
the Planning Area, assets like the Physicare
Family Health Center, the Flatlands Volunteer
Ambulance Corps, the Jewish Community
Center of Marine Park, as well as several
24-hour pharmacies, are crucial to maintaining
the health of the Community before, during,

Assessment of Risk and Needs

and after a major storm event. Additionally,
the Planning Area benefits from several med-
ical facilities located outside of the Planning
Area, including Mount Sinai Beth Israel, New
York Community Hospital, and Kings County
Hospital.

The Community is served by three New York Fire
Department (FDNY) engine companies. All three
of these facilities, located within the moderate
risk area, are critical to effective emergency
response, and thus, the safety and resiliency of
the Community. With a lack of New York Police
Department (NYPD) precincts located within
the Planning Area, the Community has a greater
reliance on these FDNY stations.

 

FDNY Engine 323 (Top) and Sunrise Senior Living
(Bottom) are two of the many health and social services
assets located in the Planning Area.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure II-2: Health and Social Services Assets Map

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area

 

. Extent of High & Extreme
Planning Area Risk Zones
Health and Social Service NYSDOS Risk Areas
Assets
Moderate

Health,Social Service,
and Emergency Response || High

Assets
|| Extreme

1 PHYSICARE FAMILY HEALTH CENTER 19 JUNIOR HIGHSCHOOL 278 MARINE PARK
2 SOUTH BROOKLYN NEPHROLOGY 20 KINGS PLAZA SHOPPING CENTER
(DIALYSIS) CENTER
3 SUNRISE SENIOR LIVING CENTER OUTSIDE OF THE PLANNING AREA:
4 RITE AID PHARMACY 21 CVS PHARMACY
KS \ & WALGREENS PHARMACY 22 MADISON HIGH SCHOOL
‘Ss
< AY > re wS tL . Ae ‘ Z 6 ARMED FORGES RESERVE CENTER 23° PUBLIC SCHOOL 203
NS Se ~~ SS K \ ? fs ay 7 FDNY ENGINE 309, LADDER 189 24 PUBLIC SCHOOL 261
<S “SS S&S p » 8 FONYENGINE 321 25 SOUTH SHORE EDUCATIONAL COMPLEX
. 8
iS SS * SS 9 FDNYENGINE 893 28 KINGS COUNTY HOSPITAL CENTER
AS x > ‘&) 5 <j 10 SAINT BERNARD OF CLAIRVAUX PARISH 27 NY COMMUNITY HOSPITAL
® wal \ AND SCHOOL 28 CONEY ISLAND HOSPITAL
11 JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL 78 ROY H MANN 29 MOUNT SINAI BETH ISRAEL HOSPITAL

12 PUBLIC SCHOOL 312 (BERGEN BEACH)
13 PUBLIC SCHOOL 207 ELIZABETH G LEARY

14 PUBLIC SCHOOL 222 KATHERINE R
SNYDER

18 PUBLIC SCHOOL 236 (MILL BASIN)

16 FLATLANDS VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE
CORPS

17 HATZOLAH OF MILL BASIN
18 JCC OF MARINE PARK

Source: New York State Department of State (BOS) Risk Assessment Areas; New York City
Department of Gity Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

i

 

  
       

fas
Gian

 

 

 

 

5,000 10,000
a 1 Feet

 

Assessment of Risk and Needs ll-5
ll-6

W)

Economic Assets

The Planning Area is served by four
commercial corridors: Avenue N, Flatbush
Avenue, Ralph Avenue, and Avenue U, the
last of which runs the width of the Planning
Area and passes through Marine Park, Mill
Basin, and Bergen Beach. Of these avenues,
Flatbush Avenue and Avenue U are similar,
each characterized by four-lane roadways
and sporadic development. Flatbush Avenue,
in particular, features many small businesses
that rely on the major thoroughfare’s pedes-
trian traffic.

At the intersection of Flatbush Avenue and
Avenue U is Kings Plaza Shopping Center,
the largest of many shopping centers
located within the Planning Area. Located
at the intersection of the Mill Basin and
Marine Park neighborhoods, Kings Plaza
Shopping Center is a_ centrally-located
commercial node and one of the largest
enclosed shopping malls in Brooklyn, which
draws shoppers from throughout the borough
of Brooklyn. Also of note is the collection of
shopping centers along Ralph Avenue in
Georgetown, which serves both the residents

of Georgetown and Bergen Beach. These
commercial corridors and businesses are
critical to day-to-day economic activities, as
well as the Community’s ability to prepare for
and recover from disasters.

 

Left, Commercial storefronts line Avenue N, one of many busy commercial thoroughfares in the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area; Right, There are several
supermarkets that serve the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Community, including Key Food on Avenue U.

Assessment of Risk and Needs
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure II-3: Economic Assets Map

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area

 

NYSDOS Risk Areas
Economic Assets
0 Economic Assets

Gua » Commercial Corridors || High
(Flatbush Avenue, Avenue N,
Avenue U, Ralph Avenue) || Extreme

Moderate

Economic Use
Mixed Residential & Commercial

i Commercial & Office Buildings

|| Industrial & Manufacturing

AVE N COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR
FLATBUSH AVE COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR,
RALPH AVE COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR
AVE U COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR
GEORGETOWN SHOPPING CENTER
KINGS PLAZA SHOPPING CENTER

RALPH AVE SHOPPING CENTER

KEY FOODS

9 | WALDBAUMS GROCERY

oN onk ON a

OUTSIDE OF THE PLANNING AREA:
10 KEY FOODS GROCERY

Source: New York State Department of State (BOS) Risk Assessment Areas; New York City
Department of City Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

z

 

     

 

 

 

5,000 10,000
1! 1Feet

 

Assessment of Risk and Needs ll-7
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

ll-8

Housing Assets

While every residence within the Planning Area
is important, those residences within the high
and extreme risk zones were highlighted as
particularly vulnerable assets. There are 2,890
residential buildings either partially or entirely
in the high and extreme risk flood zones, the
majority of which are one- and two-family resi-
dences in Mill Island and Bergen Beach. There
are some instances of multifamily walk-up
buildings, mostly within Bergen Beach, and
close to Paerdegat Basin. The housing stock of
these two neighborhoods, while similar in type,
varies in size and architecture. For instance, Mill
Island is home to numerous waterside homes
that feature private docks, as well as semi-at-
tached homes. Alternatively, Bergen Beach is
characterized by a mixture of detached one-
and two-family homes as well as semi-attached
single-family homes, as is more common
throughout the Planning Area.

Single-family residences that are located along
Avenue U within Marine Park and Mill Basin
are also within the high and extreme risk areas.
While these at-risk residences are fewer than
those in Mill sland and Bergen Beach, they face
a similar level of flood risk, particularly for those
residences with driveways that ramp down into
basements.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Housing typologies vary from att:
detached dwellings (Bottom).

 

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure II-4: Housing Assets Map

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area

 
      

Cc] Planning Area Extent of High & Extreme
Housing Assets NYSDOS Risk Areas

One and Two Family Moderate

Bee aS ae Zones iz High

Multi-Family Walk-Up || Extreme

Buildings in High and
Extreme Risk Zones

ae

ee = a
rs ax Se
ot. KN

SS ¢

 

 
 

Source: New York State Department of State (DOS) Risk Assessment Areas; New York City
Department of Gity Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Genterlines

 

 

 

 

 

10,000
1 Feet

 

Assessment of Risk and Needs ll-9
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Il-10

Infrastructure Assets

Infrastructure assets, including facilities for the
distribution and supply of power and water,
as well as for the management and treatment
of sewage, are critical to the Community's
preparedness, response, and recovery from
future storms.

There are three power-generating substations
within the Community, all of which are located
below street-level. Two of these substations are
located along Avenue N, with the third located
near Avenue U. While the Community is largely
serviced by overhead electrical wires, the
integrity of these substations is critical to the
electrical supply of the Planning Area.

Another key infrastructure asset is the Paerdegat
Basin Combined Sewer Overflow (CSO)
Retention Center, owned and operated by the
New York City Department of Environmental
Protection (NYC DEP). Completed in 2011, the
facility prevents up to 50 million gallons of CSOs
from being discharged into Paerdegat Basin.
While this facility does not serve the Planning
Area, loss of functionality or severe damage to
the facility during a future storm event could
cause severe sewer complications for residents
within the Planning Area.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

The Planning Area is serviced by the Coney
Island Wastewater Treatment Plant in
Sheepshead Bay. While this plant is outside of
the Planning Area, it is critical to the functional-
ity of the Planning Area’s separated wastewater
and stormwater systems.

The Community has limited transit access.
The closest subway stations—Kings Highway
(B and Q lines) and Flatbush Avenue-Brooklyn
College (2 and 5 lines)—are located outside of
the Planning Area, north of Marine Park and Mill
Basin at Brooklyn College and west at Kings
Highway. However, the Community is well
served by New York City Transit buses. Four
bus lines—B41, B9, B2, and B46—travel along
Flatbush Avenue in the Planning Area, with
Kings Plaza Shopping Center serving as a ter-
minus. Other major corridors in the Community
are also served by buses. Two express buses—
the BM1 and BM4—also serve the Planning
Area, providing limited-stop, express service
into Lower and Midtown Manhattan.

The Planning Area is served by the Belt Parkway
(called Shore Parkway within the Planning
Area). The Parkway is a two-way, east-west,
limited-access highway that operates with
three moving lanes of traffic in each direction.
Entry and exit ramps are located at Flatbush
Avenue in the Planning Area.

Additionally, the Planning Area connects to
the Rockaway Peninsula via the Marine Park-
way-Gil Hodges Memorial Bridge, to the south
of Floyd Bennett Field and a key vehicular
access route.

 

The NYC DEP CSO Retention Center is one of several
infrastructure assets located in the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure II—-5: Infrastructure Assets Map

 

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area

 

NYSDOS Risk Areas
Infrastructure Assets

06 Infrastructure Systems Moderate
Assets | High
<@ane> Belt Parkway
|| Extreme
1 GAS STATION OUTSIDE OF THE PLANNING AREA:
2 GAS STATION 20 GAS STATION (2773 NOSTRAND AVE)
3° GAS STATION 21 GAS STATION (2402 KNAPP ST)
4 GAS STATION
& GAS STATION
6 GAS STATION
7 GAS STATION
a

CON EDISON SUBSTATION

9 CON EDISON SUBSTATION

10 CON EDISON SUBSTATION

11 BELT PARKWAY

12 FLATBUSH AVE BUS DEPOT (MTA)

19 MILL AVE SCHOOL BUS DEPOT

14 NYPD AIR OPERATIONS (FLOYD BENNETT
FIELD)

18 STRICKLAND AVE SCHOOL DEPOT LOT

16 PAERDEGAT BASIN COMBINED SEWER
OVERFLOW RETENTION CENTER

17 CONEDISON TRANSFORMER
18 CONEDISON TRANSFORMER

Source: New York State Department of State (DOS) Risk Assessment Areas; New York City
Department of Gity Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Genterlines

 

 

 

 

 

A 0 2,500 5,000 10,000

| be 1 Feet

Assessment of Risk and Needs _ |I-11
I-12

Natural and Cultural Resources
Assets

Many cultural assets, including community
centers and churches, serve critical commu-
nity and capacity-building functions, acting as
centers for gathering and communication, as
well as providing skills training and support to
residents. The Community benefits from two
community centers located within the Planning
Area. The newly-constructed Carmine Carro
Community Center in Marine Park is ideally sit-
uated adjacent to park space and a junior high
school. Completed in 2013, the New York City
Department of Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR)
facility is partially powered by solar energy and
features a vegetated roof, serving as a prece-
dent for resilient and sustainable design.’ The
John Malone Community Center is located near
Paerdegat Basin in Bergen Beach. Opened in
2003, the Center provides key recreational and
educational programming to the Community.
Both of these centers provide vital community
services, including meals to senior citizens in
the Planning Area. According to residents, the
Church of St. Thomas Aquinas in Marine Park
also acted as an informal recovery center in the
aftermath of Superstorm Sandy.

The Planning Area is home to extensive park-

land and open space, concentrated primarily
along the Jamaica Bay shoreline and the

Assessment of Risk and Needs

various inlets and water bodies that define it.
These shorelines contain marshlands and other
natural areas, as well as recreational space. The
largest park in Brooklyn, Marine Park consists
of 530 acres of grassland and salt marshland,
which NYC DPR has committed to protecting
through its Forever Wild Program. While a por-
tion of the park is protected natural area, the
park also offers a wide range of recreational
activities to the Community, including a golf
course, playgrounds, bikeways, basketball
courts, and baseball diamonds.? The majority
of Marine Park sits within the moderate risk
area, though portions are located in the high
and extreme risk zones. Additional park space
is located on the northeast boundary of the
Planning Area, along the Paerdegat Basin
shoreline. In conjunction with the Paerdegat
Basin CSO Retention Center project, NYC DEP
is constructing a natural area and Ecology Park
along the basin. These two areas connect to the
existing McGuire Fields, creating natural and
recreational areas that stretch the length of the
Paerdegat Basin shoreline.

Paerdegat Basin itself is a natural resource
asset as well as a major source of floodwaters
that affected the Community during Superstorm
Sandy. The NYC DEP process of restoring the
tidal wetlands and shorelines of the basin into
natural areas will augment water quality and

 

The Carmine Carro Community Center in Marine Park
serves as a precedent for sustainable design.

ecological improvements along the basin.*

The park space and natural areas of the
Community’s Jamaica Bay shoreline are part
of the National Park Service’s (NPS) Gateway
National Recreation Area. As such, this shore-
line ties into the larger NPS recreation area for
all of Jamaica Bay, including the Jamaica Bay
Greenway. Gateway National Recreation Area
includes the southern portion of Bergen Beach,
home to the Jamaica Bay Riding Academy
and Floyd Bennett Field, once the site of New
York City’s first municipal airport. Today, Floyd
Bennett Field features the Aviator Sports and
Events Center recreational complex and a vis-
itor’s center
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure II-6: Natural and Cultural Resources Assets Map

  
   
  
 
       
     
    
 
      

LO
Or co
Sa a es
e awe

   
 
 
  

Co
oe
Seo

%
oS

 

  

  
    

Wl

NOMYA
A

  

  

Y, 4 pa,
we

 

Cc] Planning Area

Natural and Cultural
Resource Assets

Natural and Cultural
Resource Assets

=" Jamaica Bay Greenway

GD] Parks and Open Space

HISTORIC AIRCRAFT RESTORATION
PROJECT

AVIATOR SPORTS

BERGEN BEACH (GATEWAY NATIONAL
RECREATION AREA, NATIONAL PARKS
SERVICE)

BERGEN BEACH PLAYGROUND.

FLOYD BENNETT FIELD (GATEWAY
NATIONAL RECREATION AREA,
NATIONAL PARKS SERVICE)

6 FOUR SPARROW MARSH

7 HICKMAN PLAYGROUND (NYC PARKS)
8 JAMAICA BAY GREENWAY

9 LINDOWER PARK (NYC PARKS)

10 MARINE PARK (NYC PARKS)

11 MCGUIRE FIELDS (NYC PARKS)

12 PAERDEGAT BASIN ECOLOGICAL PARK
(UNDER CONSTRUCTION, NYC PARKS)

13 PAERDEGAT BASIN PARK (NYC PARKS)
14 WHITE ISLAND
15 DEAD HORSE BAY

n

eo

ae

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area

Extent of High & Extreme
Risk Zones

NYSDOS Risk Areas

Moderate

EE cr
|| Extreme

EAST MILL BASIN

MILL BASIN

PAERDEGAT BASIN

MARINE PARK CREEK AND MILL CREEK
CARMINE CARRO COMMUNITY CENTER
ST. COLUMBA CHURCH

CHURCH OF ST. THOMAS AQUINAS
JOHN MALLONE COMMUNITY CENTER

Source: New York State Department of State (DOS) Risk Assessment Areas; New York City
Department of Gity Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Genterlines

 

 

x

 

 

 

10,000
1 Feet

Assessment of Riskand Needs [I-13
1-14

Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems

The assessment of risk to assets identified by
the Community provides important information
to inform the evaluation and prioritization of the
projects developed. The assets and systems
of assets that collectively define the neighbor-
hoods in the Planning Area are at risk due, in
large part, to their location relative to the impact
of future flood hazards (risk area). The various
water bodies that surround the Community, and
that experienced high surge from Superstorm
Sandy—including Paerdegat Basin along the
northeast, Mill Basin and East Mill Basin near
the center of the Planning Area, and Shell Bank
Creek along the southwest—were entry points
for inundation during Superstorm Sandy. These
coastlines remain exposed to coastal flooding
from future storms and sea-level rise. While the
hazard of future flooding is not equivalent in
all neighborhoods, none of the neighborhoods
are immune from this threat. While upland
portions of the Community are located within
the moderate risk area, much of the waterfront
and some low-lying inland areas—primarily in
the neighborhoods of Bergen Beach and Mill
Island—are located within either the high or
extreme risk zones. These areas remain at high
risk of damage from future coastal hazards due
to inundation from surge or wastewater and
stormwater sewer backup.

In addition to physical factors, there are many

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Assessing Risk

Risk, in this context, is the potential for an asset
to be damaged or destroyed in a future storm
event. The assessment of risk to assets or
systems of assets produced important informa-
tion to evaluate needs and opportunities and
help guide Committee decisions about resiliency
strategies and projects. The New York State
Department of State (NYS DOS) developed a risk
assessment tool that is aimed at determining

the level of flood risk faced by key community
assets. The tool assigns each asset a risk score
by evaluating three factors:

Hazard: the likelihood and magnitude of future
storm events.

Exposure: the local topographic and shoreline
conditions that may increase or decrease the
impact of coastal hazards.

issues with respect to community capacity that
contribute to the vulnerability of residents and
assets throughout the Planning Area. The lack
of a comprehensive emergency preparedness
plan, as well as unclear or incomplete informa-
tion about emergency response procedures

Vulnerability: the capacity of an asset to return
to service after a storm, taking into account its
material strength relative to the coastal hazard
as well as its regenerative capacity.

Hazard, exposure, and vulnerability determine
the risk that an asset could be damaged or
destroyed by a coastal storm event. This
analysis identifies which assets within the
Community are most at risk from future storms
in comparison to other assets. Furthermore, it
allows potential projects to be evaluated by their
ability to reduce risk to assets. For access to the
NYS DOS Risk Assessment Tool and additional
information on how to use it, see Attp://stormre-
covery.ny.gov/resources-0

and resources, hinders effective emergency
response and recovery, thus increasing poten-
tial damage to assets.

The assessment of risk to assets and systems
of assets provide background information to
help in the development of projects, particularly
those projects that protect assets from flooding.

Health and Social Services Assets at
Risk

Several schools within the Planning Area, and
particularly in Bergen Beach, are located within
the high risk area, including Public School
312, Roy H. Mann Junior High School 78, the
Saint Bernard School, and the Temple Sholom
Hebrew School. Schools provided temporary
relief and assistance following Superstorm
Sandy after having to close for a week in the
immediate aftermath of the storm. Damage
due to a disaster severely limits the availabil-
ity of public facilities to serve as centers for
response and recovery efforts, increasing the
vulnerability not only of the assets themselves
but of the Community's ability to provide disas-
ter response services. The South Brooklyn
Nephrology (Dialysis) Center in Marine Park
is also located within the high risk area. The
remaining health and social services assets,
including other healthcare facilities and schools,
in addition to senior and assisted living centers
and the FDNY engine companies that serve the
Community, are located within the moderate
risk area.

The ability of these assets to withstand dam-
age in the face of future storms will be crucial

to the long-term resiliency of the Planning
Area’s neighborhoods. These assets provide
vital services during storm events and assist
vulnerable populations, including seniors, peo-
ple with disabilities, low- and very low-income
populations, young children, and people at risk
of becoming homeless.

Economic Assets at Risk

Portions of two of the four major commercial
corridors in the Community—specifically, the
southern segment of the Flatbush Avenue
commercial corridor and much of the Avenue
U commercial corridor—are located in the high
risk area. The Kings Plaza Shopping Center in
Mill Basin and the Key Food grocery store in
Bergen Beach are also located in the high risk
area. Other portions of these corridors, as well
as the Ralph Avenue and Avenue N commercial
corridors, are located in the moderate risk area.

These economic assets and the businesses
throughout the Community, particularly in the
low-lying areas near the waterfront, are not
designed to withstand flooding, and remain
vulnerable to damage due to flooding from
storm surge and sewer backup. Many busi-
nesses throughout the Planning Area are still
addressing damage caused by Superstorm
Sandy, with some businesses unable to reopen
due to extensive damage. Loss of, or damage

 

Public School 312 is located in the high-risk zone.

to, these assets would limit residents’ access
to basic goods and services and disrupt local
economic activity, thus exacerbating the effect
of a significant storm upon the community.

Housing Assets at Risk

Many one- and two-family residences are
located in the high risk area, primarily in Bergen
Beach and Mill Island, but also along or near
Avenue Uin Mill Basin and Marine Park. Flooding
in housing units as a result of Superstorm
Sandy included stormwater backup and surge
inundation, and homes remain at risk due to this

Assessment of Risk and Needs

I-15
ll-16

combination. Stormwater flooding on streets
was especially problematic and widespread,
resulting in damage to homes, both with and
without driveways ramped down to basements.

It is not feasible to elevate much of the housing
stock due to construction constraints, making it
difficult to address the vulnerability of housing
assets. In addition, rising flood insurance pre-
miums and ineligibility for flooding reimburse-
ment through many Federal programs limits
the financial capacity of homeowners to make
resiliency improvements. This has resulted in
widespread concern and frustration among
residents of the Planning Area.

Infrastructure Assets at Risk
Transportation assets located within the high
and extreme risk areas include two bus depots
in Mill Island (Mill Avenue and Strickland
Avenue School Bus Depots), some of which
are used to store school buses; the NYPD Air
Operations facility within Floyd Bennett Field;
and portions of the Belt Parkway. There also are
a few gas stations located within the high risk
area. Inundation of these facilities could result
in interruptions of operations that would hinder
emergency response and day-to-day commu-
nity activity.

Assessment of Risk and Needs

There are also aspects of the local transporta-
tion system that limit the Community's ability
to respond in the event of a disaster and that
increase overall neighborhood vulnerability:
limited roadway access to peninsular neigh-
borhoods like Mill Basin and Bergen Beach; the
location of these roadways in low-lying flood-
prone areas; lack of transportation options, par-
ticularly limited subway access; vulnerabilities
to public bus service disruption during flooding;
and lack of alternatively-powered street lighting
and signals.

The sewer system is also at risk, with ongo-
ing concerns about both wastewater and
stormwater sewer backup. Reports of backup
are increasingly common during heavy rain
events, and are not limited to the aftermath of
Superstorm Sandy. Failure of stormwater to
drain in low-lying areas of Bergen Beach, Mill
Basin and Mill Island following Superstorm
Sandy continues to remain a significant con-
cern. Additionally, the Community has reported
the overgrowth of tree roots that block storm-
water pipes as exacerbating the problem.

Outside the Planning Area, the Coney Island
Wastewater Treatment Plant that services the
Community is similarly at risk. NYC DEP iden-
tified 1,204 target pieces of equipment below
the critical flood elevation (100-year storm plus

30 inches) at risk of flooding and estimated the
cost of resiliency upgrades at $15.5 million.®

Some neighborhoods in the Planning Area
experienced power outages leading up to,
during, and following Superstorm Sandy due,
in part, to damaged overhead power lines and
vulnerable substations. The lack of a resilient
power supply adds to the vulnerability of the
many assets and recovery functions throughout
the Community.

Natural and Cultural Assets at Risk
Most of the natural and cultural resource assets
within the Community are located either entirely
or partially within the extreme risk area along or
near the waterfront. These assets are currently
at risk of frequent inundation, are vulnerable
to erosion in the next 40 years, or are likely
to be inundated in the future due to sea-level
rise. These assets within the extreme risk area
include five water bodies (Paerdegat Basin,
Mill Basin, East Mill Basin, Shell Bank Creek,
and Dead Horse Bay), in addition to a number
of parks and recreational assets throughout
the Planning Area, including Bergen Beach,
Gateway National Recreation Area, McGuire
Fields, Paerdegat Basin Park, Marine Park,
Four Sparrow Marsh, and the Jamaica Bay
Greenway.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Natural and cultural resource assets located
in the high risk area include the John Malone
Community Center in Bergen Beach, Bergen . ;
Beach Playground, Floyd Bennett Field, —— :
Gateway National Recreation Area, Hickman Lae Pe gana le
Playground, and Lindowner Park. Other natural ,

and cultural resource assets are located in the
moderate risk area.

aL
While many of these natural assets are resilient
and less vulnerable to damage from flooding,
they remain at risk of damage and their poten-
tial capacity to provide additional protection to
other assets could be improved.

 

The John Malone Community Center in Bergen Beach is located in the high-risk zone.

Assessment of Riskand Needs I-17
ll-18

Assessment of Needs and Opportunities

Throughout the NYRCR planning process,
the Community’s identification of needs and
opportunities provides a critical founda-
tion for the development of strategies and
projects to enhance collective resiliency.
At Planning Committee Meetings and the first
Public Engagement Event, Committee mem-
bers and members of the public identified
key resiliency needs and opportunities in the
Planning Area.

Needs are safety and resiliency measures
identified by the Community that will help
address its critical issues and minimize poten-
tial impacts associated with climate change,
including extreme weather events or rising
sea levels. Needs may also demonstrate those
things that will help the Community become
more resilient overall.

Opportunities include important underutilized
assets and existing programs that can be lever-
aged to reduce risks or address issues.

Together, needs and opportunities address
gaps in the Community’s collective resiliency to
severe weather-related events.

The needs and opportunities outlined here

reflect the firsthand experiences of Planning
Committee members and Community residents,

Assessment of Risk and Needs

along with their combined knowledge of risks,
challenges, unmet needs and untapped poten-
tial across the neighborhoods of the Planning
Area. These needs include:

¢ Coastal edge strengthening and protec-
tion (Infrastructure, Natural and Cultural
Resources)

Improved drainage and stormwater

management (Natural and Cultural
Resources)
« Emergency preparedness and

response planning (Community Planning
and Capacity Building, Health and Social
Services)

¢ Aresilient power supply (Infrastructure)

Enhanced residential

(Housing)

resiliency

¢ Ensured access to food and supplies
(Health and Social Services, Community
Planning and Capacity Building)

¢ Tree maintenance and damaged tree
removal (Natural and Cultural Resources)

ee

Coastal Edge Strengthening and
Protection

Needs

Community members have cited a need for
increased protection from coastal flooding
and shoreline erosion. These needs focus on
the most at-risk areas, such as Bergen Beach,
which experienced flooding from all sides during
Superstorm Sandy. Bergen Beach is primarily
built on landfill, and residents have reported
that its filled shorelines are eroding and need
to be strengthened in order to increase natural
edge surge and tidal protection.

Opportunities

¢ The narrow width of the inlets and
basins that were the source of floodwa-
ters during Superstorm Sandy may pro-
vide an opportunity to have a meaningful
flood mitigation impact through relatively
small-scale interventions. The reconstruc-
tion of several bridges across these basins
through the New York City Department of
Transportation’s (NYC DOT) Seven Bridges
project may also provide an opportunity
to tie interventions—for example, tide
gates —into the new bridges. Additionally,
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

there are a number of low-lying, vulnerable
points along the Planning Area’s shoreline
where floodwaters entered during the
storm and where there may be opportu-
nity for further small-scale, yet strategic,
interventions.

Existing efforts led by NYC DEP and
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers may
also provide coastal protection benefits.
Through the Paerdegat Basin Wetland
Restoration Project (see “Relationship to

proper drainage.

Regional Plans,” page 1-18), NYC DEP. in
coordination with NYC DPR, has already
elevated portions of the basin’s shoreline
within Georgetown. Continuing this eleva-
tion south into Bergen Beach could pro-
vide targeted protection to the Community
from waters rising from Paerdegat Basin
and inundating at-risk inland areas.
Additionally, the USACE is in the process
of studying various alternatives for flood
risk reduction for communities on Jamaica
Bay as part of Phase 2 of the Rockaway

 

a aes

Many drains and catchbasins in the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area are clogged, inhibiting

 

Inlet to East Rockaway Inlet Reformulation
Study (see “Relationship to Regional
Plans,” page !-18), due for release in
2015. While the study will fund long-term
interventions in the Bay, a number of local
flood-risk reduction projects, incorporat-
ing both “green” and “grey” infrastructure
and providing varying levels of risk reduc-
tion, will be considered. Recently funded
interventions around Jamaica Bay include
projects at Lower Spring Creek (Howard
Beach), Sunset Cove (Broad Channel),
and Breezy Point (Rockaway Peninsula).

Improved Drainage and Stormwater
Management

Needs

Residents have reported instances of wastewa-
ter and stormwater sewer backup in the after-
math of Superstorm Sandy, as well as during
heavy rain events. Backup signals a crucial
need for improvements to, and increased
maintenance of, the existing separated sewer
system in the Planning Area. Community mem-
bers have identified a strong need for existing
sewer infrastructure to be upgraded and for the

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Il-19
Il-20

Planning Area’s catch basins, and wastewater
and stormwater sewers, to be cleaned more
frequently, in order to reduce the frequency of
sewer backup.

Opportunities
¢« Ample open space, wetlands, and

its Greenstreets program, NYC DEP has
constructed a bioswale in Mill Basin.®
Repairs to faulty manhole covers and
other openings may decrease the amount
of stormwater that enters the wastewater
sewer system, thereby reducing wastewa-
ter sewer backup.

recreational assets provide an opportu-
nity to implement stormwater capture
measures throughout the Planning Area,
and on a large-enough scale to potentially
provide meaningful stormwater runoff
reduction benefits. Bioswales,° permeable
paving,’ rainwater storage tanks, and wet-
lands restoration can reduce the amount
of rainwater entering stormwater sew-
ers, and thereby reduce backup. These
measures may also lessen the amount
of stormwater that inadvertently enters
wastewater sewers and exacerbates
wastewater sewer backup.

NYC DEP has already begun imple-
menting stormwater capture measures
in the in the Planning Area that the
NYRCR Program may be able to leverage.
This includes their Rain Barrel Giveaway
Program, through which NYC DEP has
distributed rain barrels to homeowners in
Marine Park that capture roof runoff from a
home’s downspout.’ Additionally, through

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Tree Maintenance and Removal

Needs

Residents have reported an extensive need
for tree removal and pruning throughout the
Planning Area, particularly in Mill Basin and
Bergen Beach. Tree roots have lifted sidewalks
and blocked sewers, exacerbating back-up
in Superstorm Sandy’s aftermath and during
heavy rain events. Trees close to vulnerable
overhead power lines resulted in power loss
during Superstorm Sandy, as a result of strong
winds. Additionally, dead and dying trees, a
consequence of saltwater inundation during
Superstorm Sandy, need to be removed to pre-
serve the Community’s appearance and reduce
risk of personal injury or property damage.

   

Local power infrastructure is in need of repair and
hardening.
Opportunities

e Through its Remove and Replant
Program, NYC DPR has surveyed trees
within the Superstorm Sandy inundation
zone and has begun removal of those trees
damaged during the storm. NYC DPR
plans on removing an estimated 10,000
damaged trees, with the goal of replant-
ing them within 12 months of removal.

A Resilient Power Supply

Needs

Many residents and business owners through-
out the Community experienced power
outages during and after Superstorm Sandy.
Residents have reported a need for a more
resilient local power supply, both through
strengthening existing power infrastructure
(e.g., overhead power lines that experienced
wind damage during Superstorm Sandy),
and through increasing power redundancy,
using solar energy and backup generators.
Consistent power is needed in order to ensure
access to lighting, heating and air condition-
ing, perishable food, and cellphone charging
during and after severe weather-related events.

Additionally, vital retailers such as gas stations
and supermarkets require redundant power
supply in order to prevent disruptions to food

and gasoline access.

Opportunities

Con Ed has plans to fortify or bury over-
head power lines in coastal areas of New
York City in order to protect against the
wind damage that caused outages during
Superstorm Sandy.'? Con Ed also owns
and operates substations throughout
the Planning Area that can be fortified to
address vulnerabilities.

Off-the-grid technologies could reduce
demand on the Planning Area’s exist-
ing system and help to prevent power
failures. Technologies including — solar
panels, wind-powered energy, and other
alternative power sources could be lever-
aged to help meet demand and increase
redundancy.

Finally, the several large parking lots for
big-boxretailersinthe Planning Areacould
be outfitted with backup power supply and
provide services like cellphone charging.

Emergency Preparedness and
Response Planning

Needs

Community members have reported several
needs related to emergency preparedness and
response planning. First, during Superstorm
Sandy, residents lacked information on the
locations of vital supplies and resources
Residents have noted that a network of pre-
determined, centralized recovery centers
or meeting zones is essential to a coordinated
response effort. Second, residents have indi-
cated a need for a flood notification system
that identifies the approach of a high tide.
Additionally, community members have cited
inadequate transportation coordination in the
wake of Superstorm Sandy and a need for
greater emergency transportation planning.

Opportunities

¢ There is a wide network of civic and reli-
gious organizations that can distribute
tide-level and other storm information to
resident networks in advance of a storm.
Many of these organizations are located in
large community facilities, which served
as informal gathering spaces in the wake

Assessment of Risk and Needs

21
l-22

of Superstorm Sandy and may be able
to serve as centralized recovery centers
within a more formalized community
network.

The area also benefits from Kings Plaza
Shopping Center, which has a multilevel,
elevated parking structure that did not
flood during Superstorm Sandy and may
serve as a strategic location for informal
response efforts and service delivery,
particularly for the surrounding Mill Basin
community.

Ensured Access to Food and Supplies

Needs

Community members have voiced a need for
backup power and improved coordination in
emergency food and gas supply chain manage-
ment in order to ensure uninterrupted access
to these goods after severe weather-related
events.

Opportunities

¢ Key community and religious centers that
provided food and supplies in the wake of

Assessment of Risk and Needs

Superstorm Sandy can be bolstered with
backup and alternative power supply to
promote continued access to these goods
in the event of supermarket closures.

¢ Food and supply distribution during emer-
gency situations is a larger-scale regional
issue that the City closely examined in
Superstorm Sandy’s wake as part of its
Special Initiative for Rebuilding and
Resiliency (SIRR). Through this effort, the
City of New York has committed to analyz-
ing where breakdowns in the supply chain
occurred during Superstorm Sandy, and
to providing greater planning and coor-
dination with food and utility providers to
prevent such disruptions into the future.

Enhanced Residential Resiliency

Needs

Many residents still have not completely
remediated their homes from Superstorm
Sandy-related flood damage. Residents have
reported lacking the funds to perform repairs
and the information needed to make informed

decisions about home improvements that could
affect flood insurance rates. Additionally, many
community members have reported issues
in obtaining insurance benefits for flooding
related to sewer backup and not surge, and
require both technical assistance as well as
funding toward related repairs.

Opportunities

e There are several citywide organizations
with robust technical assistance and com-
munity outreach programs that present an
opportunity for leveraging and expanding
assistance to the Community.
III. Reconstruction and
Resiliency Strategies
 
Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

The Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Planning Committee (Committee) identified
strategies for enhancing the physical, envi-
ronmental, social, and economic resiliency of
the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Community (Community). Developed by the
Committee and refined by the public at two
Public Engagement Events, these strategies
identify the approach the Community intends
to take in order to address Superstorm Sandy-
related impacts, as well as better prepare for
future severe weather-related events.

The following strategies described provide the
framework for the Proposed Projects put forth
for funding in the Community’s NYRCR Plan,
as well as the Featured Projects and additional
resiliency recommendations for which the Plan
advocates.

The list in this section reflects the Community’s
vision for bolstering and expanding the health,
vitality and sustainability of its neighborhoods.
Feedback from the first Public Engagement
Event on the Community's critical issues,
needs, and opportunities helped inform the
development of a preliminary list of strategies.
At the second Public Engagement Event, res-
idents then provided input and voted on the
list. Meetings were held at different locations
throughout the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront

Planning Area (Planning Area) to acknowledge
and accommodate varying neighborhood
needs and aspirations. The corresponding
Recovery Support Functions (see page II-18)
accompany each of the following strategy
descriptions:

¢ Reduce neighborhood flooding through
stabilizing the coastal edge, discouraging
development at at-risk locations, and mit-
igating any potential negative impacts of
new projects (Infrastructure, Natural and
Cultural Resources)

Improve stormwater and wastewater man-
agement to prevent flooding and back-up
(Infrastructure, Natural and Cultural
Resources)

¢ Make power supply more resilient and
redundant (Infrastructure)

e Enhance emergency preparedness and

response (Community Planning and
Capacity Building, Health and Social
Services)

¢ Improve residential resiliency through edu-
cation, technical assistance, and funding
(Housing)

Proposed and Featured Projects

Proposed Projects are projects proposed
for funding through an NYRCR Planning

Area’s allotment of CDBG-DR funding.

Featured Projects are projects and actions
that the Planning Committee has identified
as important resiliency recommendations
and has analyzed in depth, but has not
proposed for funding through the NYRCR
Program.

Additional Resiliency Recommendations
are projects and actions that the Planning
Committee would like to highlight and that
are not categorized as Proposed Projects or
Featured Projects.

¢ Improve resiliency of commercial corridors
and critical supply chains (Health and
Social Services, Economic Development)

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Hl-1
Il-2

Reduce Neighborhood Flooding
Through Stabilizing the Coastal Edge,
Discouraging Development at
At-Risk Locations, and Mitigating
any Potential Negative Impacts

of New Projects

The shoreline of the Planning Area weaves
along five interconnected basins. During
Superstorm Sandy, the combination of storm
surge and a high tide resulted in waters over-
topping bulkheads and natural shorelines,
with surge inundating neighborhoods from all
basins and reaching as far upland as Avenue N.
Given the exposed shoreline and its low-lying
nature—coupled with the impacts of climate
change, which include rising sea levels and
more frequent and intense coastal storms—the
Planning Area can expect to experience signif-
icant flood events in the future. Coastal pro-
tection measures that take into consideration
both increased risk, as well as how protective
measures can be incorporated into the shore-
line’s existing conditions, will be critical to the
Communhity’s long-term resiliency.

The Committee has considered the feasibility
of various coastal protection approaches, as
well as the challenges facing implementation in
regards to existing conditions of the shoreline.
These include landscape attributes, ownership,

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

and land use. The Committee seeks coastal
protection strategies that are most feasible and
effective for reducing the Planning Area’s flood
risk while maintaining its waterside way of life.
In the long term, the Community would benefit
from coastal protection measures that build
off of existing assets and take advantage of
ongoing plans and studies in the Planning Area.
Foremost among such studies is the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE) East Rockaway
to Rockaway Inlet Reformulation Study (refor-
mulation study). This regional approach to
flood risk mitigation throughout Jamaica Bay
includes consideration of a storm-surge barrier
at Rockaway Inlet and the necessary connect-
ing infrastructure—a measure identified as part
of New York City’s long-term comprehensive
coastal protection plan in A Stronger, More
Resilient New York.' The Committee recognizes
that such measures will require coordination
with City, State, and Federal entities.

An alternative or interim strategy for providing
storm-surge protection for the Community
could include localized approaches. For exam-
ple, tide gates or surge barriers could be placed
at Gerritsen Inlet, Mill Basin, and Paerdegat
Basin, which tie into protective measures in-be-
tween, including berms, levees, or flood walls.

The Committee has also considered a more
strategic coastal protection approach that

targets especially vulnerable areas (for exam-
ple, Bergen Beach and Avenue VU) by construct-
ing protective measures in areas where inunda-
tion was particularly severe during Superstorm
Sandy or is expected to be in the future. Coastal
protection measures must also reduce risk from
more gradual hazards. While the Planning Area
shoreline is not highly susceptible to wave
action, preventing erosion and degradation
will stabilize the shoreline, potentially reducing
entry points for future surge and vulnerability to
sea level rise.

 

Restoration of wetlands and marshes help to strengthen
the coastal edge and provide some protection against
sea level rise.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table III-1: Strategy Table

STRATEGY: Reduce Neighborhood Flooding Through Stabilizing the Coastal Edge, Discouraging Development at At-Risk

Locations, and Mitigating any Potential Negative Impacts of New Projects

 

 

. _ Project Estimated Regional
Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)
Southeast Brooklyn This Proposed Project would develop a study to determine the Proposed Project $500,000 Y
Waterfront Coastal Protection cost and feasibility of coastal protection measures along the
Study Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront shoreline in order to protect the

Community from a severe weather event.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies __III-3
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Ill-4

Improve Stormwater and Wastewater
Management to Prevent Flooding and
Backup

Community residents have indicated that
improving stormwater and wastewater systems
within the Planning Area is crucial to the health
of their neighborhoods. During Superstorm
Sandy, many residents and business owners in
low-lying areas experienced basement flooding
from stormwater runoff, as well as sanitary and
storm sewer backup in some locations. At the
first two Public Engagement Events, community
members also reported experiencing flooding
from backup during regular heavy rain events,
and have speculated that such issues have
worsened since the storm. Both the Committee
and Community members have expressed a
strong desire to address recurring drainage
issues.

In the long term, government agencies could
perform upgrades and improve maintenance
to sewer and stormwater infrastructure, includ-
ing catch basins and sewer lines, in order to
enhance system capacity and reduce block-
ages that may cause backup.

To supplement this, the Committee has

prioritized shorter-term, targeted stormwa-
ter diversion measures in areas particularly

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

vulnerable to sewer backup and street flood-
ing. Measures to reduce stormwater flooding
and backup include the diversion and capture
of stormwater before it enters the sewer—or
floods—low-lying areas in the Community.
Stormwater management measures (e.g., rain
barrels, permeable paving, storage tanks) and
green infrastructure (e.g., bioswales and wet-
lands) can be installed in public open spaces as
well as individual properties.

Additionally, Community members are con-
cerned with decreasing or preventing sewer
backup into homes. Targeted measures to
address storm and sanitary sewer backup into
homes could include the installation of check
valves and proper roof drainage systems on
individual homes. These measures can help
prevent flooding in homes and ensure storm-
water does not overburden the sewer systems.
The Committee also has expressed interest in
leveraging ongoing New York City Department
of Environmental Protection (NYC DEP) infra-
structure programs and projects within the
Planning Area.

 

Bioswales are one of several stormwater capture mech-
anisms that can be deployed in the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area. Corey Burger. ?
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table III-2: Strategy Table

STRATEGY: Improve Stormwater and Wastewater Management to Prevent Flooding and Backup

Project Estimated Regional

Project Name Short Description Category Cost (Y/N)

 

Southeast Brooklyn This Proposed Project would fund: Proposed Project $650,000 Y
Waterfront and Canarsie
Stormwater Study and Pilot e Astudy to examine the feasibility, costs, and benefits for various
Projects stormwater capture and retention projects in the joint NYRCR Planning
Areas of Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront and neighboring Canarsie.

e The implementation of those pilot projects in the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area that were identified in the study as
having the highest feasibility and impact. May include measures such
as bioswales, permeable paving, and improvements in and around
public and open spaces to enhance area stormwater capture capacity.

 

Bergen Beach Stormwater This Proposed Project would construct a stormwater retention/detention Proposed Project $500,000 N
Retention/Detention System wetland within a natural area of southern Bergen Beach on land owned

by New York City Department of Parks and Recreation. This stormwater
retention system would link to City plans to construct a new storm sewer
and outfall along Avenue Y, providing stormwater flooding abatement for a
low-lying, at-risk residential community, while also removing pollutants from
stormwater that may otherwise enter nearby East Mill Basin.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies __III-5
Ill-6

Power outages in the Planning Area, following
Superstorm Sandy, varied in both location
and duration, with some homes losing power
prior to Superstorm Sandy’s arrival and others
experiencing outages after, lasting anywhere
from a day to a week. Power serves as a
necessary resource for emergency response,
providing basic utilities including lights, water
pumps, and refrigeration. Outages interrupted
communication systems, limited access to key
facilities, and impeded recovery efforts in the
following days. This strategy addresses the
need to improve system-level infrastructure
and focuses on backup power and alternative
sources of energy to ensure a redundant and

a

@ wnereade

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

resilient power supply during and following
future weather-related events.

The majority of power outages in the Planning
Area were caused by high winds and downed
trees which damaged overhead wires. To pro-
tect against this in the long term, the Committee
suggests greater protection of overhead ser-
vice lines through tree maintenance and other
methods of hardening and reinforcement, in
addition to the hardening of power substations
prevalent throughout the Planning Area.

In the short term, the Committee prioritized
opportunities for backup and alternative forms
of energy generation, creating a redundant
and resilient power system in the Community.
This could be achieved through increasing the

   

= aS

Large parking lots in the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area serve as promising venues for the installation of alternative power infrastructure.

supply of fixed backup generators, especially
at Community assets that provide key services
(e.g., community organizations and volunteer
ambulance services). The Committee also
recognizes the importance of alternative forms
of energy generation for creating redundant
energy sources. Alternative forms of power,
including solar and wind, generate energy and
feed into the existing grid, while still functioning
in the event of a larger grid failure. Several large
and privately-owned parking lots for big-box
retailers and shopping centers throughout the
Planning Area could act as central locations
throughout the Community to install acces-
sible resilient lighting and cellphone charging
stations.

 

Sora

ad
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table III-3: Strategy Table

STRATEGY: Make the Power Supply More Resilient and Redundant

 

 

. . oe Project Estimated Regional
Project Name Short Description | 3
Category Cost (Y/N)
Alternative Power Hotspot This Proposed Project would install alternative energy infrastructure Proposed Project $300,000 N

along critical thoroughfares throughout the NYRCR Planning Area

to serve as pilots for similar interventions in the neighborhood.
Alternative power hotspots would provide a reliable source of lighting
in the event of an outage and create a space where residents could
meet and power mobile devices, while also accessing food and other
services nearby. In locating the hotspots, the project would leverage
the large number of big-box retailers and associated street-facing
parking lots within the NYRCR Planning Area.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies __III-7
Ill-8

Enhance Emergency Preparedness
and Response

Emergency preparedness and response in the
Planning Area—before and after Superstorm
Sandy—was marked by both a lack of coordi-
nation among response agencies and organi-
zations, and a lack of information on existing
resources and procedures among residents.

Residents report not knowing whether
they needed to evacuate and where to go.
Discrepancy between Federal and New York
City assessments of flood risk and evacuation
meant that few residents evacuated. Even
though sections of the Planning Area, including
Mill Basin and Bergen Beach, had been iden-
tified as being of moderate to high flood risk
in Federal Emergency Management Agency’s
(FEMA) Special Flood Hazard Area maps,
the City’s hurricane evacuation maps labeled
these neighborhoods as part of Hurricane
Evacuation Zone B, which was not issued a
mandatory evacuation order in advance of the
storm. Additionally, for those who evacuated
or wanted to evacuate, many thought that the
closest City-designated overnight emergency
shelter for the area was at Brooklyn College,
when in actuality, it was at FDR High School.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Both of these shelters are considerably far, with
FDR High School located about four miles west
of the Planning Area.

New York City and Federal emergency response
efforts concentrated on other hard-hit areas in
Brooklyn and Queens, leaving residents and
business owners to fend for themselves in
accessing supplies and aid. To fill this gap, local
civic groups and religious institutions stepped
in to provide information and supplies, as did
local shopping centers. Religious organiza-
tions, including St. Bernard of Clairvaux, pro-
vided food and clothing to area residents, and
opened their school’s classes to students from
hard-hit areas like the Rockaway Peninsula. The
Kings Plaza Shopping Center, one of the larg-
est indoor shopping centers in Brooklyn, and
equipped with an independent power source,
remained open during the storm, offering both
complimentary charging stations, as well as
free parking in their elevated, covered lot. This
provided critical protection from flooding and
falling trees for many car owners. Additionally,
the shopping center, centrally located between
Bergen Beach and Mill Basin, hosted repre-
sentatives from New York City’s Department
of Finance to answer housing and insurance
questions in the storm’s aftermath.

In order to enhance preparedness and response
in the Community, and thereby promote lon-
ger-term recovery, these informal centers
can be formalized into the development of a
network of local recovery centers. Centralized
spaces would offer food, water, emergency
supplies, and access to power. To ensure that
critical health and social service providers are
able to provide key emergency services, the
Committee is also interested in pursuing fund-
ing programs to help these organizations make
key facility upgrades to enhance their resiliency.

To provide the critical information that so many
community members needed before, during,
and after Superstorm Sandy, the Committee
is also interested in funding informational
resources, such as a printed guide and online
hub. These resources could disseminate vital
information around where to go to access
supplies and food, and how to access help for
vulnerable populations.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table III-4: Strategy Table

STRATEGY: Enhance Emergency Preparedness and Response

Project Name

Short Description

Project
Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional
(Y/N)

 

Emergency
Preparedness
Education Program

This Proposed Project would develop a printed local emergency preparedness
and response guide, an online information hub, and educational programming
to help inform community members of what to do before, during, and after a
storm event. All resources created through the program would leverage material
provided by the New York City Office of Emergency Management (NYC OEM)
and aim to provide locally-tailored information to residents on how to prepare
before a storm hits, evacuation procedures, and where to obtain supplies and
information in the aftermath of a storm.

Proposed Project

$100,000

N

 

Recovery Community
Centers

This Proposed Project would fund the development of Recovery Community
Centers, to be based out of existing community facilities and organizations.
Centers would facilitate disaster preparedness coordination across community-
based organizations (CBOs) in advance of an event. Centers could provide
power, information, and supplies for residents, among other services. These
would be located outside of the floodplain, have a parking lot, and be compliant
with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

Proposed Project

$1,500,000

 

Critical Facility
Upgrades Program

 

 

This Proposed Project would help health and social services providers to make
critical building-level capital improvements. Providers could include medical
clinics, hospitals, voluntary emergency/ambulance organizations, and senior
living facilities, among others. This would help to prevent disruption in essential
health and social services due to power outages or structural damages in the
event of a storm.

 

Proposed Project

 

$1,000,000

 

 

 

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Il-9
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Ill-10

W)

Improve Resiliency of Commercial
Corridors and Critical Supplies Chain

In the immediate aftermath of Superstorm
Sandy, the Planning Area suffered sporadic
power loss, resulting in businesses and resi-
dents not being able to access essential sup-
plies, including food and gas. In addition to
losing power, some homes and businesses also
experienced flooding and property damage.
Vehicular access was constrained as primary
access routes in the Planning Area, like Flatbush
Avenue, experienced severe congestion due
to emergency vehicles and residents using
this corridor to travel to and from the hard-hit
Rockaway Peninsula.

Commercial businesses located in low-lying
areas near the waterfront, such as along Avenue
U, remain vulnerable to storm surge and sewer
backup. Grocery stores serving the area expe-
rienced disruptions due to the storm. Met Food,
located on Quentin Road in Marine Park, exper-
ienced power loss, and the Key Food on Avenue
U, which backs up against East Mill Basin, was
flooded. While many of these commercial strips
and stores have bounced back since Super-
storm Sandy, Committee members have ob-
served that some retail sites have not reopened.

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

   

The Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Committee is interested in enhancing the resiliency of critical
retailers like gas stations, in order to ensure continuity of service during severe weather-related events.

In order to improve coordination of emergency
food and gas supply chain management after
severe weather-related events, the City and
State should continue to pursue efforts to
correct bottlenecks. At a more local level,
businesses that provide food and construction
supplies (the Planning Area is home to both a
Home Depot and a Lowe’s) can be bolstered
with backup and alternative power to enable
continued access to these critical goods. Solar-
powered cellphone charging stations could be
installed in shopping centers and coupled with

measures that reduce the risk of flooding while
improving the overall aesthetics and safety of
the area, including resilient streetscaping and
lighting.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table III-5: Strategy Table

STRATEGY: Improve Resiliency of Commercial Corridors and Critical Supplies Chain

 

Regional

(Y/N)

Recommendation Name Short Description Cost Estimate

 

Expand the FUEL NY Initiative Expand the Fuel NY law and initiative to extend to gas stations located N/A (legislative measure) Y
one mile from evacuation routes and highway exits, in order to include
more critical gas stations in the floodplain.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies III-11
Improve Residential Resiliency
through Education, Technical
Assistance, and Funding Construct new mechanical closet and relocate

mechanical and electrical equipment to above
design flood elevation

Optional: Add new partial level
by extending roofline back

 

   
     
 
 
    
   

 

 

 

 

Relocate electric meters to
above design flood elevation

Housing throughout the Planning Area experi-
enced widespread damage from Superstorm
Sandy, mostly as a result of basement flood-
ing—from both surge and stormwater and
wastewater backup. In the aftermath of the
storm, many homeowners struggled to reme-
diate this water damage, due to a lack of infor-
mation around the proper repairs to undertake.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reconfigure water and
natural gas piping

 

 

 

 

 

Use only flood damage-
resistant materials below
first floor

   

 

 

 

Residents are interested in improving the
resiliency of their homes through enhancing
individualized education and technical assis-

i : There are a variety of measures a homeowner can undertake to enhance their home’s resiliency. Arup and Architec-
tance around resiliency upgrades. This could ture Research Office, report for FEMA and the NYC Housing Recovery Office.
be achieved through resiliency audits of homes,

specifically around flooding, in order to provide
homeowners with an assessment of risk and a
list of repairs to mitigate that risk. This could
include measures like installing check valves,
and dry floodproofing basement spaces to
make them watertight.

IIl-12 Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table III-6: Strategy Table

STRATEGY: Improve Residential Resiliency through Education, Technical Assistance, and Funding

 

 

. _ Project Estimated Regional
Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)
Homeowner Assistance This Proposed Project would aim to enhance the resiliency of Proposed Project $2,000,000 N
Program homes throughout the Planning Area and reduce homeowner risk,

geared at both general homeowners and high-risk homeowners
in the 100-year floodplain. This project would have three potential
components:

e Educational programming on retrofitting for resiliency, flood
insurance, and other financial questions, for both general and
high-risk homeowners

e¢ One-on-one counseling for both general and high-risk
homeowners, to assess risk and resiliency options

e Audits for high-risk homeowners, performed by specialized
engineers, in order to recommend specific measures to
enhance home resiliency.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies III-13
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

The Kings Plaza Shopping Center has a covered parking garage that provided refuge for cars during Superstorm Sandy.

IIl-14 Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies
IV. Implementation—Project
Profiles
 

 

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Projects Overview

The Proposed and Featured Projects in the
following pages are those projects that the
Committee, with input from the public, has
prioritized for funding with its CDBG-DR allot-
ment of up to $4.38 million. The Committee
developed these projects after a seven-month-
long iterative process of identifying critical
issues, needs, opportunities, and strategies
for addressing needs. The main strategies that
the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Planning Committee (Committee) devised, with
feedback from the public, focused on coastal
protection; drainage and stormwater manage-
ment; power; emergency preparedness and
response; economic and supply chain resil-
iency; and residential resiliency. The projects
that emerged from this process are those which
best met major Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
NYRCR Community (Community) needs while
weighing feasibility, funding, as well as risk
reduction and cost-benefit concerns.

This section describes each project and the
potential costs and benefits that would result
from each project if funded. In addition to pre-
liminary cost estimates, the project profiles
discuss the projects’ potential benefits:

¢ Health and social benefits

e Economic benefits

 

Coastal protection was a major priority in project development for the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Plan-
ning Committee.

e Environmental benefits
e Ability to reduce future risk

Finally, the descriptions delineate relevant
implementation factors, including the likely
timeline and the governmental jurisdiction for
implementation of each project.

Implementation—Project Profiles

IV-1
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Project List

Iv-4
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Coastal Protection Study

 

IvV-14

Bergen Beach Stormwater Retention/Detention System

 

IV-2

Implementation—Project Profiles

Iv-8

Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront and Canarsie Stormwater Study
and Pilot Projects

zi
tetrad
1s 83
1s 183
S
E46 8T
E64
e6r st

AVL . ee

z
x
E62 8T

is ves
13 123
ise
onwesson
2
UTICA AY
Es68T
EST st
*

istes
ne

+ » & ve
& & »
Re NOP we % Rt
& *, SOG, ee
SEN Ve KS 1 oe
Ss eee 1 a, a®
< % RAS 4 %
% S
& te
Quentin RE &

Se
XK
m & .
WE Ble &

IV-20
Alternative Power Hotspot

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown,

IV-26
Emergency Preparedness Education Program

 

IV-36

 

Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Island—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-30
Recovery Community Centers

SAB. voy Trt utheran church: Serge SenbarlcCongregation )

CROTTERS ARS

a NR. Meraz Yodo pay ar

Fr gegen RDN NN eZ A

HEN ee Sab
TLL Os. se si Zz

\ ee \

ANS
realy Ms
er ae

 
  
  
  

 
    
    

  

 

 

Iv-40
Homeowner Assistance Program

 

Implementation—Project Profiles 1V-3
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Coastal Protection Study

Proposed Project

STRATEGY:

Reduce neighborhood flooding
through stabilizing the coastal
edge, discouraging develop-
ment at at-risk locations, and
mitigating any potential negative
impacts of new projects

Recovery Support Functions

Infrastructure

Natural & Cultural
Resources

Cost

$500,000

Timeline (in years)

e
0 1 2 3

Implementation—Project Profiles

There are several vulnerable points where flood waters entered into the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area (Planning Area). A feasibility study for protection of the
Planning Area shoreline and basins could supplement New York City, New York State,

and Federal agency efforts to create a comprehensive coastal protection strategy for the
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Community (Community).

Project Description

With five creeks and basins located within the
Planning Area (Marine Park Creek, Mill Creek,
Mill Basin, East Mill Basin, and Paerdegat
Basin), the potential storm surge entry points
are plentiful and varied. Storm surge from each
of these five creeks and basins affected the
Community during Superstorm Sandy, and the
risk of a similar storm surge event remains. This
project would develop a study to determine the
cost and feasibility of coastal protection mea-
sures along the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
shoreline in order to protect the Community
from a severe weather event. The scope of this
study would include:

e Assessment of populated areas of the
Planning Area that are most vulnerable to,
and at risk from, coastal flooding, such as
the neighborhoods of Bergen Beach and
Mill Island;

¢ Comparison of potential alternatives,

including berming, flood walls, and
floodgates;

Feasibility and cost-benefit analysis of
identified alternatives;

¢ Conceptual design of potential coastal
protection measures;

¢ Community engagement to ensure that
developed public alternatives are respon-
sive to local needs and priorities; and

e Agency coordination to ensure synergy
with existing plans and adequate adher-
enceto City, State, and Federalregulations.

The study would prioritize strategies that
provide protection to high-risk residential
neighborhoods while not negatively impacting
adjacent areas. It also would prioritize strate-
gies that complement existing Jamaica Bay
planning efforts, by first examining coastal
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-1: FEMA Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)

 
  

 
  
 
   
 
   
   

239/ST
ALBANY

BLENWOOD RD

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area

Ae
ble
g 6 bree Cc] Planning Area
ay jul & 22
ey
mm i %
yi 'b ® imi
ys iF i FEMA Preliminary FIRM Flood Zone
AAS A YA 4 fa
E 4 | | VE zone (waves > 3’)
a
meee
i 5. a x | 100 year floodplain (1% annual chance of flooding)
Blak 4
a

Es.
x CL] 500 year floodplain (0.2% annual chance of flooding)

Ke
ana SON

= = o= Limit of moderate wave action (1'-3' waves)

 

Source:
FEMA Preliminary FIRM; Basemap: New York City Department of City Planning, MAPPluto
v13.1; Buildings; Street Genterlines

NEW JERSEY

  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
   

    
   

oe

ol

Ets

 

 

 

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-5
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-6

protection studies and projects in development
by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
and the City of New York. Enriched by discus-
sions with these entities, the plan then would
propose Planning Area-specific strategies that
complement Jamaica Bay efforts.

Cost Estimate

$500,000

This conceptual-level cost estimate is based
on planning and engineering experience with
projects of similar scope and scale, and would
likely vary as the project is further developed
and refined. This cost estimate covers the
scope of analysis described above and does
not include physical construction costs for any
projects proposed in the study.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Economic Benefits

This study could lead to the construction
of coastal protection interventions for the
Planning Area, which would help minimize
economic losses, including losses to public
facilities and private homes and businesses
located adjacent to creeks and basins. Beyond
damage to facilities and disruption of economic
activity, the Community also faces rising flood
insurance costs for the approximately 3,000
buildings within the ever-expanding 100-year
floodplain. These rising costs could create

Implementation—Project Profiles

economic hardships for residents and business
owners. Addressing the Community’s flood risk
is critical to mitigating the impact of these rising
costs and promoting long-term economic sta-
bility for residents.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Neighborhood-wide protection from future
coastal storm surge events is potentially costly
for the neighborhood, with a built construction
cost well beyond the Community’s NYRCR
Community Development Block Grant-Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) allotment. Still, physical
flood risk reduction, implemented in a manner
that respects existing community assets and
goals and builds upon ongoing planning efforts,
is a key priority for the Community.

While a study on physical risk reduction cannot
be evaluated, the need for such an investment
can be evaluated based on the magnitude of
the risk to the Community.

Inthe Planning Area’s 100-year floodplain, there
are approximately 3,000 residential buildings,
which include 4,400 residential units. Many of
these units are of masonry or brick construction
and/or have basements, making building-level
flood adaptation, such as elevation, a challenge.
While there are ongoing flood risk reduction
and coastal protection planning efforts around

Jamaica Bay, none are targeted specifically
to the needs and priorities of the Community.
Without a study, there is no clear understanding
of potential flood protection options. A coastal
protection strategy for the Planning Area is
less likely to gain traction with prospective
implementation and funding partners due to
uncertainties surrounding its cost and feasi-
bility. If the cost of the study ($500,000) were
distributed among the 3,000 buildings within
the 100-year floodplain, the cost per building
would be only $167. The proposed study would
be an important investment to ensure that plan-
ning for long-term physical flood risk reduction
continues.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

While the study itself would not reduce risk
to the Community's assets and population, it
would lay the groundwork for strategies with
high potential for risk reduction in the future.
With the potential to reduce flood risk to 3,000
buildings in the 100-year floodplain and the
34 assets identified by the Community that
are in high- or extreme-risk areas, the study
would be a key next step toward a compre-
hensive coastal flood mitigation strategy. The
study would also reduce the uncertainty in the
effectiveness, feasibility, and cost of long-term
flood risk reduction, putting forth strategies
that would lower the risk score for every highly
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

valued Community asset within the Planning

Area. While the study would develop coastal Jurisdiction

protection strategies to reduce the risk of | As a study, this project would not have any
coastal flooding from a 100- or 500-year storm, jurisdictional requirements. However, the plan
no coastal protection strategy will completely would require direct coordination with the
eliminate risk of coastal flooding. Residual risk agencies indicated above.

remains, particularly as storms strengthen and

sea level rises gradually over time.

Timeframe

The timeframe for completion of the study
would be 9 to 12 months from the commence-
ment of the study.

Regulatory Requirements

While there would be no regulatory review
requirements for the feasibility study, it would
require coordination with a variety of City, State
and Federal agencies. Most notably, coordina-
tion with the USACE’s ongoing Rockaway Inlet
to East Rockaway Inlet Reformulation Study
would be critical since the study’s focus is on
flood risk reduction strategies for the Rockaway
Peninsula and all of Jamaica Bay. The project
would also require coordination with the U.S.
National Park Service (NPS), USACE, New
York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYS DEC), New York State
Department of State (NYS DOS), and the New
York City Office of Recovery and Resiliency
(NYC ORR).

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-7
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront and Canarsie
Stormwater Study and Pilot Projects

Proposed Project

STRATEGY:

Improve stormwater and
wastewater management
to prevent flooding and
sewer back-up

Recovery Support Functions

Infrastructure

Natural & Cultural
Resources

Cost

$650,000

Timeline (in years)

IV-8 Implementation—Project Profiles

During Superstorm Sandy, stormwater sewers overflowed throughout the Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area (Planning Area), inundating streets and homes.
Residents are still recovering from the effects of stormwater basement flooding, struggling
to cover the costs of mold remediation and to install check valves and other measures to
reduce backup flooding in the future. This project would help mitigate street stormwater
flooding—and thus, basement flooding —through implementing pilot projects to capture
excess stormwater that could otherwise overwhelm the sewer system and cause backup.

Project Description

This two-phase project first would fund a study
to examine the feasibility, costs, and benefits
for various stormwater capture and retention
projects in the neighboring Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront and Canarsie NYRCR_ Planning
Areas, to combat against stormwater runoff
that inundated streets and homes during
Superstorm Sandy and continues to be a
problem during heavy rain events. A second
phase then would implement recommended
scalable pilot projects.

The interest among both the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront and Canarsie Planning Committees
for this project emphasizes the need both for
such a study and for pilot projects to address
stormwater management issues in the area.

Phase 1: Stormwater management and
mitigation study

Phase 1 of this project would include a study
of existing stormwater and groundwater issues
facing both the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
and Canarsie Planning Areas, as well as of
potential stormwater capture and retention
strategies to be applied within the Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area. This, first,
would entail identifying areas of highest need,
such as the intersection of Royce Avenue and
Avenue T in Bergen Beach and East 57th Street
and Avenue T in Mill Basin. The study then
would examine the feasibility, costs, benefits,
and impacts of potential stormwater capture
measures; develop proposals for governmental
interventions to incentivize stormwater capture
and retention; and suggest pilot projects.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-2: Locations of Stormwater Flooding Complaints (via 311)

a Stormwater Flooding Locations
Identified by Comittee

311 Street Flooding Complaints for 1 Year
(07/01/13-07/01/14)

Street Flooding (237 complaints)
® Street Flooding Complaint
Low volume

High volume

 

NYC 311 Complaints
New York City Department of City Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

Deep Creek

Dead Horse
Bay

 

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-9
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IvV-10

 

A bioswale absorbs excess stormwater from the street.

Chris Hamby.'

Implementation—Project Profiles

Phase 2: Stormwater mitigation pilot projects
Phase 2 would implement targeted piloting
strategies that are identified in Phase 1 as
having the highest feasibility and impact. This
may include the following:

e Measures such as bioswales and perme-
able paving (or other surface treatments) in
areas with poor drainage and nonporous
surfaces; and

e Improvements in and around public and
open spaces to enhance area stormwater
capture capacity and strengthen the resil-
iency of community assets.

This phase would give additional consideration
to existing information on groundwater tables
and would conduct borings on key vulnerable
locations wherever groundwater information is
unavailable.

Cost Estimate

$650,000

The Phase 1 study estimated cost is approxi-
mately $300,000, based on prior studies similar
in scope and intent. Since this project would
be jointly pursued by the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront and Canarsie NYRCR_ Planning
Committees, half of this cost ($150,000)
would be covered by the Southeast Brooklyn

Waterfront Planning Committee’s allotment
and the other half by the Canarsie Planning
Committee’s allotment. This would fund a study
of the feasibility and applicability noted earlier
and determine if and how stormwater capture
and retention strategies would be applied
within each Planning Area.

For Phase 2, the scalable cost of a typical
green infrastructure stormwater capture
measure is valued at approximately $25,000.
The Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning
Committee envisions 20 of these measures
(.e., four per Planning Area neighborhood),
implemented within at-risk areas in each
Planning Area neighborhood to best evaluate
effectiveness. Based on these considerations,
a preliminary cost estimate for Phase 2 pilot
projects is $500,000, bringing the total project
cost to approximately $650,000.

This cost estimate is based on engineering
experience with projects of similar scope and
scale, and would likely vary as the project is
further developed and refined.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Economic Benefits

This project is expected to produce modest
economic benefits, including three full-time
equivalent construction jobs associated with
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

the implementation of stormwater capture
measures in Phase 2.? The implementation of
green infrastructure projects along commercial
corridors also has the potential to enhance the
resiliency of local businesses through reducing
street flooding and promoting beautification.

Environmental Benefits

While this project is expected to have modest
environmental benefits in the short term, it
could pave the way for a more comprehensive
strategy for addressing Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront’s stormwater flooding issues,
resulting in better water quality in Jamaica Bay
and its tributaries. A long-term stormwater
management strategy—particularly one that
leverages existing open park space and nat-
ural areas—would enhance and protect each
Planning Area’s natural environment.

The majority of the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront and Canarsie Planning Areas are
served by separated sewer systems. Rather
than being piped to wastewater treatment
plants, stormwater is generally discharged
without treatment through storm sewers to
surrounding waterbodies. To date, the focus
of New York City’s use of green infrastructure
for stormwater management has been on
reducing runoff into combined sewer systems
and reducing combined sewer overflow (CSO)

events. In areas with separated sewers, runoff
from roads and other impervious surfaces
carries many potential water pollutants. By
capturing and filtering runoff before it enters
the stormwater system, green infrastructure
can improve the quality of the water entering
surrounding waterbodies, thereby enhancing
overall water quality. The use of native plants in
green infrastructure projects can also provide
urban habitat for birds and insects.

Health and Social Benefits

This project would benefit property owners who
currently have to rely on their own financial and
technical resources to address the damage
and disruption caused by direct stormwater
runoff. Stormwater management practices may
also mitigate wastewater backup concerns by
reducing stormwater infiltration into wastewater
sewers, creating an important health benefit for
those who experience wastewater backup in
the basements of their homes and businesses.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The proposed stormwater capture pilot proj-
ects would address stormwater flooding at
multiple at-risk locations throughout both
communities. The immediate costs of storm-
water flooding, particularly on streets, include
potential flooding and damage to adjacent pri-
vate properties, as well as the additional time

and maintenance required of City agencies to
respond to the problem and address damage.
Over time, these represent serious disruptions
in basic community activities for residents,
business owners, and employees.

According to an analysis by the New York
City Comptroller for the 2012 Fiscal Year, 318
of the property damage claims, caused by
sewer overflow and filed against the City, came
from Brooklyn’s Community District 18, which
includes the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
Planning Area neighborhoods of Mill Basin,
and Bergen Beach, in addition to Canarsie.*
These accounted for 28% of the 1,168 map-
pable claims, representing more than any other
Community District in the city. While most
claims do not have dollar values assigned to
them, available values typically range between
$250 and $5,000, which represents a cost
to both the City and property owners. As an
approximation, if each claim is valued at $5,000,
this represents $1.6 million in damages by
sewer overflow to properties within Community
District 18.

In addition to the project’s primary intended
benefits of reducing street flooding and
sewer backup, it may also offer potential
water quality benefits by diverting stormwater
runoff that would otherwise enter surrounding

Implementation—Project Profiles

IV-11
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-12

waterbodies. New York State and New York
City are currently investing over $100 million
through 2020 in long-term control plans to
improve water quality in Jamaica Bay. These
interventions may offset or delay costs of
other water quality investments by diverting
direct runoff and enhancing the water quality of
Jamaica Bay and its tributaries. The reasonably
small investment recommended for this project,
in relation to those proposed by the City to
address water quality, stormwater flooding and
sewer backup, suggests that this project would
be a beneficial and cost-effective investment.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

Pilot projects implemented through Phase 2
are anticipated to provide a reduction in risk
of flooding from heavy rain events within the
localized area where they are implemented.
The degree to which these measures mitigate
localized flooding would depend largely on the
size of the catchment area, quantity of rainfall,
and in the case of bioswales, the depth to high
groundwater and soil types. A sense of the
magnitude of the issue—and thus, potential for
risk reduction—is conveyed by the following
statistics:

e The four specific locations identified

by the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
Community that experience regular

Implementation—Project Profiles

reoccurring flooding; and

e The 237 complaints to 311 regarding street
flooding that were logged in 2013.

Should the pilot projects prove effective, this
project could pave the way for a large-scale
stormwater strategy in Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront, reducing the risk of street flooding
to at-risk areas within the overall Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area. Depending
on their locations, pilot projects would lower the
risk scores of any nearby community assets by
lessening their vulnerability to street flooding.
This risk score reduction is likely to be minimal,
as pilot projects would be designed to mitigate
street flooding from stormwater overflow and
not to provide meaningful protection against
coastal storm surge.

Timeframe

Once the implementing entity has been deter-
mined, Phase 1 of this project could begin within
6 months, while Phase 2 would take anywhere
from 3-5 years, depending on the scope of the
projects identified in Phase 1 and the identifica-
tion of appropriate partners.

Regulatory Requirements
While the Phase 1 study would not have any
regulatory requirements, the stormwater capture

and retention projects identified for implemen-
tation during Phase 2 would require review and
approval of agencies including the New York
City Department of Environmental Protection
(NYC DEP) New York City Department of
Transportation (NYC DOT), and New York City
Department of Parks and Recreation (NYC DPR).

Jurisdiction

Jurisdiction over this project’s proposed initia-
tives would depend on the types of initiatives
implemented in Phase 2. Proposed improve-
ments to street infrastructure and parks could
involve NYC DEP, NYC DOT, and NYC DPR.
 

A bioswale absorbs excess stormwater from the street. Steven Vance.*

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-13
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Bergen Beach Stormwater Retention/Detention System

Proposed Project

STRATEGY:

Improve stormwater and
wastewater management
to prevent flooding and
sewer back-up

Recovery Support Functions

Infrastructure

Natural & Cultural
Resources

Cost

$500,000

Timeline (in years)

IV-14 Implementation—Project Profiles

After Superstorm Sandy, the homes along Avenue Y in Bergen Beach were surrounded by
standing stormwater runoff for two days, preventing residents from accessing their homes
and flooding many of their basements. Due to a lack of stormwater infrastructure along
Avenue Y, these homes remain at risk of similar damage during future storm events. This
project proposes the construction of a stormwater retention/detention system within a
naturalized park area in southern Bergen Beach, tying into New York City plans to construct
new storm sewers and an associated outfall in the area.

Project Description

This project would construct astormwater reten-
tion/detention system within a natural wetland
area of Bergen Beach, on land owned by New
York City Department of Parks and Recreation
(NYC DPR). This stormwater retention/deten-
tion system would link to City plans to construct
a new storm sewer and outfall along Avenue Y,
providing stormwater flooding abatement for a
low-lying, at-risk residential community, while
also removing pollutants from stormwater that
may otherwise enter nearby East Mill Basin. By
combining grey and green infrastructure, the
project specifically would mitigate stormwater
runoff in an area that recurrently experiences
this issue.

This project would lessen street flooding that
affects homes along Avenue Y that do not have
nearby catch basins in the street, as well as

homes along the low-lying southern portions
of Bergen Avenue, East 74th Street, East 73rd
Street, and East 72nd Street, among other
nearby areas.

This stormwater retention system may also
be employed in similar natural or underuti-
lized areas throughout the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area (Planning
Area). Some potential locations where a similar
project may be replicated include:

e Parkland south of Avenue U between East
33rd and East 36th Streets; and

e Underutilized property on the southwest
corner of the Avenue U and Mill Avenue

intersection.

While further study would be required to
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

The Bergen Beach stormwater retention/detention system would entail the construction of a wetland to help absorb excess stormwater off of Avenue Y.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-15

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-16

  

>»
es

determine the feasibility and permission of
constructing a stormwater retention/detention
system in any of these three locations, these
areas remain underutilized and are in close
proximity to where the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NYRCR Community (Community)
reported stormwater flooding, making them
strong initial candidates for this type of
intervention.

Cost Estimate

$500,000

While the sewer infrastructure component
of this project would cost upwards of $10

Implementation—Project Profiles

 

Existing conditions at Avenue Y and East 70th St. Map Data: Google.

million, the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
NYRCR_ Planning Committee (Committee)
has elected to allot $500,000 of funding (6%
of total cost) toward project implementation.

The remainder of the project cost would be cov-
ered by the City, leveraging the City’s existing
capital funding. Without the Committee’s con-
tribution, the City likely would design this project
to the base standards of stormwater sewer
construction in New York City, which includes
the direct outflow of stormwater into East Mill
Basin and Jamaica Bay. This project adds a
green infrastructure element to the project,

which would carry water quality benefits.

This cost estimate is based on engineer expe-
rience with projects of similar scope and scale,
and would likely vary as the project is further
developed and refined.

This cost estimate will also vary depending on
the size and type of the stormwater retention/
detention system. This cost includes neither the
initial study required to determine the feasibility
of the project nor design and construction.
Maintenance is not included in the cost.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-3: Bergen Beach Stormwater Retention/Detention System Site Plan

“% 4 . a ,
hee |

Sy a J.
‘Sy $ 23 Bey nyais Fee
Lin eo a CATCHMENT AREA. wie
mK -

Pye Xo:
: an
INFLOW

10S) 27 Ne
WEIR WALL

vy ~
SN“, Se HABITAT ISLAND
opt \. a WATER STORAGE
Tbe e
x A“ Ah, WETLAND
ir ae = be
. 3 ,
es, Sere 0) 7h KE
A oy 4 ¥ rx

j
~<a POTENTIAL LOCATION
OF NEW OUTFALL

 

Se Cty POTENTIAL LOCATION
OF NEW STORM SEWER

100 FEET

 

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-17

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-18

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Economic Benefits

This project is expected to produce meaningful
economic benefits, including 30 full-time equiv-
alent construction jobs. A reduction in street
flooding in the southern portion of Bergen
Beach additionally could lessen flood damage
experienced by area homeowners, helping to
protect residential assets and promote lon-
ger-term neighborhood economic vitality.

Environmental Benefits

The project would provide environmental ben-
efits by eliminating nuisance local ponding and
by improving the water quality of nearby East
Mill Basin, consequently benefiting the water
quality of the larger Jamaica Bay. The system
would achieve this by removing pollutants, such
as those found in sediment from stormwater
runoff before it enters the basin. This project
may also expand on its water quality benefits
if sized to capture stormwater runoff from the
neighboring Belt Parkway. Depending on the
design of the stormwater retention system, this
project also has the potential to increase biodi-
versity by introducing new target ecosystems.

Health and Social Benefits

This project would benefit residents of southern
Bergen Beach who currently use their own funds
and resources to address stormwater flooding,

Implementation—Project Profiles

particularly when it affects the basements of
their properties. In the long term, should City
agencies replicate this system elsewhere in the
Planning Area, stormwater management prac-
tices could also mitigate wastewater backup
concerns by reducing stormwater infiltration
into wastewater sewers, creating an important
health benefit for those who experience waste-
water backup in the basements of their homes
and businesses.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The Committee’s allotment toward this project
is intended to contribute a relatively small
amount of Community Development Block
Grant— Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding
to a larger City capital project with the intention
that the project would carry greater community
benefits and occur within a shorter timeframe
than it may otherwise. The immediate costs
of stormwater flooding, particularly on streets,
include potential flooding and damage to adja-
cent private properties, as well as the additional
time and maintenance required of City agencies
torespond to the problem and address damage.
Over time, these represent serious disruptions
in basic community activities for residents,
business owners, and employees.

This project would provide stormwater capture
benefit for approximately 12 acres of southern

Bergen Beach, comprising 60 residential
buildings within the proposed catchment area.
Damage to these buildings caused by storm-
water flooding may cost upwards of $5,000 per
home. While the Committee’s contribution of
$500,000 to this project amounts to $8,300 per
home, this cost includes the area’s daily storm-
water capture needs weighed against capture
needs specific to a 50- or 100-year rainfall. The
constructed wetland component of this project
could reduce the costs of traditional grey infra-
structure by allowing street runoff to discharge
directly into the wetland, precluding the need
for the construction of piping.

In addition to the primary intended benefits of
the project to reduce street flooding and sewer
backup, the significant water quality benefits
derived from diverting stormwater that would
have otherwise discharged into surrounding
water bodies through a new outtall is important
to consider. New York State and New York City
are investing over $100 million through 2020 in
long-term control plans to improve water quality
in Jamaica Bay. These interventions may offset
or delay costs of other water quality investments
by diverting direct runoff and enhancing the
water quality of the Bay and its tributaries. The
reasonably small investment recommended for
this project in relation to those of the City to
address water quality, stormwater flooding, and
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

sewer backup suggests this project would be a
beneficial and cost-effective investment.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

If feasible, this project would drastically reduce
the risk of street flooding from stormwater over-
flow during heavy rain events for approximately
60 residential properties and 12 acres of land
within southern Bergen Beach, reducing their
vulnerability and therefore the risk score for
those homes within the high risk area along
Avenue Y. This project could also reduce the
risk of street flooding for more northern areas
of the Bergen Beach neighborhood (north of
Avenue X) should the project include a means
of pumping or channeling stormwater runoff
from those areas into the area of the system.
While this project has the potential to capture
stormwater from up to a 100-year rainfall event,
residual risk of stormwater street flooding
remains, depending particularly on the catch-
ment area and the capacity of the retention
system, among other factors.

Timeframe

Once the implementing entity has been deter-
mined, this project could begin within a year and
6 months, with final construction completed in
around 3-5 years, depending on the scope of
the project.

Regulatory Requirements

This project would require the direct review and
approval of the New York City Department of
Environmental Protection (NYC DEP) and New
York City Department of Parks and Recreation
(NYC DPR). Additional input would be required
from the New York City Department of
Transportation. Since the project occurs within
an existing wetland area, the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation
(NYS DEC) would also need to approve final
construction of this project.

Jurisdiction

This project would be located in Brooklyn, New
York, and as such, would fall under the jurisdic-
tion of New York City laws. This project builds
off of an existing project led by New York City
Department of Transportation in partnership
with the NYC DEP. The green infrastructure
component of this project occurs within NYC
DPR property. As such, this project falls pri-
marily within the jurisdiction of these three City
agencies. Given that this project affects wet-
lands and water quality within Jamaica Bay, it
must also meet the jurisdictional requirements
of NYS DEC.

Implementation—Project Profiles

IV-19
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Alternative Power Hotspot

Proposed Project

STRATEGY:
Make the power supply more
resilient and redundant

Recovery Support Functions

Infrastructure

Cost

$300,000

Timeline (in years)

IV-20 Implementation—Project Profiles

Faced with recurring power outages in the aftermath of Superstorm Sandy, the Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area (Planning Area) is in need of more redundant and
resilient power infrastructure. Residents, in particular, have cited a need for better lighting
on streets, and for areas where they can charge cellphones in the event of a power outage
in order to ensure communication with loved ones and with providers of critical support
services. This project would help to meet that need through installing alternative energy
infrastructure along critical thoroughfares throughout the Planning Area to serve as pilots
for similar interventions in the neighborhood. Alternative power hotspots provide a reliable
source of lighting in the event of an outage and create a space where residents can meet
and power mobile devices, while also accessing food and other services nearby.

Project Description

This project would create a power hotspot or
series of hotspots throughout the Planning
Area. In siting the hotspots, the project would
leverage the large number of big-box retailers
and associated street-facing parking lots
within the Planning Area. Potential locations
may include the parking lots of retailers along
major corridors like Avenue U, Royce Avenue,
and Flatbush Avenue. The components of the
hotspot could include:

¢ Solar- or wind-powered pedestrian-level
lighting;

e Solar- or wind-powered cellphone
charging station(s);

e Benches or other limited seating;

¢ Stormwater capture measures, such as
permeable pavement; and

¢ Streetscape improvements as they relate
to privately-owned sidewalks, parking
lots, and streets.

Once alternative power infrastructure is
installed, a subsequent phase may consider
the implementation of permeable paving and/
or other stormwater capture measures adja-
cent to the hotspots to increase the absorptive
capacity of parking lots and reduce flooding,
as well as opportunities to replicate hotspots in
other areas. These hotspots may also serve as
ideal locations to test the efficacy and reliability
 

Alternative power hotspots would entail the installation of alternative power infrastructure in large parking lots.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-21
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-22

of alternative power technologies before they
are rolled out on a neighborhood, or even city-
wide, scale.

Cost Estimate

$300,000

Each hotspot is estimated to cost around
$130,000-$200,000. This estimate includes:

e Four units of hybrid (wind- and solar-pow-
ered) lighting: $30,000;

e Three units of solar-powered charging
stations: $30,000;

e 500 square feet of permeable pavement:
$3,500;

e Two trees, benches, and trash recepta-
cles: $8,500; and

e Construction and design contingencies:
$60,000-$130,000.

The total cost for the project is variable,
depending on the number of units for each
hotspot component and the number of hotspots
installed; this cost estimate assumes the above
components, and could cover two hotspots.
These costs include the manufacturing costs of
the hotspots, including solar batteries, needed

Implementation—Project Profiles

to ensure the resiliency of the hotspots during
emergency events. This cost does not include
continued maintenance of infrastructure.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Economic Benefits

The hotspots would enhance the character
of commercial corridors in the Planning Area,
encouraging increased pedestrian traffic that
could bolster local businesses. Furthermore,
hotspot visitors may visit adjacent retailers,
increasing economic activity. Solar power
closely aligns with the goals of the New York
City Regional Economic Development Council's
Strategic Plan, which calls for a more diversified
energy generation and distribution system.

Health and Social Services Benefits
Hotspots throughout the Planning Area would
provide a source of reliable power in the event
of a larger grid failure. Following an emergency,
lighting and charging stations would improve
the safety and mobility of residents, providing
greater access to health providers and emer-
gency contacts, as well as goods and services.

Environmental Benefits

In addition to emergency functions, the
hotspots could be used on a more regular
basis, providing environmental benefits since
solar power is a renewable and pollution-free

energy source. The use of solar power reduces
the demand for electricity procured from tradi-
tional power plants, which is a regional source
of air pollution.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

The Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Planning Committee (Committee) has proposed
an Additional Resiliency Recommendation
(see page V-4) that Consolidated Edison
harden existing power infrastructure within
the Planning Area—a long-term and costly
endeavor to enhance the resiliency of the
Planning Area’s power grid. Alternative power
hotspots would help to promote power resil-
iency and redundancy in the short-term by pro-
viding an alternative form of power that would
reduce the vulnerability of residents to power
outages. During emergencies, solar-powered
lighting and charging stations equipped with
batteries could run from 12 hours up to several
days without sunlight. This infrastructure would
provide the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
NYRCR Community’s (Community) 53,000
residents with resilient lighting and charging
stations during emergencies at a cost of
approximately $14 per resident. This project
would ensure reliable communication with crit-
ical emergency providers, and would provide
lighting that increases the safety and mobility
of residents to goods and services following an
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

SOLAR MOBILE PHONE
CHARGING STATION

i> (hail tem ier. 1 2) Hy Lele] 10) 8 ea Lc] COMMERCIAL STORE

PERMEABLE PAVEMENT

PRIVATE

 

oO 10 30 60 ft
el

Alternative power hotspots would be located in the parking lots of supermarkets and big-box retailers in the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area.

Implementation—Project Profiles [IV-23
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-24

emergency. During normal operations, alterna-
tive power hotspots would provide an environ-
mentally friendly form of energy that enhances
the character of commercial centers and pro-
motes economic and pedestrian activity.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

This project is expected to generate high
risk-reduction benefits in the short term. It
would ensure a source of electricity for lighting
as well as powering and charging mobile
devices (including cellphones and laptops),
enabling communication with critical emer-
gency contacts and accessing information.
Hotspots would be located near major thor-
oughfares, making resilient power accessible to
residents throughout the Planning Area. During
Superstorm Sandy, power outages forced the
City to focus efforts on short-term fixes, such
as setting up generator-powered streetlights.
Resilient, non-grid light sources would allow
recovery efforts to focus on helping people in
the immediate aftermath of a storm and less
on restoring light, increasing the City’s emer-
gency response capacity. Hotspots additionally
could reduce the vulnerability of community
assets located nearby, thereby lowering the
risk scores of those assets. This could include
key commercial corridors (Avenue N, Flatbush
Avenue, Ralph Avenue, and Avenue U) and
shopping centers (Kings Plaza, Ralph Avenue,

Implementation—Project Profiles

Key Food, and Waldbaums Grocery) valued by
the Community.

Timeframe

Once approved, this short-term project would
require approximately 1-2 years to design,
review, permit, and construct it.

Regulatory Requirements

Since the project would be located on privately
-owned sites, no agency oversight is expected
other than permitting, as required, by the New
York City Department of Buildings. Coordination
with existing utilities companies may addition-
ally be required.

Jurisdiction

As hotspots would be located in privately
-owned parking lots, the project would not have
any jurisdictional requirements other than com-
pliance with New York City laws.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-4: Potential Locations of Alternative Power Hotspots

   
   

Ter eee
Ne e os

4 il
ui wr Ps
pr Ro a ee

   

  

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area

SR ERO gy
a BOs .
7,

      

    
  
   
    
      
    
 
  
  
     
 
  

 

a f .
. Extent of High & Extreme
a av 4 a Beetle po ‘ NY | Planning Area Risk Areas
By eA - NYSDOS Risk Areas
wv S| 1 x lv Economic Assets
ANS a ei ls an i 5 Qennan » Commercial Corridors Moderate
a yj A (Flatbush Avenue, Avenue N, .
AKT | PaaS NOS. Duane Reade SSRs eects NR NN Ce Avenue U, Ralph Avenue) i High
m (oh ' . .
Th jel NS. Saeed Shopping Centers Extreme
a

 

Gs i
poe
RN
ee ee
EE Nat

Economic Use
Mixed Residential & Commercial

i Commercial & Office Buildings

i Industrial & Manufacturing

 
  

   

bel" Lowe's /
‘ HomeDepot

Source: New York State Department of State (DOS) Risk Assessment Areas; New York City
Department of City Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines

 

 

 

 

10,000
1Feet

 

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-25
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Emergency Preparedness Education Program

Proposed Project

STRATEGY
Enhance emergency
preparedness and response

Recovery Support Functions

Health & Social
Services

Community
Planning

Cost

$100,000

Timeline (in years)

@
2

IV-26 Implementation—Project Profiles

Before, during, and after Superstorm Sandy, residents lacked critical information on New
York City evacuation protocol and where to go for help. Through several tools, this project
would address the critical knowledge gap that existed during Superstorm Sandy and

promote long-term recovery.

Project Description

This project would develop a guide on local
emergency preparedness and response pro-
cedures, an online information hub, and edu-
cational programming. Resources created
through the program would aim to provide
locally-tailored information to residents on
how to prepare before a storm hits, evacuation
procedures, and where to obtain supplies and
information in the aftermath of a storm. Material
would leverage existing information developed
by the New York City Office of Emergency
Management (NYC OEM) on these topics.

A printed guide would provide information
on general preparedness best practices, such
as tips on how to prepare a Go Bag and an
Emergency Supply Kit.

An online information hub would provide
up-to-date information on evacuation protocol
and where to go to access supplies. This may
include:

¢ City-designated evacuation zones, and
where and how to evacuate;

e High-ground parking areas;

e Where to access food, hot water, power,
and medical assistance; and

¢ How to get help if unable to self-evacuate.

Educational programming would accompany
the printed guide and the online information
hub, training the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
NYRCR Community (Community) on these new
resources. Programming would be designed
for a broad community audience and could
be held at community facilities, libraries, and
health facilities across the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area (Planning
Area).

The above resources would be developed by
an implementing entity with prior experience
producing community-relevant material on
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

ae ea
2a

Ya crea kesh A NE lccenceuil

Emergency
Preparedness

Guide

The above image is a graphical representation of what a printed emergency preparedness guide may look like and is intended for illustrative purposes only.

 

Implementation—Project Profiles |[V-27
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-28

emergency preparedness and response, and
with capacity and responsibility for hosting and
updating the online information hub and the
printed preparedness guide. This organization
would be selected through a competitive bid-
ding process and would need to demonstrate
a history of providing community program-
ming and of existing relationships with the
Community.

In the development of material, the imple-
menting entity would work with NYC OEM to
collect and provide information—on prepared-
ness measures and evacuation protocol—and
to supplement it with local information from
civic associations, religious facilities, com-
munity centers, and senior living facilities, on
where to access additional supplies and ser-
vices. To gain a sense of the most critical topics
to cover, the implementing entity may gather
input through surveys and interviews, as well
as test the efficacy of sample resources with
residents and business owners.

Cost Estimate

$100,000

The estimated cost for this effort is approxi-
mately $100,000. This cost estimate assumes
(over two years):

e Salary and benefits for one part-time

Implementation—Project Profiles

equivalent program manager: $80,000;
and

* Programming and materials: $20,000.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Health and Social Benefits

This Proposed Project would increase resident
awareness of where to access health services,
supplies, and information before, and in the
aftermath of, a storm event. As such, it would
enhance access to these services and supplies
and guard against unnecessary harm, particu-
larly for vulnerable populations.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

This project would increase access to critical
information for the 53,000 residents across
the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Planning Area (Planning Area), where resi-
dents report that information is not currently
distributed across the population effectively. It
would do so at the low cost of $2 per resident,
making available potentially life-saving infor-
mation regarding evacuation routes, medical
care, and where to find emergency assistance,
particularly for those 75 and older, who rep-
resent 7% of the Planning Area’s population.
These localized resources would reduce the
burden on government agencies and nonprofit
organizations with limited funding and staffing

capacity to provide this information. The small
cost of this project is greatly outweighed by the
benefits for community members, government
agencies, and nonprofit organizations.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

Residents have said that one of the largest
obstacles to community safety during
Superstorm Sandy was the lack of information
regarding access to resources. This project
would ensure that information on resources
and proper procedures reaches the Community
effectively and is well-understood, thus
reducing risk.

Timeframe

Once the Proposed Project has been formally
initiated, project implementation would begin
with a competitive bidding process, inviting
local non-profit organizations and consultants
to apply to administer the program. This is
expected to take around 6 months. Funding
toward distributing the guide, establishing the
online hub, and implementing programming
would then be allotted through the Community
Development Block Grant— Disaster Recovery
(CDBG-DR) program for a 2-year period. After
this time, the implementing entity would need
to identify other sources of funding to maintain
the guide, hub, and programming, or to absorb
the costs into their existing budgets.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Regulatory Requirements

It is anticipated that no regulatory review would
be needed for the execution of this project;
however, New York City Office of Emergency
Management would be consulted to ensure
coordination with citywide emergency pre-
paredness efforts.

Jurisdiction
This program has no jurisdictional requirements
other than compliance with New York City laws.

Implementation—Project Profiles

IV-29
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Recovery Community Centers

Proposed Project

STRATEGY
Enhance emergency
preparedness and response

Recovery Support Functions

Health & Social
Services

Community
Planning

Cost

$1.5 MILLION

Timeline (in years)

e
2

IV-30 Implementation—Project Profiles

After Superstorm Sandy, several community-based organizations (CBOs) in the Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area (Planning Area) opened their facilities to dis-
tribute food, supplies, and information to residents. While these efforts provided substantial
help to the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Community (Community), residents
have reported they were not extensive enough, and that residents often did not know the
locations of these informal relief efforts beforehand. This project would take a first step at
meeting a need for a more formalized network of support by funding the development of
Recovery Community Centers to be based out of existing community facilities and organi-
zations. Centers would provide emergency preparedness-related programming on a regular
basis, as well as emergency-related supportive services, such as food and supplies, in the
immediate aftermath of a severe weather event.

Project Description

This project would fund the creation of e Access to food, water, heating and cool-
Recovery Community Centers (Centers) to ing, and basic supplies;

house the distribution of emergency services

following a disaster, such as access to power, e Access to power and charging stations for
food, water, basic medical services, and infor- cellphones;

mation. Centers would be large community
spaces outside of the floodplain, equipped with

Information about citywide emergency

backup power, where supplies and services response activities and local efforts;
could be distributed. As such, the program

would not just provide funding to organizations e Non-urgent medical services (e.g., first
for programming, but also for building-level aid, mental health services); and

capital improvements, such as backup power

installation. ¢ Social services (e.g., legal or financial

counseling, childcare).
The array of services to be provided by Centers
could include: Centers would be housed within existing
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-5: Potential Locations of Recovery Community Centers

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

—>
8 NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
bs rf Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area
E
| Extent of High & Extreme
Ae | Planning Area Risk Areas.
Ris NYSDOS Risk Areas
wT A |S
Aa - BergensCove Homeowner, Moderate
SLL AS Si” |
oI Midwood Catholic Academy = Extreme
4 eyes ie - pa Midwood MasonicTemple
4 \4 joke St Thomas Aquinas Brookyn Public Librar SOV Beer
7] 4+ \Soh “\ Bible Fellowship Church
+ Congregation Congregation Bnei Tor no
Adath Veshurun.§ Flatbush Park Jewish Center ’
BL SLANE NN. Trinity Lutheran ch Sephardic Congregation
4 Khilah Marine Park Holy Trinity Lutheran Church pl greg
a4 \ ‘
4 Yeshiva Ohe Yisrael
Madson Jewish enter
Friends of Columbus 7
Merkaz Yisroel of Martine Park,
Carmine Carvo Saint\Columba Church
Community Center 4 &
\
\
. \
Source: New York State Department of State (DOS) Risk Assessment Areas; New York City
. Department of City Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Centerlines
‘
o. cae
‘ iG
iN oo
-
a

 

 

 

10,000
1Feet

  

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-31
buildings and organizations that provide year-
round community services. Eligible sites and
participating organizations would be selected
through a competitive bidding process. This
process would prioritize organizations both
with a past history of running community pro-
gramming in the Planning Area, and with suf-
ficient organizational and facility capacity to
administer the program.

In selecting organizational facilities for housing
Centers, the program would prioritize the fol-
lowing physical criteria:

Capacity for reliable source of power and
heat/cooling;

e American with Disabilities Act (ADA)-
compliance, or capacity to be made

compliant;

e Potable water system;

Restrooms;

e Large space on ground floor;

Ease of approachability and accessibility
from street;

Implementation—Project Profiles

Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Recovery Community Centers would collect and distribute food and supplies to community members, as did the
Flatlands Volunteer Ambulance Corps after Superstorm Sandy. Photograph by Steve Solornonson.

e¢ Location near an evacuation route; and
e Location outside of the floodplain

Based on needs identified by the Southeast
Brooklyn NYRCR_- Planning Committee
(Committee), the ideal host organization would
exhibit some or all of the following criteria:

¢ Activein post-Superstorm Sandy response
efforts;

e History of community engagement and
strong community ties;

e Regular community programming and
capacity to provide emergency-related
programming;
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

¢ Demonstrated ability to conduct outreach
to vulnerable populations;

Capacity to provide social and/or health
services;

e Long-term occupancy agreement or own-
ership of the building;

Business continuity plan in place;

Financial stability; and

Ability to fund the purchase of basic emer-
gency supplies and equipment, including
radios or push-to-talk phones, or fuel
for backup generators (which cannot be
funded with the Community’s Community
Development Block Grant-Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding allotment).

Cost Estimate

$1.5 MILLION

Each center is estimated to cost between
$500,000 and $700,000, depending on the
level of capital upgrades needed to harden the
building and make it ADA-compliant, as well as
the number of people the center is anticipated to
serve. This cost estimate includes (over 2 years):

* Backup power: $200,000-$300,000;

* Accessibility upgrades: $0-$100,000;

e Salary and benefits for one full-time
equivalent program manager and part-
time equivalent program support staff:
$240,000; and

* Programming and materials: $60,000.

The total project cost is scalable, depending on
the number of Centers the Committee would
like to fund. The Committee ultimately decided
to allot funding for two to three Centers, at a
total amount of $1,500,000.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Health and Social Benefits

By bolstering a number of existing buildings to
serve as Centers, this project would improve
the ability of community organizations to
operate during an emergency. The network
would coordinate and share information about
the location and availability of critical social and
health services and could also provide on-site
medical and legal counseling, and other ser-
vices to residents.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Enhancing accessibility and organization of relief
activities has been cited as a primary need in the
Community. In helping to meet this need for the

53,000 residents throughout the Planning Area,
this project would carry substantial risk reduc-
tion benefits—and at the low project cost of $28
per resident.

Providing a distributed network of supportive
services also would increase access to these
services for vulnerable populations. This
includes the approximately 3,700 residents over
the age of 75 (7% of the population) and the
approximately 10,500 residents under the age of
18 (20% of the population).

The creation of Centers additionally would bol-
ster the financial and professional capacity of
host CBOs and promote their continued service
to the Community. For host organizations that
may have informally provided relief services out
of their own operations budgets in the aftermath
of Superstorm Sandy, this project now would
provide financial support for offering related ser-
vices and programming, as well as creating one
full-time equivalent job and one part-time equiv-
alent job. By funding the installation of backup
power supply, the project would additionally
prevent disruptions in organizational activity due
to power outages.

Anticipated Risk Reduction

A Recovery Community Center network would
reduce risk to residents by providing publicly

Implementation—Project Profiles

IV-33
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-34

accessible backup power, a centralized source
for information, social and support services, and
food and supplies. For the entire Community,
formalizing a network of locations to provide
coordinated relief supplies and support ser-
vices would reduce risks to health and safety
following a disaster. Specifically, Centers could
reduce the risk of:

e Sickness, discomfort, injury, or death
related to lack of access to medical
attention, food, water, power, and other
necessities;

e¢ Emotional or psychological distress; and

¢ Displacement of children, relatives, and
friends who might need to relocate to
receive services.

Vulnerable populations such as seniors and
physically impaired residents stand to benefit
the most, given that they are most likely to
need assistance, yet less likely to have reliable
and convenient access to critical supplies and
services.

The project would also reduce vulnerability
and increase the operational capacity of CBOs
that provide resiliency programming. Backup
power would allow these organizations to

Implementation—Project Profiles

continue to operate in the wake of emergency
events, thereby reducing business interruption.
Further, the funding provided by this program
would increase the capacity of CBOs to con-
duct emergency preparedness outreach and
planning, and their overall ability to support the
Community.

Timeframe

Once the project has been formally initiated, it
would take approximately 1-2 years to imple-
ment. The key issues that could impact the time-
frame are: (1) the length and format of the selec-
tion process; and (2) physical challenges that
may emerge with building-level improvements.

Project implementation would begin with a
competitive bidding process, inviting local orga-
nizations that meet certain criteria—including
those mentioned above—to apply to participate
in the program. This process would take into
account existing conditions, emergency plan-
ning efforts, organizational capacity, and other
community characteristics. It is estimated that
this process—from initial survey of existing con-
ditions to the release of the solicitation —would
take approximately 2-4 months. Subsequently,
a program manager would be hired and imple-
mentation of capital improvements would begin.
Depending on the scope of work, this construc-
tion phase could take up to 6 months.

Regulatory Requirements
Implementation would require permitting from
the New York City Department of Buildings
(NYC DOB) and coordination with several addi-
tional entities, including the Fire Department of
New York, Consolidated Edison, National Grid,
and the Bureau of Electrical Control. New York
City Office of Emergency Management would
be consulted to ensure coordination with city-
wide emergency preparedness efforts.

Jurisdiction

The jurisdictional requirements for this project
would vary, depending on whether centers were
located in publicly- or privately-owned facilities.
Any capital improvements for publicly-owned facil-
ities could fall under the jurisdiction of agencies
like the New York City Department of Parks and
Recreation, New York City Department of Design
and Construction, and New York City Department
of Education. For private facilities, there would be
no further jurisdictional requirements other than
compliance with New York City laws.
Recovery Community Centers would collect and distribute food and supplies to community members, as did the Flatlands Volunteer Ambulance Corps after Superstorm Sandy. Photograph by Steve
Solomonson.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-35

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Critical Facility Upgrades Program

Proposed Project

STRATEGY
Enhance emergency
preparedness and response

Recovery Support Functions

Health & Social
Services

Community
Planning

Cost

$1 MILLION

Timeline (in years)

IV-36 Implementation—Project Profiles

During both Superstorm Sandy and its aftermath, health and social service providers in the
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area (Planning Area) experienced service

disruptions due to lack of backup power and structural damage from flooding. This project
would aim to prevent these disruptions by helping health and social service providers make

building-level capital upgrades.

Project Description

This project would fund building-level capital
improvements at critical health and social ser-
vices facilities. Providers could include medical
clinics, hospitals, voluntary emergency/ambu-
lance organizations, and senior living facilities,
among others. These organizations may face
service disruption as a result of power out-
ages or structural damages brought upon by
a severe weather-related event. Funding for
resiliency improvements would help to avoid a
disruption in the critical services these organi-
zations provide.

Potential capital improvements may include:

e Backup power, with priority on natural
gas-powered backup generators due
to lower cost (in comparison to solar/
hybrid-powered); and

e Floodproofing measures, such as elevat-
ing mechanicals and applying waterproof

coatings to the basement and ground
floor, among other measures.

To receive funding, the facility/organization
would need to demonstrate past involvement
in community disaster recovery and make a
formal commitment to providing such services
in the future.

Cost Estimate

$1 MILLION

The cost estimate for this Proposed Project is
scalable, depending on the type of improvements
funded and level of financial support provided.
The Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Planning Committee (Committee) has allotted $1
million to this project, which could support 3-10
recipient organizations, depending on the type of
upgrade(s), and level of support.

The purchase and installation of a generator is one
example of a facility upgrade. A fixed generator
for an approximately 5,000-square-foot building
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Figure IV-6: Health and Social Services Asset Map

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront Planning Area

 

. Extent of High & Extreme
Planning Area Risk Zones
Health and Social Service NYSDOS Risk Areas
Assets

Moderate
Health,Social Service,

and Emergency Response || High

     

       
    
 
   
      
  

 
   
 
  

Assets
|| Extreme
1 PHYSICARE FAMILY HEALTH CENTER 19 JUNIOR HIGHSCHOOL 278 MARINE PARK
— 2 SOUTH BROOKLYN NEPHROLOGY 20 KINGS PLAZA SHOPPING CENTER
e oS KS (DIALYSIS) CENTER
m g < SS AYO iW 3 SUNRISE SENIOR LIVING CENTER OUTSIDE OF THE PLANNING AREA:
oe f
eS \ CS at Z 4 RITE AID PHARMACY 21 OVS PHARMACY
iS YP) o y 5 Tero 6 WALGREENS PHARMACY 22 MADISON HIGH SCHOOL
k ” mi Sf 23 PUBLIC SCHOOL 203
\ \\ NLS A) 7 6 ARMED FORCES RESERVE CENTER
ES <3 << <. “ a WS G 7 FDNY ENGINE 309, LADDER 159 24 PUBLIC SCHOOL 251
oS CG Oo x tus Gor 8 FDNYENGINE 321 26 SOUTH SHORE EDUCATIONAL COMPLEX
. €
Ss Sx ‘ << oY xy 9 FDNYENGINE 323 26 KINGS COUNTY HOSPITAL CENTER
XS 2S ‘&.) 7 << \ 10 SAINT BERNARD OF CLAIRVAUX PARISH 27 NY COMMUNITY HOSPITAL
® A ie « AND SCHOOL 28 CONEY ISLAND HOSPITAL
11 JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL 78 ROY H MANN 29 MOUNT SINAI BETH ISRAEL HOSPITAL

12 PUBLIC SCHOOL 312 (BERGEN BEACH)

13 PUBLIC SCHOOL 207 ELIZABETH G LEARY

14 PUBLIC SCHOOL 222 KATHERINE R
SNYDER

16 PUBLIC SCHOOL 236 (MILL BASIN)
16 FLATLANDS VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE
CORPS

17 HATZOLAH OF MILL BASIN
18 JCC OF MARINE PARK

Source: New York State Department of State (DOS) Risk Assessment Areas; New York City
Department of Gity Planning, MAPPluto v13.1; Buildings; Street Genterlines

 

  
        

rs

Giron

re; Ms .

 

 

 

5,000 10,000
a 1Feet

 

Implementation—Project Profiles [IV-37
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-38

is estimated to cost $200,000 to $300,000. This
estimate is based on engineering experience with
projects of similar scope and scale, and would
likely vary as the project is further developed and
refined. It is based on the assumption that elec-
trical equipment is conducive to required alter-
ations and connections, and that there is excess
available space in the facility for the installation of
new equipment.

Floodproofing measures are estimated to cost
$50,000-$60,000 for a small facility of the same
size as above. These could include, depending on
the facility’s flood risk, applying waterproof coat-
ings to the basement and ground-floor, elevating
mechanicals, and installation of flood barriers at
ground-floor entrances.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Health and Social Benefits

This project would ensure that critical providers
have power and are more floodproof in order
to continue serving local residents during and
after emergencies, improving access to health
and social services.

Economic Benefits

This project would reduce economic loss after
a disaster by enabling selected providers to
continue operations.

Implementation—Project Profiles

Example of fixed backup generators. Flickr user Jemimus.®

Cost-Benefit Analysis

This program could benefit 3-to-10 health and
social service providers inthe Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NYRCR Community (Community)
that serve residents throughout the Planning
Area. With no major hospitals located within
the Planning Area, health clinics, senior living
facilities, and voluntary ambulance services fill a
vital gap. For a minor project cost of $18.80 per

 

resident, these critical health and social services
providers could avoid service disruptions during
and after an extreme weather event, as well as
minimize expenditures on critical operations
budgets. In the end, this would help to ensure
continuity of vital services, particularly during
and after severe events when residents often
need such services.
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Anticipated Risk Reduction

This project would result in decreased vulner-
ability to power loss and structural damage in
several key health and social services facilities.
Promoting continuity of operations for these
key service providers in the Community would
reduce adverse health impacts among resi-
dents that may be caused by service disrup-
tions, and help to facilitate quick recovery for
the Community.

Timeframe

Implementation would begin with a competi-
tive bidding process for organizations meeting
certain established criteria in order to select
the most appropriate organizations and facil-
ities to receive support. This process could
take 3-6 months. Appropriate flood proofing
measures could be identified and performed
within 3 months of facility identification, while
a generator of the size specified above could
be procured and installed within 1 year of site
identification.

Regulatory Requirements
Implementation would require permitting from
the New York City Department of Buildings
(NYC DOB) and coordination with several addi-
tional entities, including the Fire Department of
New York, Consolidated Edison, National Grid,
and the Bureau of Electrical Control.

Jurisdiction

Through this program, capital improvements
would be funded at privately-owned facilities, and
as such, the project has no jurisdictional require-
ments other than compliance with New York City
laws, including compliance with the NYC DOB
building code.

Implementation—Project Profiles

IV-39
Homeowner Assistance Program

Proposed Project

STRATEGY

Improve residential resiliency
through education, technical
assistance, and funding

Recovery Support Functions

Housing

Cost

$2 MILLION

Timeline (in years)

@
2

Implementation—Project Profiles

Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Many residents throughout the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area
(Planning Area), and particularly in the 100-year floodplain, incurred substantial flood
damage during Superstorm Sandy, largely as a result of stormwater sewer backup.
Residents have reported lacking the technical knowledge to make the necessary repairs
that would both remediate this damage and enhance their homes’ resiliency to future storm
events. This project would aim to meet this critical need for homeowner education and
technical assistance through funding resiliency educational programming, one-on-one
counseling, and audits for homeowners in the Planning Area. The education and counseling
components would aim to eliminate confusion around retrofitting for resiliency, flood
insurance, and other financial questions. The audit component would then fund resiliency
audits for high-risk homeowners through which specialized engineers would identify
specific measures to enhance a home’s resiliency.

Project Description

This project would fund educational program-
ming, one-on-one counseling, and audits for
homeowners living in the high-risk zone of the
Planning Area.

¢ The education program would aim to
eliminate confusion around retrofitting for
resiliency, flood insurance, and related
financial questions.

e Forresidents who need more personalized
assistance, individual counseling would
offer financial, insurance, and resiliency
experts for one-on-one consultations.

Counseling would also identify homeown-
ers in the 100-year floodplain eligible for
audits through the program.

¢ Audits performed by specialized engi-
neers would recommend specific mea-
sures to enhance home resiliency.

A community-wide education program would
be an effective way to disseminate information
to all residents while raising awareness about
the physical and financial impact of future
disasters. General education could be offered
to the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR
Community (Community) in the form of online
eS

-

 

Counselors would provide one-on-one assistance to homeowners on technical and financial questions. Courtesy of the Center for NYC Neighborhoods.

Implementation—Project Profiles IV-41
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-42

courses, in-person classroom courses, or as
community workshops. Information covered in
general education classes could include:

e Understanding basic resiliency retrofits
and costs, including elevating building or
mechanicals, installing backflow preven-
tion devices, and waterproofing doors and
windows;

Obtaining and understanding adequate
insurance coverage, particularly flood
insurance coverage;

Financing retrofits and repairs to mitigate
storm damage; and

Identifying products and providers for
building resiliency improvements.

After Superstorm Sandy, many homeowners
were forced to spend significant amounts of
money to repair damaged property or pay rising
flood insurance premiums. Individual coun-
seling could help guide homeowners to resolve
existing issues and understand and prepare for
future risk. For residents and business owners
who need more personalized assistance than
what the general education program would
offer, individual counseling would provide
financial, insurance, and resiliency experts for

Implementation—Project Profiles

one-on-one consultations. Counseling services
could be offered as drop-in advising hours or
through scheduled appointments. Counseling
would also identify at-risk homeowners in the
100-year floodplain eligible for audits.

Individual counseling could include flood,
homeowner and property insurance, finan-
cial management, and_ individually-tailored
rebuilding and resiliency support for property
owners.

Audits would focus on providing homeowners
with a list of feasible improvements to reduce
their flood risk and enhance the resiliency of
their homes. An audit would involve a special-
ized engineer conducting a walk-through of a
home and identifying potential retrofits and
actions to mitigate future storm damage and
potentially lower insurance premiums. For sin-
gle-family homes, these measures may include:

e Installation of sewer check valve(s);

e Installation of a backup power source
(e.g., on-site generator);

e Elevation and protection of mechanical
systems;

e Floodproofing of basement spaces; and

e Elevation of homes, or filling-in of base-
ment spaces.

The program would be administered by a
Citywide or borough-based organization with
a history of providing housing counseling and
informational resources to New York City res-
idents. This organization would be responsible
for developing program curricula and materials.
Qualified counselors would deliver the educa-
tion programs and one-on-one counseling at
a single location or multiple locations in the
Planning Area. Though resiliency education
and counseling would be made available to all
residents in the Community, outreach for the
audit component would be focused on at-risk
residents in the 100-year floodplain.

Cost Estimate

$2 MILLION

This is a partially-scalable project, with a cost
estimate dependent on the number of audits
performed and the related level of staff support
needed to coordinate the program. An estimate of
$2 million includes a $1.65 million cost estimate
for the audit component and $350,000 estimate
for the education and counseling component.

Assuming that audits may cost $500 to $1,000
per home, depending on home size, $1.65 million
would support 1,650 to 3,300 audits (up to all of
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

the approximately 3,000 homes in the 100-year
floodplain).

The $350,000 cost estimate for the education
and counseling component would include (over
2 years):

¢ Salary and benefits for one full-time equiv-
alent program manager to coordinate the
program: $160,000;

e Salary and benefits for one part-time
equivalent counselor: $80,000;

* Materials development: $60,000; and
* Programming: $50,000.

Benefit/Co-Benefits

Economic Benefits

The proposed program would give home-
owners the tools to protect major economic
assets, and avoid significant repair costs in
the future. Actions like home elevation may
also bring down insurance premiums, and thus
enable residents to afford to remain in their
homes. This would carry the benefit of main-
taining market attractiveness to potential new
buyers, contributing to longer-term neighbor-
hood economic vitality. Helping the Community
achieve a more stable financial outlook can

 

Audits would entail specialized engineers performing an assessment of a home’s resiliency needs and potential im-
provements. Michael Rieger/FEMA.

promote diverse and thriving neighborhoods
and improve residents’ quality of life.

Health and Social Benefits

Through reducing risk to their homes, this
project would benefit all residents, including
senior and disabled populations who reside

in the Planning Area. Without improvements
to homes, residents face risk of injury and the
inability to evacuate due to basement flooding
and power outages. Efforts to address these
concerns would reduce risk to vulnerable res-
ident populations.

Implementation—Project Profiles

IV-43
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

IV-44

Cost-Benefit Analysis

This project would provide much-needed
information, counseling, and technical support
to the estimated 20,000 homeowners in the
Planning Area, approximately 3,000 of whom
have properties in the 100-year floodplain. The
audit component of the program could provide
subsidized audits for up to 3,000 homes i.e.,
up to 100% of those in the 100-year floodplain),
depending on the size of the homes provided
audits and thus cost.

Using the average Federal Emergency
Management Agency Individual Housing
Assistance Award for Sandy Victims in New York
as a proxy for cost of future hurricane damage,
the value of making resiliency improvements
with a 10% discount would be over $800 per
home in any given year, meaning the home-
owner would realize the value of their investment
within 11 years. As the improvement would offer
protection for a longer time period, resiliency
improvements identified through the audit would
provide a clear economic benefit.

Costs of the program include the cost of indi-
vidual audits, support of one full-time equivalent
staff person and one part-time equivalent staff
person, as well as programming and materials
costs. The costs are minimal compared to the
value of avoiding future potential flood damage.

Implementation—Project Profiles

Anticipated Risk Reduction

This project would help homeowners make
informed decisions about how to best protect
their properties from future flooding and storm
damage. If owners choose to implement the
suggested storm mitigation measures, retrofits
would help protect the Community’s housing
stock, making buildings safer for all residents
who own, operate, or live in them.

Timeframe

Project implementation is estimated to take 6
months. This process would begin with the
identification of a large non-profit organization
to administer the project. Once the adminis-
tering entity has been selected, it would take 6
months to launch the program, which includes
the selection processes for identifying service
providers and establishing program parameters.

The administering entity would begin a com-
petitive bidding process, inviting neighbor-
hood organizations who meet certain criteria
to apply to participate as service providers in
the program. The selection of service providers
would take into account history of providing
similar services in Brooklyn, proximity to at-risk
homeowners, and organizational capacity. It
is estimated that the selection process would
take approximately 2 to 4 months or could be
completed on a rolling basis by neighborhood.

In addition, the administering entity would begin
a separate competitive bidding process for
engineering and technical services firms who
could provide resiliency audits to eligible home-
owners. This is estimated to take 3 months.

Regulatory Requirements

This project would require coordination with
the New York City Department of Buildings on a
discretionary basis to oversee or certify building
resiliency audits, though the project would not
require permitting since no capital construc-
tion would be directly funded by the program.
The New York City Department of Housing
Preservation and Development and New York
City Housing Recovery Office additionally may
be consulted in the development of educational
programming and the outreach strategy.

Jurisdiction

No direct capital improvements on publicly-owned
land would be funded through this program. The
program has no jurisdictional requirements other
than compliance with New York City laws.
V. Additional Materials
 

uc
Table V-1: Additional Resiliency Recommendations

Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

. _ Estimated Regional
Strate Project Name Short Description
gy J P Cost (Y/N)

Improve stormwater and wastewater management Assessment of Area’s Sewer Recommend that the New York City Department of $3-10 million Y
to prevent flooding and sewer back-up System Environmental Protection examine vulnerabilities of

the Planning Area’s sewer system and determine

improvements to enhance the resiliency of the system.
Reduce neighborhood flooding through stabilizing U.S. Army Corps of Ensure that existing coastal protection plans for Jamaica >$10 million Y
the coastal edge, discouraging development of at Engineers Coastal Protection Bay include measures to enhance coastal protection in the
at-risk locations, and mitigating any potential Recommendation Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area.
negative impacts of new projects
Make the power supply more resilient and redundant Harden Area Power Ensure that Consolidated Edison protects vulnerable >$10 million N

Infrastructure

substations and hardens all overhead power lines within
the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area.

 

Improve residential resiliency through education,
technical assistance, and funding

Revise National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP)

Expand eligible floodproofing measures recognized by
the NFIP to better accommodate urban contexts where
elevation may be infeasible.

NAA (legislative Y
measure)

 

Improve resiliency of commercial corridors and

Expand the FUEL NY Initiative

Expand the Fuel NY law and initiative to extend to gas

NAA (legislative Y

 

 

critical supply chains stations located one mile from evacuation routes and measure)
highway exits, in order to include more critical gas stations
in the floodplain.
Enhance emergency preparedness and response Provide Local High Tide / Surge Encourage the City to include localized alerts/warning via $500,000- N
Warning phone calls and/or text messages of an impending high $3 million

 

 

tide or surge event that may pose flood risk.

 

 

 

Additional Materials

V-1

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Table V-2: Master Table of Projects

 

 

 

 

wastewater management to
prevent flooding and sewer
back-up

 

 

Stormwater Retention/
Detention System

 

wetland within a natural area of southern Bergen Beach on land owned
by New York City Department of Parks and Recreation. This stormwater
retention system would link to City plans to construct a new storm sewer
and outfall along Avenue Y, providing stormwater flooding abatement for
a low-lying, at-risk residential community, while also removing pollutants
from stormwater that may otherwise enter nearby East Mill Basin.

 

 

 

Strategy Project Name Short Description Project Estimated | Regional
Category Cost (Y/N)
Reduce neighborhood flooding Southeast Brooklyn This Proposed Project would develop a study to determine the cost and Proposed Project $500,000 Y
through stabilizing the coastal Waterfront Coastal feasibility of coastal protection measures along the Southeast Brooklyn
edge, discouraging development Protection Study Waterfront shoreline in order to protect the Community from a severe
at at-risk locations, and mitigating weather event.
any potential negative impacts of
new projects
Improve stormwater and Southeast Brooklyn This Proposed Project would fund: Proposed Project $650,000 Y
wastewater management to Waterfront and
prevent flooding and sewer Canarsie Stormwater e Astudy to examine the feasibility, costs, and benefits for various
back-up Study and Pilot stormwater capture and retention projects in the joint NYRCR
Projects Planning Areas of Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront and neighboring
Canarsie.
e The implementation of those pilot projects in the Southeast Brooklyn

Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area that were identified in the study

as having the highest feasibility and impact. May include measures

such as bioswales, permeable paving, and improvements in and

around public and open spaces to enhance area stormwater capture

capacity.
Improve stormwater and Bergen Beach This Proposed Project would construct a stormwater retention/detention Proposed Project $500,000 N

 

V-2

Additional Materials

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Project
Category

Estimated
Cost

Regional

(Y/N)

 

Make the power supply more
resilient and redundant

Alternative Power
Hotspot

This Proposed Project would install alternative energy infrastructure along
critical thoroughfares throughout the Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront
NYRCR Planning Area (Planning Area) to serve as pilots for similar
interventions in the neighborhood. Alternative power hotspots would
provide a reliable source of lighting in the event of an outage and create
a space where residents could meet and power mobile devices, while
also accessing food and other services nearby. In locating the hotspots,
the project would leverage the large number of big-box retailers and
associated street-facing parking lots within the Planning Area.

Proposed Project

$300,000

 

Enhance emergency preparedness
and response

Emergency
Preparedness
Education Program

This Proposed Project would develop a printed local emergency
preparedness and response guide, an online information hub, and
educational programming to help inform community members of what to
do before, during, and after a storm event. All resources created through
the program would leverage material provided by the New York City
Office of Emergency Management (NYC OEM) and aim to provide locally-
tailored information to residents on how to prepare before a storm hits,
evacuation procedures, and where to obtain supplies and information in
the aftermath of a storm.

Proposed Project

$100,000

 

Enhance emergency preparedness
and response

Recovery Community
Centers

This Proposed Project would fund the development of Recovery
Community Centers to be based out of existing community facilities
and organizations. Centers would facilitate disaster preparedness
coordination across community-based organizations (CBOs) in advance
of an event. Centers could provide power, information, and supplies for
residents, among other services. These would be located outside of the
floodplain, have a parking lot, and be compliant with the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA).

Proposed Project

$1.5 million

 

 

Enhance emergency preparedness
and response

 

Critical Facility
Upgrades Program

 

This Proposed Project would help health and social services providers to
make critical building-level capital improvements. Providers could include
medical clinics, hospitals, voluntary emergency/ambulance organizations,
and senior living facilities, armong others. This would help to prevent
disruption in essential health and social services due to power outages or
structural damages in the event of a storm.

 

Proposed Project

 

$1 million

 

 

 

Additional Materials V-3
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

 

. oe Project Estimated | Regional
Strategy Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)
Improve residential resiliency Homeowner This Proposed Project would aim to enhance the resiliency of homes Proposed Project $2 million N
through education, technical Assistance Program throughout the Planning Area and reduce homeowner risk, geared at
assistance, and funding both general homeowners and high-risk homeowners in the 100-year
floodplain. This project would have three potential components:
e Educational programming on retrofitting for resiliency, flood
insurance, and other financial questions, for both general and high-
risk homeowners
e¢ One-on-one counseling for both general and high-risk homeowners,
to assess risk and resiliency options
e Audits for high-risk homeowners, performed by specialized
engineers, in order to recommend specific measures to enhance
home resiliency.
Improve stormwater and Assessment of Area’s Recommend that the New York City Department of Environmental Additional $3-10 million Y
wastewater management to Sewer System Protection examine vulnerabilities of the Planning Area’s sewer system Resiliency
prevent flooding and sewer and determine improvements to enhance the resiliency of the system. Recommendation
back-up
Reduce neighborhood flooding U.S. Army Corps Ensure that existing coastal protection plans for Jamaica Bay include Additional >$10 million Y
through stabilizing the coastal of Engineers measures to enhance coastal protection in the Southeast Brooklyn Resiliency
edge, discouraging development Coastal Protection Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area. Recommendation
of at at-risk locations, and Recommendation
mitigating any potential negative
impacts of new projects
Make the power supply more Harden Area Power Ensure that Consolidated Edison protects vulnerable substations Additional >$10 million N
resilient and redundant Infrastructure and hardens all overhead power lines within the Southeast Brooklyn Resiliency

 

 

 

Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area.

 

Recommendation

 

 

 

v-4

Additional Materials

 
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

 

 

 

 

 

. ae Project Estimated | Regional
Strategy Project Name Short Description J 9
Category Cost (Y/N)

Improve residential resiliency Revise National Flood Expand eligible floodproofing measures recognized by the NFIP to better Additional N/A Y
through education, technical Insurance Program accommodate urban contexts where elevation may be infeasible. Resiliency (legislative
assistance, and funding (NFIP) Recommendation measure)
Improve resiliency of commercial Expand the FUEL NY Expand the Fuel NY law and initiative to extend to gas stations located Additional N/A Y
corridors and critical supply chains | Initiative one mile from evacuation routes and highway exits, in order to include Resiliency (legislative

more critical gas stations in the floodplain. Recommendation measure)
Enhance emergency preparedness Provide Local High Encourage the City to include localized alerts/warning via phone calls Additional $500,000- N
and response Tide / Surge Warning and/or text messages of an impending high tide or surge event that may Resiliency 3 million

pose flood risk. Recommendation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Additional Materials V-5
V-6

Public Engagement Process

As a community-driven planning process,
public engagement has been central to the iter-
ative development of the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront New York Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Plan. Over the
course of six months, more than 150 residents,
elected officials, and other local stakeholders
participated in NYRCR events, including three
Public Engagement Events and nine Planning
Committee (Committee) Meetings. Public input
guided each step in the reconstruction process,
including the identification of assets, risks,
needs, strategies, and ultimately the formula-
tion of projects that are proposed for funding
in the NYRCR Plan. Extensive public engage-
ment has ensured that the NYRCR Plan reflects
the Community’s priorities for rebuilding and
resiliency.

Planning Committee

The Planning Committee is comprised of
seven volunteer Committee Members and two
volunteer Co-Chairs who represent various
constituencies within the Southeast Brooklyn
Waterfront NYRCR Planning Area (Planning
Area), including, but not limited to, home-
owners, civic leaders, and business owners.
Committee Members serve as ambassadors
of the NYRCR process and are instrumental
in ensuring that Community voices are heard
throughout the public planning process. The

Additional Materials

Committee helped to facilitate the community
engagement process by identifying avenues for
outreach and developing a strategy for effec-
tively soliciting public feedback.

Planning Committee Meetings were the
central venue for Committee discussion and
decision-making. Specific tasks and discus-
sions held at the meetings involved: identi-
fication of community assets; assessment
of critical issues, needs and opportunities;
formalization of reconstruction and resiliency
strategies; refinement of projects; and final-
ization of Proposed and Featured Projects,
and Additional Resiliency Recommendations.
Planning Committee Meetings were open to
the public and held at local community centers,
including the Carmine Carro Community Center
and John Malone Community Center. The
NYRCR Committee website hitip://stormrecov-
ery.ny.gov/nyrcr/community/southeast-brook-
lyn-waterfront served as the official portal of
information for Committee meetings, and pro-
vided meeting times, locations, presentations,
and post-meeting summaries.

Public Engagement Process

Public Engagement Events were designed
to be highly interactive and maximize public
feedback on the priorities and needs of the
Community. Three Public Engagement Events

m Sandy Impacts: Sewer Backup

 

A Bergen Beach resident locates areas that regularly ex-
perience sewer backup at Public Engagement Event #1.

were held prior to the submission of the NYRCR
Plan. The events rotated between easily-acces-
sible community facilities to encourage atten-
dance among residents of each neighborhood
within the Planning Area. At Public Engagement
Events, the Committee offered general infor-
mation about the NYRCR process, presented
outcomes and information gathered to date,
and solicited feedback through dynamic dis-
cussions and interactive displays. Following
each Public Engagement Event, community
feedback was aggregated and analyzed in
order to guide discussion during subsequent
Planning Committee meetings. The Committee
also spearheaded additional outreach efforts
to supplement the Public Engagement
Events. Presentations were held at three Civic
Associations— Bergen Beach, Marine Park and
Mill Basin- to introduce the NY Rising process
to the individual communities. A survey—dis-
tributed online and in hard print—and a dedi-
cated NY Rising voicemail line ensured that the
Planning Committee captured additional public
feedback from residents unable to attend the
Public Engagement Events.

Public Engagement Event Outreach

Extensive outreach was undertaken in advance
of the three Public Engagement Events.
Planning Committee members leveraged
community distribution channels— particularly
local civic organizations—to distribute printed
meeting advertisements in the form of flyers
and storefront posters. E-mail blasts with event
information were disseminated to civic asso-
ciations, local schools, religious institutions,

 

Community members provided feedback on Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies at Public Engagement Event #2.

elected officials, and businesses. Online and
print advertisement campaigns were launched
through two media outlets serving the Planning
Area. Additionally, for Public Engagement #3,
the Committee targeted local schools and dis-
tributed backpack mailers to students.

Online Engagement and Social Media
Outreach

The NYRCR website, located at www.storm-
recovery.ny.gov/nyrcr, served as a valuable
public resource. The NYRCR page featured
announcements, meeting dates and locations,
as well as materials produced by the

Additional Materials
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

V-8

   

Planning Committee throughout the process.
The NYRGR website also directed visitors
to the NYRCR Facebook page (located at
https://www.facebook.com/NYStormRecovery)
and Twitter account (@NYStormRecovery).
Communities were also able to submit com-
ments through the NYRCR website and by
emailing info@stormrecovery.ny. gov.

Additional Materials

Local residents discuss project ideas with a member of the Planning Team at Public Engagement Event #3.

Public Engagement Event #1

(July 29, 2014)

Program Scope; Goals and Timeline;
Community feedback on Community Vision,
Critical Issues, Needs and Opportunities,
Geographic Scope and Community Assets
The first Public Engagement Event held at the
Carmine Carro Community Center in Marine
Park showcased the NYRCR program scope

and presented the Planning Committee’s
preliminary community vision, assessment of
community assets, critical issues, and needs
and opportunities. The Public Engagement
Event began with a formal presentation to
the Community that introduced the NYRCR
Program and its objectives. Following the pre-
sentation, an open house-style event was held
with Committee members, facilitating group
discussions and inviting community input on
the community vision, community assets,
critical issues, and needs and opportunities,
as featured on the display boards. While the
public engaged in conversation, they were
invited to write their feedback directly on the
boards. The event ended with a wrap-up,
including reporting from each display station
and a general question-and-answer session.
Residents from the five neighborhoods com-
prising the Planning Area attended the event
and contributed valuable feedback that guided
subsequent Committee discussions.

Public Engagement Event #2
(September 10, 2014)

Summarized feedback from Public
Engagement Event #1; Presentation of and
community feedback on List of Strategies
The second Public Engagement Event, held at
the John Malone Community Center in Bergen
Beach, solicited public responses to the priority
resiliency strategies presented by the Planning
Committee and members of the public. The
event followed a similar format to the first Public
Engagement Event and featured an introduc-
tory presentation, an open house with display
boards, anda wrap-up. Members of the commu-
nity not only engaged with Planning Committee
members staffing the display boards, but were
additionally encouraged to vote for three of
their preferred resiliency strategies via a sticker
voting board. Community feedback and voting
on the strategies were analyzed and directly
shaped the Planning Committee’s conversa-
tion during the formulation of Proposed and
Featured Projects.

Public Engagement Event #3
(November 12, 2014)

Presentation of and community feedback
on Proposed and Featured Projects, and
Additional Resiliency Recommendations
The third Public Engagement Event, held
at the St. Bernard Parish School in Bergen
Beach, provided a critical opportunity to share
the Proposed and Featured Projects with the
Community and obtain feedback on these
projects. The event featured an open house
with educational boards on the Proposed and
Featured Projects staffed by Committee mem-
bers. A central component of the open house
was the project voting board through which

attendees were able to indicate their support for
up to three projects. By the end of the event, the
voting board featured an array of feedback and
was used to guide the selection of Proposed
and Featured Projects.

Public Engagement Event #4

(January 14, 2015)

Presentation of NYRCR Plan

Public Engagement Event #4 will take place
in January of 2015 and conclude the Public
Engagement Event series. At this event the
Planning Committee will present the Proposed
Projects and the NYRCR Plan to the public.

Additional Materials

V-9
Table V-3: Community Asset Inventory

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
5 =|
= 3 2 Ss = & 2
Ss a 2 & 2 3 2 é = 3 g e 5 8 2
3 2 2} s 2 3 = S = S 2 B x 2F FL oo] @ = 8
g = S a S = eys|]e2]8 > J/sile] z- Ts] § 1a /2
* = é 3 se ]}eT°]F leer le] sePF lel2lé
B > oS 3 wn S Za a pa Ss
<= = © a 5 2 >
a] = oo
3 S|
Moderate Employment
AVE N COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR Economic Hub No No High No No | Yes | No | Yes} No 1 3.41.50] 3 | 14
FLATBUSH AVE COMMERCIAL High Employment
CORRIDOR Economic Hub No No High No No | Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2 3 [3.00] 3 27
Moderate Employment
RALPH AVE COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR Economic Hub No No High No No | Yes No_ | Yes] Yes 1.5 3 [2.00] 3 18
High Employment
AVE U COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR Economic Hub No No High No No | Yes No_ | Yes] Yes 1.5 3 [250] 3 23
Downtown
GEORGETOWN SHOPPING cenTeR _|Moderate fe conomic Center No__|No High _| No | No | Yes | No |Yes| Yes] 15 | 3 |200] 3 | 18
. Downtown
KINGS PLAZA SHOPPING CENTER High Economic Center No No High No No | Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2 3 [3.00] 2 18
Downtown
RALPH AVE SHOPPING CENTER Moderate Economic Center No__|No High _| No | No | Yes | No |Yes| Yes] 15 | 3 |200] 3 | 18
High Grocery/Food
KEY FOODS Economic Suppliers No No High No No | Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2 3 [3.00] 2 18
Moderate Grocery/Food
WALDBAUMS GROCERY Economic Suppliers No No High No No | Yes | No | Yes] Yes 1.5 3 |2.00] 2 | 12
Moderate Health_and_So |Healthcare Yes,
PHYSICARE FAMILY HEALTH CENTER cial_Services Facilities Yes |FEMA High No No Yes No | Yes] No 1 3 1.50 2 9
SOUTH BROOKLYN NEPHROLOGY High Health_and_So |Healthcare
(DIALYSIS) CENTER cial Services __|Facilities No No High No No | Yes No_ | Yes] Yes 1.5 3 [250] 2 15

 

V-10 Additional Materials

 
Meaning of Risk Scores

Severe (>70)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)
Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
5 El e
= 5 s =| 8
= S o 3 2
= 2 ss) 3 2 3 < 5 = = > gli 22 fk oo] @ >» | Ss
z < S a 2] 5 E€e2/=e/S8)2]2le] £. Jes! s | 2)4
@ & 3 a S s - 5 s 2 S/S a] te ES] 2/2 ]a
aa 2 3 Ss = E = & 8 5B | 32 sa |e]
2 a ee ele =| 2 ~ | 3
aa} = a
z é|°
Moderate Health_and_So |Daycare and
SUNRISE SENIOR LIVING CENTER cial Services _|Eldercare No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes| Yes 2 3 1250] 2 15
Moderate Health_and_So |Healthcare
RITE AID PHARMACY cial_Services Facilities No No High No No Yes No | Yes] No 1 3 1.50 2 9
Moderate Health_and_So |Healthcare
WALGREENS PHARMACY cial_Services __ |Facilities No No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 12.00] 2 12
Moderate Health_and_So | Military
ARMED FORCES RESERVE CENTER cial_Services _ |Installations No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes| Yes 2 3 1250] 2 15
Emergency
Moderate Health_and_So |Operations/Res Yes,
FDNY ENG 309, LAD 159 cial_Services ponse No FEMA High No No Yes No | Yes] Yes 1.5 3 2.00} 3 18
Emergency
Moderate Health_and_So |Operations/Res Yes,
FDNY ENG 321 cial Services _|ponse No FEMA _ |High No No Yes No_| Yes| No 1 3.1150] 3 14
Emergency
Moderate Health_and_So |Operations/Res Yes,
FDNY ENG 323 cial Services _|ponse No FEMA _ |High No No Yes No_| Yes | Yes 1.5 3.12.00] 3 18
High Health_and_So
SAINT BERNARD SCHOOL cial Services _ |Schools Yes |No High No No Yes No | Yes | Yes 1.5 3 1250] 3 23
Additional Materials V-11
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
= 5 5 =| 8
5 a 8 qg | = 2 2 | §
s g s e| 2 /8s 2 | 2| 2 B|) 83 21/4 |e
3 2 & s 2 3 Ss 5 = Ss > gli 27 Fe ol ® = 3
a s 2 Z 3 x = a 3 ZS = = 5 2 Ess] ge = |a4
2 3 S 3 5 S 5 Sls] s 2e/S/s|/ =. Esl 2/2] es
= 2 S S = eg°- |= |]2/8 s| 3> a |e]
B > oO 5S n s a Qe Oo =
<= = © < S 2 >
s = s
& S|
JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL 78 ROY H High Health_and_So
MANN cial_Services Schools Yes |No High No No Yes No_ | Yes] Yes 1.5 3 | 2.50 2 15
High Health_and_So
PUBLIC SCHOOL 312 (BERGEN BEACH) cial Services _|Schools Yes __|No High No No | Yes No_| Yes | Yes 1.5 3 [250] 2 15
PUBLIC SCHOOL 207 ELIZABETH G Moderate Health_and_So
LEARY cial_Services Schools Yes |No High No No Yes No | Yes] No 1 3 1.50 2 9
PUBLIC SCHOOL 222 KATHERINE R Moderate Health_and_So
SNYDER cial Services _ |Schools Yes [No High No No Yes No | Yes| No 1 3.11.50] 2 9
Moderate Health_and_So
PUBLIC SCHOOL 236 (MILL BASIN) cial Services _|Schools Yes __|No High No No | Yes No_| Yes | Yes 1.5 3 [2.00] 2 12
FLATLANDS VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE
CORPS Health_and_So |Public Works
Moderate cial_Services Facilities No_ |No High No No Yes No No | No 0.5 3 1.00 2 6
Health_and_So |Public Works
HATZOLAH OF MILL BASIN Moderate cial_Services Facilities No _|No High No No Yes No | No] No 0.5 3 {1.00} 2 6
Health_and_So |Public Works
JCC OF MARINE PARK Moderate cial_Services Facilities No _|No High No No Yes No | No] No 0.5 3 {1.00} 2 6

 

V-12 Additional Materials

 
 

Meaning of Risk Scores

Severe (>70)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)
Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
5 Ele
> s wo S = & 2
S S = = g a 3 2oe 2 3
= s & = s|s |e sel2e/2])8lelel2¢ ke] 2/2 /8
a <= S a ue = B S Ss = els|] 8." Jss} ele /]4
2 a 5 a = | 3 PTeE]/s|e|]2lalsl|]éeu E24] 2/2]z
= 2 3 Ss = E = s 8 5 | 8 a8 |e ]/=
B > S 3 a 3 2] Br a |s
<= = © a Ss 2 >
oO = wo
3 S|
JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL 278 MARINE Health_and_So |Public Works
PARK Moderate cial_Services Facilities No |No High No No Yes No No | No 0.5 3 1.00 2 6
Infrastructure_S
GAS STATION (#1) Moderate | stems Liquid Fuels |No _|No High | No | No | Yes | No |Yes|Yes| 1.5 3 |200| 4 | 24
Infrastructure_S
GAS STATION (#2) Moderate |vstems Liquid Fuels |No_|No High | No | No | Yes | No | Yes| No 1 3 1150| 4 | 18
Infrastructure_S
GAS STATION (#3) Moderate | stems Liquid Fuels |No _|No High | No | No | Yes | No |Yes|Yes| 1.5 3 |200| 4 | 24
Moderate Infrastructure_S
GAS STATION (#4) ystems Liquid Fuels No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes| Yes 2 3.12.50] 4 30
High Infrastructure_S
GAS STATION (#5) ystems Liquid Fuels No No High No No Yes No | Yes] No 1 3 | 2.00] 4 24
Moderate Infrastructure_S
GAS STATION (#6) ystems Liquid Fuels No No High No No Yes No | Yes] No 1 3.11.50] 4 18
Infrastructure_S
GAS STATION (#7) Moderate | stems Liquid Fuels |No _|No High | No | No | Yes | Yes |Yes|Yes| 2 3 |250| 4 | 30
Infrastructure_S
SUBSTATION (#8) Moderate | stems Power Supply |No  |No High | No | No | Yes | No | Yes| No 1 3 1150| 4 | 18
Infrastructure_S
SUBSTATION (#9) Moderate | stems Power Supply |No  |No High | No | No | Yes | No | Yes| No 1 3 1150| 4 | 18
Infrastructure_S
SUBSTATION (#10) Moderate | stems Power Supply |No  |No High | No | No | Yes | Yes |Yes|Yes| 2 3 |250| 4 | 30
Extreme Infrastructure_S
BELT PARKWAY ystems Transportation |No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2 3.14.00] 2 24
Additional Materials V-13
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
= 5 5 =| 8
5 a 8 qg | = 2 2 | §
? g s E| 2/8 2|2|é& Z| 2s 2/2]
3 = = s 2 @ = S = Ss S g/m] 2F Fees] 2 2S|s
g S S 3 2/5 /e72]/8 /2] 2/2] 22 Ea s)3l2
B > oS 3 wn Ss 2 a pa Ss
<= = © < S 2 >
s = s
& S|
Moderate Infrastructure_S
FLATBUSH AVE BUS DEPOT (MTA) ystems Transportation |No No High No No | Yes No_| Yes | Yes 1.5 3 [2.00] 3 18
High Infrastructure_S
MILL AVE SCHOOL BUS DEPOT ystems Transportation _|No No High No No_| Yes | Yes | Yes| Yes 2 3 | 3.00] 3 27
NYPD AIR OPERATIONS (FLOYD High Infrastructure_S
BENNETT FIELD) ystems Transportation [No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2 3.13.00] 3 27
High Infrastructure_S
STRICKLAND AVE SCHOOL DEPOT LOT ystems Transportation |No No High No No | Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2 3 [3.00] 3 27
Infrastructure_S
CON EDISON TRANSFORMER (#1) Moderate ystems Power Supply _|No No High No No | Yes | Yes | Yes} No 1.5 3 | 2.00] 3 18
Infrastructure_S
CON EDISON TRANSFORMER (#2) High ystems Power Supply _ {No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes] No 1.5 3.12.50] 3 23
PAERDEGAT BASIN COMBINED SEWER Moderate Infrastructure_S
OVERFLOW RETENTION CENTER ystems Wastewater No No High No | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2.5 3 [3.00] 3 27
Natural_and_C [Museums,
HISTORIC AIRCRAFT RESTORATION Moderate ultural_Resourc |Performing Arts
PROJECT es Centers, No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2 3.1250] 2 15
Natural_and_C
Moderate ultural_Resourc |Parks and
AVIATOR SPORTS es Recreation No No High No No | Yes No_| Yes | Yes 1.5 3 [2.00] 2 12
Natural_and_C
BERGEN BEACH GATEWAY NATIONAL |Extreme ultural_Resourc |Parks and
RECREATION AREA es Recreation No No High No Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2.5 3.1450] 2 27

 

V-14 Additional Materials

 
Meaning of Risk Scores

Severe (>70)
High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
5 E| es
= 8 @ S = & 2
S S = = B 3s 3 2£eo s 8
$s s & 5 S 3 = S = 5 S 2 z= B $ TS 8 = 5
8 = oO : Ss rh = 3s = o S 2 = # SS 2 = B
2 z z a =| 8 2,s|/2|/2]2/4lse|léze E422 {zs
= 2 S Ss = E = s 8 Ss a> a |e]
B 2 S 3 a S 2) 3 a | s
= = ° & s | = >
a] = a
8g S|
Natural_and_C
High ultural_Resourc |Parks and
BERGEN BEACH PLAYGROUND es Recreation No No High No No_| Yes No_| Yes] Yes 1.5 3.12.50] 2 15
Natural_and_C
FLOYD BENNETT FIELD GATEWAY High ultural_Resourc ]Parks and
NATIONAL RECREATION AREA es Recreation No No High No Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2.5 3.13.50] 2 21
Natural_and_C
Extreme ultural_Resourc |Parks and
FOUR SPARROW MARSH es Recreation No No High No | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes] No 2 3 | 4.00] 2 24
Natural_and_C
High ultural_Resourc ]Parks and
HICKMAN PLAYGROUND es Recreation No No High No No_| Yes No_| Yes] Yes 1.5 3.12.50] 2 15
Natural_and_C
Extreme ultural_Resourc |Parks and
JAMAICA BAY GREENWAY es Recreation No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes| Yes 2 3.14.00] 2 24
Natural_and_C
High ultural_Resourc ]Parks and
LINDOWER PARK es Recreation No No High No No Yes No_| Yes | Yes 1.5 3.12.50] 2 15
Natural_and_C
Extreme ultural_Resourc |Parks and
MARINE PARK es Recreation No No High No Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2.5 3.14.50] 2 27
Natural_and_C
Extreme ultural_Resourc ]Parks and
MCGUIRE FIELDS es Recreation No No High No | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2.5 3.14.50] 2 27
Additional Materials V-15
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
5 E| es
> = @ S = 8 2
Ss S = 2 B Ss 3 2c s 8
= g g z S|] el/2tsle]2)]elelel2¢hkh-l2/2]s
S = oO 7 3S “ = 3s = w > 2 = £1 ss] 2 = B
a z 3 a =| 8 |}27&/]s]e]2]46lsl| se E4 2/2 [2
= 2 S Ss = E = Ss 3 Ss a> a |e]
B 2 S 3 a S 2] 3 a | s
= = ° & es | = >
SS = a
3 a |
Natural_and_C
PAERDEGAT BASIN ECOLOGICAL PARK |Mocerate ultural_Resourc |Parks and
(UNDER CONSTRUCTION) es Recreation No No High No | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes| Yes 2.5 3.13.00] 2 18
Natural_and_C
Extreme ultural_Resourc |Parks and
PAERDEGAT BASIN PARK es Recreation No No High No Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2.5 3. [450] 2 27
Natural_and_C
Extreme ultural_Resourc |Parks and
WHITE ISLAND es Recreation No No High No Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2.5 3. [450] 2 27
Extreme ultural_Resourc
DEAD HORSE BAY es Water Bodies _|No No High No | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes} No 2 3 | 4.00] 1 12
Natural_and_C
Extreme ultural_Resourc
EAST MILL BASIN es Water Bodies _|[No No High No Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes| No 2 3 [4.00] 1 12
Natural_and_C
Extreme ultural_Resourc
MILL BASIN es Water Bodies _|[No No High No Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes| No 2 3 [4.00] 1 12
Natural_and_C
Extreme ultural_Resourc
PAERDEGAT BASIN es Water Bodies _|[No No High No Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes| No 2 3 [4.00] 1 12
Natural_and_C
Extreme ultural_Resourc
MARINE PARK CREEK & MILL CREEK es Water Bodies _|[No No High No Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes| No 2 3 [4.00] 1 12

 

V-16 Additional Materials

 
Meaning of Risk Scores

Severe (>70)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

High (24-53)
Moderate (6-23)
Residual (<6)
Asset Information Landscape Attributes Risk
s =| o
= = 5 =| 3
= ZS 2 a a £
g 2 © | 2 | gs g | & g| ee 2| 8s
= g g 5 s|elets|/2]2] elele| 2e feel ele] 8
8 < oS S a oa = z = 3 = a £1 ss] e Ea
3 3 s 3 5 3g 5 slzls ¢1a/s|tu.Esl 2/2 /]s
= g 5 ye /ey°]Fle le e | 2s s|2|=
B = o S a“ S 2 aT ao Ss
<= = © a Ss 2 >
s e s
& S|
Natural_and_C
CARMINE CARRO COMMUNITY Moderate ultural_Resourc |Community
CENTER es Centers No No High No No _ | Yes No_| Yes] Yes 1.5 3 [2.00] 3 18
Natural_and_C [Cultural or
Moderate ultural_Resourc |Religious
ST. COLUMBA CHURCH es Establishments [No No High No No Yes No_| Yes] Yes 1.5 3 {2.00} 2 12
Moderate ultural_Resourc |Religious
CHURCH OF ST. THOMAS AQUINAS es Establishments [Yes _|No High No No Yes No | Yes] No 1 3.11.50] 2 9
Natural_and_C
High ultural_Resourc |Community
JOHN MALONE COMMUNITY CENTER es Centers No No High No No Yes No_| Yes] Yes 1.5 3.1250] 2 15
BERGEN BEACH/GEORGETOWN
HOUSING IN HIGH AND EXTREME RISK [High Single-Family
AREAS Housing Residence No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2 3.13.00] 3 27
MILL ISLAND HOUSING IN HIGH RISK High Single-Family
AREAS Housing Residence No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes] Yes 2 3.13.00] 3 27
MILL ISLAND HOUSING IN EXTREME Single-Family
RISK AREAS Extreme Housing Residence No |No High | No | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes| Yes] 2.5 3 |450| 4 | 54
MILL BASIN HOUSING IN HIGH RISK High Single-Family
AREAS g Housing Residence No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes| Yes 2 3 73.00] 3 27
MARINE PARK HOUSING IN HIGH RISK | Single-Family
AREAS High Housing Residence No No High No No Yes | Yes | Yes] No 1.5 3 12.50] 3 23
Additional Materials V-17
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

V-18

Endnotes

Foreword

1

Five of the Round | Planning Areas— Niagara,
Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery
Counties —are not funded through the CDBG-DR
program.

Section |

1

ESRI. “Census 2010 Summary Profile: Southeast
Brooklyn Waterfront.” 2010 U.S. Census. U.S.
Census Bureau, 2010. Web. 3 September 2014.

ESRI. “American Community Survey Population
Summary: Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront.” 2008-
2012 American Community Survey, U.S. Census
Bureau, 2008-2012. Web. 3 September 2014.

Esri. “American Community Survey Housing Sum-
mary, 2008-2012.” U.S. Census Bureau, 2008-
2012. Web. 3 September 2014.

Esri. American Community Survey Population
Summary, 2008-2012. U.S. Census Bureau, 2008-
2012. Web. 3 September 2014.

Esri. American Community Survey Population
Summary, 2008-2012. U.S. Census Bureau, 2008-
2012. Web. 3 September 2014.

311. “311 Online Service Request Map.” City of
New York. 15 Oct 2014. <http:/Awww1 .nyc.gov/
apps/311srmap/>.

Additional Materials

FEMA Enterprise Coordination & Information
Management (FEMA ECIM). “Housing Assistance
Program.” Federal Emergency Management
Agency. 22 Apr 2014. <http://www.fema.gov/
media-library/assets/documents/30714>.

Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs. “Hurricane
Sandy Resources and Services for Affected New
Yorkers.” 8 Nov 2012. <http://www.humanservi-
cescouncil.org/documents/Sandy% 20Resourc-
es_11.08.2012.pdf>

Section Il

1

New York City Department of Parks and Recre-
ation (NYC DPR). “Carmine Carro Community
Center Opens In Marine Park.” 4 Mar 2013. Web.
15 Oct 2014. http://www.nycgovparks.org/parks/
marinepark/pressrelease/21108

NYC DPR. “Parks Dedicates John Malone Com-
munity Center in Brooklyn.” 19 Nov 2003. Web.
15 Oct 2014. http://www.nycgovparks.org/parks/
Q028/dailyplant/1 8388

NYC DPR. “Marine Park.” Web. 15 Oct 2014.
http:/Awww.nycgovparks.org/parks/marinepark

New York City Department of Environmental
Protection (NYC DEP). “Paerdegat Basin Natural
Area Park and Ecology Park.” 6 May 2014.

Web. 15 Oct 2014. http://www.slideshare.net/

10

ecowatchers/paerdegat-basin-restoraion-up-
date-may-6-2014

NYC DEP. “Wastewater Resiliency Plan.” 29 Oct
2013. Web. 15 Oct 2014. http://Awww.nyc.gov/
html/dep/html/about_dep/wastewater_resilien-
cy_plan.shtml

A bioswale is a shallow planted area that incor-
porates sloping and other design measures to
collect stormwater runoff from adjacent streets
and sidewalks.

Paving that features a surface and subsurface
layer, allowing water to seep through the surface
and collect at the subsurface layer.

NYC DEP. http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/
press_releases/1 1-30pr.shtml#.U-wdFPIdVQE

NYC DPR. “Greenstreet: Firefighter Gregory T.
Saucedo Triangle.” Web. 15 Oct 2014. http://
www.nycgovparks.org/parks/greenstreet-bz30/
history

Con Edison. “Fortifying the Future in New York
City.” 28 May 2013. Web. 15 Oct 2014 http://www.
coned.com/newsroom/news/pr20130528.asp.

Section Ill

1

NYC Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resilien-
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

cy. 2013. A Stronger, More Resilient New York.

2 Licensed under Creative Commons 2.0,
tinyurl.com/p6dec9n

Section IV
Southeast Brooklyn Waterfront and
Canarsie Stormwater Study and Pilot
Projects

1 Licensed under Creative Commons BY 2.0,
https://www.flickr.com/photos/.chrisham-
by/9152150158/.

2 Planning Team analysis of Bureau of Labor Sta-
tistics. “May 2013 Metropolitan and Nonmetro-
politan Area Occupational Employment and Wage
Estimates.” May 2013. Web. 3 Dec 2014. http://
www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes_35620.htm#47-
0000.

3 New York City Comptroller. 2014. “Sewer Over-
flow Claims by Community District.” ClaimStat.
http://comptroller.nyc.gov/reports/claim-
stat/#sewerclaims.

4 Licensed under Creative Commons BY 2.0, http://
tinyurl.com/n98665d.

Bergen Beach Stormwater Retention/
Detention System
5 Planning Team analysis of Bureau of Labor Sta-

tistics. “May 2013 Metropolitan and Nonmetro-
politan Area Occupational Employment and Wage
Estimates.” May 2013. Web. 3 Dec 2014. http://
www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes_35620.htm#47-
0000.

Critical Facility Upgrades Program
6 Licensed under Creative Commons BY 2.0, http://
tinyurl.com/mv84ure.

Additional Materials

V-19
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

V-20

Glossary

ACS

United States Census Bureau American
Community Survey

A continuous survey provided by the United States
Census Bureau that provides demographic data
between decennial censuses.

ADA

Americans with Disabilities Act

A United States law enacted by Congress prohibit-
ing discrimination against people with disabilities in
employment, transportation, public accommodation,
communications, and government activities.

BEC

Bureau of Electrical Control

The New York City government office within the
Department of Buildings (NYC DOB) responsible for
administering electrical inspections and maintaining
records of electrical work conducted in buildings.

BRIP

New York City Business Resiliency

Investment Program

A $110 million Community Development Block
Grant-Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)-funded pro-
gram that will be implemented by New York City
Economic Development Corporation (NYCEDC) and
will provide funds to both business tenants and
building owners to make improvements that enhance
resiliency to severe weather-related events.

Additional Materials

CBO

Community-Based Organization

A not-for-profit organization that operates within a
local community.

CDBG-DR

Community Development Block

Grant-Disaster Recovery

Federal grants administered by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) and allotted to cities, counties, and states
to facilitate rebuilding and recovery of disaster-im-
pacted areas as designated by the President of the
United States.

CRP

Comprehensive Restoration Plan

A master plan developed among stakeholders to
facilitate ecosystem restoration within a defined area.

cso

Combined Sewer Overflow

Water pollution caused by large variations of flow in a
sewer system that collects both sanitary sewage and
stormwater runoff in a single pipe system.

CUNY
City University of New York
The public university system of New York City.

FDNY

Fire Department of the City of New York

The New York City government agency responsible
for providing first responders to fires, public safety
and emergency situations, disasters, and acts of
terrorism.

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency

An agency within the United States Department of
Homeland Security responsible for the coordination
of the response to a state-of-emergency-declared
disaster.

FIRM

Flood Insurance Rate Map

The official map of a community used by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to delineate
a community’s base flood elevations, flood zones,
and floodplain boundaries.

FTE

Full-Time Equivalent

As defined by the United States Small Business
Administration (SBA), the aggregation of employees
comprising the workload of a full-time employee.

GMP

General Management Plan

A plan developed and implemented by the United
States National Park Service (NPS) concerning the
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

preservation, protection, and management of a
national park.

HRE

Hudson Raritan Estuary

An estuary within the boundaries of New York State
and New Jersey State that includes Jamaica Bay,
Lower Bay, Arthur Kill, Kill Van Kull, Newark Bay,
Hackensack River and Passaic River, Lower Hudson
River, Harlem River, East River, Western Long Island
Sound, and Upper Bay.

HRE CRP

Hudson Raritan Estuary Comprehensive

Restoration Plan

A plan developed in 2009 by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE) and the Port Authority
of New York/New Jersey that established a vision,
master plan, and strategy for future ecosystem resto-
ration in the New York/New Jersey Harbor.

HUD

United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development

The United States Federal government executive
department responsible for executing federal policies
concerning housing and metropolises.

JBRWG
Jamaica Bay Regional Working Group
A collection of representatives from the NY Rising

Community Reconstruction NYRCR Communities
closest to Jamaica Bay tasked with reviewing the
NYRCR Final Plan.

NDRF

National Disaster Recovery Framework

A guide provided by Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency (FEMA) that provides a flexible, recov-
ery-support structure for disaster-impacted areas.

NFIP

National Flood Insurance Program

A Federal Emergency Management Agency (FE-
MA)-run program that provides government-spon-
sored flood insurance to homeowners, renters, and

business owners.

NOAA

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
A scientific agency within the United States Depart-
ment of Commerce responsible for monitoring the
condition of the environment, including the oceans
and the atmosphere.

NPS

United States National Park Service

The United States Federal government executive de-
partment responsible for the management of national
parks and monuments, as well as historic properties.

NYC DCP

New York City Department of City Planning

The New York City government agency responsible
for the strategic development of the City’s physical
and socioeconomic planning.

NYC DDC

New York City Department of Design

and Construction

The New York City government agency responsi-

ble for building critical infrastructure facilities and
municipal institutions, as well as managing the City’s
capital construction projects.

NYC DEP

New York City Department of Environmental
Protection

The New York City government agency responsible
for providing the City’s water supply; managing the
City’s wastewater system; and regulating the City’s
environment, including air quality, hazardous waste,
and quality of life issues.

NYC DOB

New York City Department of Buildings

The New York City government agency responsible
for the enforcement of building codes and zoning
regulations, the issuance of building permits, and the
inspection of new and existing buildings.

Additional Materials V-21
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

V-22

NYC DOF

New York City Department of Finance

The New York City government agency responsible
for tax collection, property investment, property
records, the municipal treasury, tax exemptions and
abatements, parking ticket enforcement, and law
enforcement representation on behalf of the City, as
well as overseeing the Mayor’s Office of Pensions
and Investments and assisting the City’s Banking
Commission.

NYC DOT

New York City Department of Transportation

The New York City government agency responsible
for managing the City’s transportation infrastructure.

NYC DPR

New York City Department of Parks and Recreation
The New York City government agency responsible
for the management of City parks, monuments,

and historic house museums; the preservation of the
City’s ecological diversity; and the provision of recre-
ational and athletic facilities and programs.

NYC HPD

New York City Department of Housing Preservation
and Development

The New York City government agency responsible
for the development and maintenance of the City’s

housing stock.

Additional Materials

NYC OEM

New York City Office of Emergency Management
The New York City government agency responsible
for preparation, coordination, and education con-
cerning emergency response and recovery.

NYC ORR

New York City Office of Recovery and Resiliency

The New York City government agency, established
in March 2014, responsible for implementation of
citywide initiatives set forth in A Stronger, More Resil-
ient New York (SIRR Report), as well as assisting the
New York City Mayor’s Office of Long-Term Planning
and Sustainability (OLTPS) with enacting long-term
goals established in 2007 by the PlaNYC initiative.

NYC REDC

New York City Regional Economic Development
Council

One of ten regional councils, created by Governor
Andrew M. Cuomo, tasked with developing long-term
strategic plans for economic growth in New York City.

NYCEDC

New York City Economic Development Corporation
The City’s official economic development organi-
zation charged with leveraging the City’s assets to
promote economic growth.

NYPD
New York City Police Department

The New York City government agency responsible
for the City’s law enforcement.

NYRCR

NY Rising Community Reconstruction

A New York State program established by Governor
Andrew M. Cuomo to provide additional rebuild-

ing and revitalization assistance to communities
damaged by Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and
Tropical Storm Lee.

NYS DEC

New York State Department of Environmental Con-
servation

The New York State government agency responsible
for the conservation, improvement, and protection of
natural resources; the management of State-owned
lands; and the regulation of environmental laws and
regulations.

NYS DOS

New York State Department of State

The New York State government agency responsible
for strategic investment in regional revitalization and
economic growth.

OLTPS

New York City Mayor’s Office of Long-Term Planning
and Sustainability

The New York City government agency, instituted
within the Mayor’s Office in 2008, responsible for en-
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Istand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

acting short-term strategies and approving long-term
studies for enhancing quality of life, responding to
climate change, and promoting sustainability, as well
as for putting forth the PlaNYC initiative.

PlaNYC

A report published in 2007 and overseen jointly by
the New York City Mayor’s Office of Long-Term Plan-
ning and Sustainability (OLTPS) and the New York
City Office of Recovery and Resiliency (NYC ORR)
that seeks to increase the City’s sustainability and
resiliency in the face of climate change by propos-
ing strategies to be accomplished by the year 2030.
Progress will be reported annually and the plan will
be revised every four years.

PTE

Part-Time Equivalent

As defined by the United States Small Business
Administration (SBA), a figure indicating the propor-
tion of hours worked in comparison with those of a
full-time employee.

SBA

United States Small Business Administration

The United States Federal agency, created in 1953,
responsible for protecting the interests of small busi-
nesses by providing financial assistance, counseling,
and training; promoting and guiding subcontractor
procurement opportunities; advocating for legislation
and fair treatment; conducting research; and sup-

porting businesses of underserved subsets.

SIRR

New York City Special Initiative for Rebuilding and
Resiliency

A special task force convened by the City in Decem-
ber 2012 to assess damage in the wake of Super-
storm Sandy and consider implications for climate
change and sea level rise as they might affect the
City moving forward.

SIRR Report

A Stronger, More Resilient New York

A comprehensive citywide plan released in 2013
and commissioned by the City detailing actionable
recommendations for rebuilding and increasing the
resiliency of communities and infrastructure impact-
ed by Superstorm Sandy.

USACE

United States Army Corps of Engineers

The United States Federal agency, under the Depart-
ment of Defense, composed of civilian and military
personnel and responsible for providing public and
military engineering services.

WWTP

Wastewater Treatment Plant

A facility designed to remove biological or chemical
waste products.

Additional Materials

V-23
Bergen Beach, Georgetown, Marine Park, Mill Basin, Mill Iskand—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

V-24 Additional Materials
PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
ie

 
