NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

South Valley Stream
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
MARCH 2014

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Acknowledgements
South Valley Stream
NY Rising Community Reconstruction
Planning Committee Members
Marc J. Tenzer, Chair
John Campbell
Maria Fletcher
Nadine Kagan
David Mandel
Zavida Mangaru
Tamika Nater
Tricia Vanderbeck

Municipal Liaisons
Representative from Nassau County Department of Public Works

Attributions
This document was developed by the South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Planning Committee as part of the NYRCR Program within the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery. The
NYRCR Program is supported by NYS Homes and Community Renewal, NYS Department of State, and NYS
Department of Transportation.
The document was prepared by Perkins Eastman / BFJ Planning in association with the Louis Berger Group, and
based on the NYR planning process undertaken by a multidisciplinary team consisting of Perkins Eastman, BFJ
Planning, Louis Berger Group, Real Estate Solutions, John V Waters, PACO Group and Rhodeside & Harwell.
Cover Photos: Valley Stream from Brook Road Park, Town of Hempstead property, Forest Road School Athletic Field, Brook Road Park,
Valley Streat at ‘The Path’, ‘The Path’, Brook Road Park playground
Attributions: All photos are attributed to the Consultant Team unless otherwise specified

2

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Foreword
Introduction
In the span of approximately one year, beginning
in August 2011, the State of New York experienced
three extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy
wreaked havoc on the lives of New Yorkers and
their communities. These tragic disasters signaled
that New Yorkers are living in a new reality defined
by rising sea levels and extreme weather events

that will occur with increased frequency and power.
They also signaled that we need to rebuild our
communities in a way that will mitigate against
future risks and build increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew
M. Cuomo led the charge to develop an innovative,
community-driven planning program on a scale

unprecedented and with resources unparalleled.
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Program empowers the State’s most
impacted communities with the technical expertise
needed to develop thorough and implementable
reconstruction plans to build physically, socially,
and economically resilient and sustainable
communities.

Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor
Cuomo in April of 2013, is a more than $650
million planning and implementation process
established to provide rebuilding and resiliency
assistance to communities severely damaged
by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and
Superstorm Sandy. Drawing on lessons
learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR
Program is a unique combination of bottom-up
community participation and State-provided
technical expertise. This powerful combination
recognizes not only that community members
are best positioned to assess the needs and
opportunities of the places where they live and
work, but also that decisions are best made
when they are grounded in rigorous analysis
and informed by the latest innovative solutions.
One hundred and two storm-affected localities
across the State were originally designated to
participate in the NYRCR Program. The State
has allocated each locality between $3 million
and $25 million to implement eligible projects
identified in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for

these projects is provided through the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) Community Development Block Grant –
Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program.1
Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising
one or more of the 102 localities, were created and
led by a NYRCR Planning Committee composed
of local residents, business owners, and civic
leaders. Members of the Planning Committees
were identified in consultation with established
local leaders, community organizations, and in
some cases municipalities. The NYRCR Program
sets a new standard for community participation
in recovery and resiliency planning, with
community members leading the planning
process. Across the State, more than 500 New
Yorkers represent their communities by serving on
Planning Committees. More than 400 Planning
Committee Meetings have been held, during
1 Five of the 102 localities in the program—Niagara, Herkimer,
Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery Counties—are not funded
through the CDBG-DR program.

which Planning Committee members worked
with the State’s NYRCR Program team to develop
community reconstruction plans and identify
opportunities to make their communities more
resilient. All meetings were open to the public.
An additional 125-plus Public Engagement
Events attracted thousands of community
members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR
planning process and proposals. The NYRCR
Program’s outreach has included communities
that are traditionally underrepresented, such
as immigrant populations and students. All
planning materials are posted on the NYRCR
Program’s website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/
nyrcr), providing several ways for community
members and the public to submit feedback on
materials in progress.
Throughout the planning process, Planning
Committees were supported by staff from the
Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR),
planners from New York State (NYS) Department
of State (DOS) and NYS Department of
Transportation (DOT), and consultants from
Foreword

3

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

world-class planning firms that specialize in
engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green
infrastructure, and more.
With the January 2014 announcement of the
NYRCR Program’s expansion to include 22
new localities, the program comprises over 2.7
million New Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500
square miles, which is equivalent to 14% of the
overall State population and 12% of the State’s
overall geography.
The NYRCR Program does not end with this
NYRCR Plan. Governor Cuomo has allocated
over $650 million of funding to the program for
implementing projects identified in the NYRCR
Plans. NYRCR Communities are also eligible for
additional funds through the program’s NY Rising
to the Top Competition, which evaluates NYRCR
Communities across eight categories, including
best use of technology in the planning process,
best approach to resilient economic growth,
and best use of green infrastructure to bolster
resilience. The winning NYRCR Community in
each category will be allocated an additional $3
million of implementation funding. The NYRCR
Program is also working with both private and
public institutions to identify existing funding
sources and create new funding opportunities
where none existed before.

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program Communities*

The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated
with State and Federal agencies to help guide
the development of feasible projects. The
program has leveraged the Regional Economic
Development Council’s State Agency Review
Teams (SARTs), comprised of representatives
from dozens of State agencies and authorities,
for feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR

Communities. The SARTs review projects with
an eye toward regulatory and permitting needs,
policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding
sources. The NYRCR Program is continuing to
work with the SARTs to streamline the permitting
process and ensure shovels are in the ground as
quickly as possible.

On the pages that follow, you will see the results
of months of thoughtful, diligent work by NYRCR
Planning Committees, passionately committed
to realizing brighter, more resilient futures for
their communities.

*Note: map includes those NYRCR Communities funded through the CDBG-DR program, including the NYRCR Communities announced in January 2014.

4

Foreword

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward
rebuilding a more resilient community. Each
NYRCR Planning Committee began the
planning process by defining the scope of
its planning area, assessing storm damage,
and identifying critical issues. Next, the
Planning Committee inventoried critical assets
in the community and assessed the assets’
exposure to risk. On the basis of this work, the
Planning Committee described recovery and
resiliency needs and identified opportunities.
The Planning Committee then developed a
series of comprehensive reconstruction and
resiliency strategies, and identified projects
and implementation actions to help fulfill those
strategies.
The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR
Plan are divided into three categories. The order
in which the projects and actions are listed in
this NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate
the NYRCR Community’s prioritization of these
projects and actions. Proposed Projects are
projects proposed for funding through a NYRCR
Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding.
Featured Projects are projects and actions
that the Planning Committee has identified as
important resiliency recommendations and
has analyzed in depth, but has not proposed
for funding through the NYRCR Program.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations
are projects and actions that the Planning
Committee would like to highlight and that are
not categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured
Projects. The Proposed Projects and Featured
Projects found in this NYRCR Plan were voted
for inclusion by official voting members of the

Planning Committee. Those voting members
with conflicts of interest recused themselves
from voting on any affected projects, as
required by the NYRCR Ethics Handbook and
Code of Conduct.
NYRCR South Valley Stream is eligible for up to
$3 million in CDBG-DR implementation funds.
While developing projects for inclusion in this
NYRCR Plan, Planning Committees took into
account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses,
the effectiveness of each project in reducing
risk to populations and critical assets, feasibility,
and community support. Planning Committees
also considered the potential likelihood that a
project or action would be eligible for CDBG-DR
funding. Projects and actions implemented with
this source of Federal funding must fall into a
Federally-designated eligible activity category,
fulfill a national objective (meeting an urgent
need, removing slums and blight, or benefiting
low to moderate income individuals), and have
a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding
is linked. These are among the factors that
the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery will
consider, in consultation with local municipalities
and nonprofit organizations, when determining
which projects and actions are best positioned
for implementation.

the projects and actions found in this NYRCR
Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State,
and local laws and regulations, including the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion
of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan does
not guarantee that a particular project or action
will be eligible for CDBG‐DR funding or that it
will be implemented. The Governor’s Office
of Storm Recovery will actively seek to match
projects with funding sources.
In the months and years to follow, many of the
projects and actions outlined in this NYRCR
Plan will become a reality helping New York not
only to rebuild, but also to build back better.

The total cost of Proposed Projects in this
NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR Community’s
CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some
Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to
environmental review, HUD eligibility, technical
feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of
Foreword

5

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
6

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Table of Contents
3

Foreword

9

Executive Summary

17

Section I: Community overview

19

A. Geographic scope of NYRCR Plan and community profile

21		

B. Description of Superstorm Sandy Damage

23		

C. Critical Issues

26		

D. Community Vision

27		

E. Relationship to Regional Plans

33

Section II: Assessment of risk and needs

36

A. Description of Community Assets

54		

B. Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems

62		

C. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities

69

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

77

Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles

Proposed and Featured Projects
80
83
86
90
93
95
97
99
101
103
104
105
106
107

South Shore Shoreline Improvement Program Study
Bulkhead Repair and Shoreline Restoration at Brook Road Park
Natural Shoreline Restoration along “The Path”
Corridor Restoration and Riverbank Stabilization along Valley Stream, Clear Stream,
Watts Creek, and Fosters Brook Lower
Hyrdologic and Hydraulic Study of Hook Creek- Head of Bay Watershed
Community Education regarding Green Infrastructure and Living Shorelines
Green Infrastructure Implementation Program on Residential and Public Property
Stormwater Infrastructure Upgrades
County-wide Stormwater Mitigation Plan with Community Education and Awareness
Green Infrastructure and Subsurface Stormwater Retention at Green Acres Mall Area
Microgrid Network Pilot Project
Community Assistance Center at Forest Road School
South Valley Stream Community Emergency Response Team (CERT)
Resilient Home Construction Incentive Program

7

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

This page is intentionally left blank
8

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

View looking north from Rosedale Rd Bridge to edge of Brook Road Park

Executive Summary
I. Overview
South Valley Stream is a hamlet of approximately
6,000 people along the southwestern edge of
the Town of Hempstead in Nassau County,
NY. It is bordered to the west by the Borough
of Queens in New York City, and to the north
by the incorporated Village of Valley Stream.
The South Valley Stream NY Rising Community
Reconstruction
Community
(Community)
consists of two unincorporated neighborhoods,
North Woodmere and Mill Brook, located to the
east and west of Valley Stream, respectively. Both
neighborhoods are characterized by post-War
single family residential neighborhoods,
schools, and neighborhood parks. Green Acres
Mall, the Community’s major economic asset, is
located on the northern end of the Community.
South Valley Stream’s growth was driven by

access offered by Sunrise Highway and the
Long Island Railroad to the north.
Several creeks extend from Jamaica Bay northward
into the South Valley Stream Community. Located
south of the South Valley Stream Community,
Hook Creek splits into three smaller creeks
further north, all of which extend into the South
Valley Stream Community. Valley Stream, the
largest of these creeks, is a source of community
identity and pride. However, Valley Stream,
along with two other tributaries of Hook Creek
(Watts Creek and Clear Stream), also increases
the Community’s vulnerability to flooding from
tidal and precipitation storm events. The most
dramatic of these events in recent memory was
Superstorm Sandy. During Superstorm Sandy, the
storm surge caused water levels in Jamaica Bay to
rise and as a result of this also the water levels in

Hook Creek and its tributaries extending into the
South Valley Stream Community. The water levels
overtopped bulkheads, natural areas, and the
existing floodgate at Rosedale Road, inundating
both the Mill Brook and North Woodmere
Nieghborhoods. Flooding of the Community
caused by overtopping of shoreline protection
was exacerbated by stormwater accumulation
as creek levels rose above stormwater outfalls,
preventing the stormwater accumulated within
the Hook Creek/Head of Bay regional watershed
from being discharged into the creeks.
In total, more than 1,600 residential properties
and 24 commercial properties within South
Valley Stream were impacted by flooding during
Superstorm Sandy. Since the storm, stream
banks in South Valley Stream have continued
to erode, and localized flooding occurs on a
Executive Summary

9

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Mill Pond

LIRR
y
e Hw

ris
Sun

es Mall

Green Acr

Mill Brook

Valley Stream
Robert W Carbonaro School

Forest Road School

Valley Stream South High School

North Woodmere

Watts Creek
Clear Stream

Fosters Brook Lower

Ogden Elementary

k

oo

ek

re

C

H

So

uth

NTS

N

NYRCR Planning Area
Watershed Boundary
South Valley Stream NYRCR Planning Area

regular basis. Beyond flooding, Superstorm
Sandy severely impacted the Community’s
electrical network, disrupting emergency
response
communications
and
leaving
residents without power for up to seven weeks.
Impacts of power outages were especially felt
by the Community’s elderly, who were among
the NYRCR Community’s most vulnerable, and
many of whom required power for medical
treatment.

II. Community-Driven Process

Executive Summary

ey

St

rea

m

Bo

un

da

ry

NYRCR Planning Area
Residential Property

Hook Creek / Head of Bay Watershed

10

Va
ll

In September 2013, a committee of South
Valley Stream residents and civic leaders, the
NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Committee convened with the goal of creating
a plan to help South Valley Stream rebuild from
the damage caused by Superstorm Sandy and
prepare for a more resilient future.
The Committee had six meetings, and all were
posted on the program website and open to the
public. Additionally, three Public Engagement
Events were held, (with a fourth to come after the

release of this NYRCR Plan,) in which the public
was invited to learn about the Committee’s work
to date and to provide feedback on past and
future work. These Public Engagement Events
were heavily advertised to attract a diverse set
of members from the Community.”
The following vision statement was created
through this process:
As a civically minded and culturally
diverse community, we will work towards
creating a resilient South Valley Stream;
founded upon a diverse economy,

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

protected and restored natural and
man-made shoreline, and environmental
stewardship.
Since that time, the NYRCR Committee has
worked closely with a team of professional
consultants, representatives of New York State,
and several Nassau County and Town of
Hempstead agencies to develop this NY Rising
Community Reconstruction Plan.

III. Final Plan as Blueprint for
Implementation
The NYRCR Plan (the Plan) details a series of
‘Proposed’ projects identified as having the
greatest benefit in increasing South Valley
Stream’s resilience to future climate related
events. These projects would be implemented
with $3,000,000 in Community Development
Block Grant-Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
funds allocated to South Valley Stream. The
Plan also includes several ‘Featured’ Projects
that are recommended for implementation
through other identified funding sources.
The NYRCR Plan is community-based, the
product of a robust public engagement effort
involving consensus-building amongst both
residents and business owners. The Plan is also
comprehensive, addressing six recovery support
functions: Community Planning & Capacity
Building; Economic Resilience; Health & Social
Services; Housing; Infrastructure; and Natural
& Cultural Resources.
With a fundamental focus on implementation,
the NYRCR planning process incorporated
extensive discussions with the Town of
Hempstead and Nassau County, to confirm

that relevant agencies had confidence in each
project’s ability to be implemented. The NYRCR
Committee also coordinated with agencies
operating at a regional level, including the
NYRCR Rockaway East Community in Queens
and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and
maintained an ongoing dialogue with parallel
resiliency efforts, including Rebuild by Design.
As a result, the projects featured in the NYRCR
Plan are compatible with, supportive of, and
complementary to these other efforts.

incomplete protection against certain levels of
tidal inundation. Inundation from tidal waters
occurs in some areas of the Community on
a regular basis during spring tides. This is
expected to increase as a result of climate
change, which is anticipated to increase both the
general sea level and the frequency of extreme
events such as high wind-induced surges.
Increasing resilience against tidal flow is thus a
key component of improving the Community’s
overall resilience.

The NYRCR Plan is aimed at addressing both
the short- and long-term resilience needs of the
two communities. The Plan includes a menu of
early action projects; medium-term projects that
can be implemented within two to five years;
and long-term actions that require resources
beyond the NYRCR funding allocation, and
are largely addressed through policy changes,
planning projects, and advocacy initiatives.

To manage tidal flow, the Plan includes three
Proposed Projects with local and regional
benefits. The Bulkhead Repair and Shoreline
Restoration at Brook Road Park Project (A1)
would provide much needed repairs to the only
park in Mill Brook, a significant community
asset, while increasing its resilience to future
storm events. This project would manage tidal
flow by creating a vegetative resilient buffer
island at the confluence of Valley Stream and
Watts Creek, replacing failing bulkhead with
vegetation and a rock edge, and constructing
a sculpted berm tied into the higher elevation.
A central part of the proposed park project is to
partially replace bulkheads that were damaged
by Superstorm Sandy with a landscaped berm
integrated into the park design. The berm
would offer a natural design solution to improve
the parks’ protection from tidal surges, while
enhancing the park’s visual appeal. The new
berms, in combination with the repair of adjacent
bulkheads, would create a barrier between the
park and tidal flows up to approximately 7 feet
elevation (10-year storm). The surrounding
planted edge would provide flood protection,
seating, and viewing, while vegetation would
filter drainage from the park into the stream.

The four Proposed and 11 Featured Projects
included in the NYRCR Plan for South Valley
Stream address each of the five strategies that
emerged from the public engagement process
and technical analysis:

1.

Manage Tidal Flow

Although
Superstorm
Sandy
was
an
unprecedented event, the sources and causes
of flooding observed during Superstorm
Sandy occur frequently (albeit on a smaller
scale) during high tide events, rainstorms,
and nor’easters. Due to the low elevation of
the neighborhoods immediately adjacent to
the creeks and throughout the Community,
the shoreline in South Valley Stream provides

Executive Summary

11

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

A second Proposed Project, Natural Shoreline
Restoration along ‘The Path’ (A2), would
manage tidal flow along Valley Stream by
creating a terraced pathway integrated within a
naturally landscaped living shoreline along the
creek. This would reduce erosion of the stream
bank and minimize the exposure of adjacent
property to tidal flows up to approximately 7 feet
elevation (10-year storm). ‘The Path’ includes
a living shoreline and green infrastructure
such as bioswales and permeable pavements.
These features would retain stormwater (and
thereby reduce the stormwater accumulation
within the Community) would also provide
natural treatment of the runoff from impervious
surfaces (such as streets and parking space)
prior to discharging into the creek, thereby
improving the water quality of Valley Stream.
The Proposed Project would also improve the
aquatic and terrestrial habitat along the creek
by re-introducing native species. The result
would be a natural, publicly accessible open
space that provides a pedestrian connection,
improves natural habitat, and re-establishes the
Community’s link with the stream while at the
same time improving resilience through flood
protection.
The effectiveness of shoreline improvements
increases when shoreline protection is continuous
and gaps are avoided or minimized. In
recognition of the complexity of the technical and
implementation issues involved in addressing
the shoreline, much of which is privately owned,
the South Valley Stream NYRCR Plan includes a
regional Proposed Project: the South Shoreline
Improvement Program Study (R1) . The study
would look at methods for making coordinated
improvements to achieve continuous shoreline
12

Executive Summary

protection along the Town of Hempstead South
Shore. The program would seek to reduce
potential gaps in consistent shoreline protection
levels. These may occur where private properties
remain unimproved or are improved to a lower
level of protection than the rest of the shoreline.
The goal of the study would be to investigate
funding mechanisms, streamline permitting,
and identify options for incentivizing bulkhead
repairs and living shoreline improvements
that would contribute to continuous shoreline
improvement. The NYRCR Committee recognizes
the importance of this issue to other communities
along the South Shore affected by flooding, and
their larger goal is that the solutions derived from
this study could serve as a model to address
conditions in those communities as well. Finally,
the Plan includes the Corridor Restoration
and Riverbank Stabilization along Valley
Stream, Clear Stream, Watts Creek, and
Fosters Brook Lower (A3) as a Featured Project
that would serve as a local pilot project for the
South Shoreline Improvement Program, by
repairing and elevating bulkheads or restoring
living shoreline, where appropriate, along water
bodies in South Valley Stream. Designing a
more accessible shoreline would also provide
increased public access, recreational use, and
connectivity to the waterfront.

2.

Retain Stormwater

South Valley Stream frequently experiences
flooding during storms that are much less
significant than events like Superstorm Sandy.
Precipitation accompanied by everyday
high tides, for example, generates recurring
localized flooding of many local roads
where the stormwater drainage system has
inadequate capacity or is not operating properly

at lower elevations. South Valley Stream is
also vulnerable to major flooding during
large storms, which bring greater volumes
of rainfall than occurred during Superstorm
Sandy. This was evident during Hurricane
Irene, which brought more than three times
the amount of rainfall as Superstorm Sandy,
causing stormwater flooding in low-lying areas.
Capturing upstream stormwater is necessary
to minimize peak stormwater flows entering
South Valley Stream’s stormwater infrastructure
system and Hook Creek’s three tributaries. In
recognition of the importance of community
involvement and education, to increasing the
resilience of South Valley Stream, the Plan
proposes a Green Infrastructure and Living
Shorelines Community Education Program
(B1). This program would include public
information, workshops, and school curricula
development.
In addition to the above Proposed Projects,
the NYRCR Plan also includes the following
five Featured Projects to address stormwater
management issues. The Hydrologic and
Hydraulic Study of the Hook Creek – Head
of Bay Watershed Study (R2) would provide
a regional, watershed-level understanding of
the hydrology affecting South Valley Stream
that would contribute to the design of more
effective flood management measures. This
project would also inform the development of
a County-wide Stormwater Mitigation Plan
(B4) which would provide flood management
solutions at a higher level of scale that would
benefit both South Valley Stream and the region.
The Plan would seek to improve the capacity of
the stormwater infrastructure system through
Stormwater
Infrastructure
Upgrades
(B3). In addition to existing infrastructure

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

upgrades, the Plan proposes nature-based
solutions to retain and manage stormwater.
This includes incentivizing green infrastructure
implementation on residential property
and public rights-of-way through a Green
Infrastructure Implementation Program on
Residential and Public Property (B2) and
by encouraging Green Infrastructure and
Subsurface Stormwater Retention at Green
Acres Mall (B5).

3.

Reinforce the Power Grid

The power outages during and after Superstorm
Sandy in South Valley Stream underscored the
importance of making the power grid more
resilient. It also highlighted the role the grid
plays in allowing critical community resources
to operate in the event of a future disaster,
stabilizing communication systems, improving
operations at warming and cooling centers, and
helping schools resume service more quickly
after disasters. To reinforce the power grid, the
NYRCR Plan includes a Microgrid Network
Pilot Project (C1). This Featured Project includes
the development of a microgrid network storm
resistance plan, to provide backup power
supply sources for homeowner benefit during
a disaster. Another Featured Project would
establish a Community Assistance Center
at the Forest Road School (C2) to provide a
place for residents - especially the area’s elderly
- to go to obtain resources after a disaster, and
act as a safe location during extreme heat or
cold weather.

4.
Strengthen Communication
and Coordination
Superstorm Sandy highlighted the importance of communication and coordination
among civic and social organizations to the
Community’s post-Sandy recovery efforts.
Despite the strong emergency response efforts
of groups like the Mill Brook Civic Association,
such efforts were hindered by disruption of
communications networks during Superstorm
Sandy. The Plan includes as a Proposed Project
the establishment of a local South Valley
Stream Community Emergency Response
Team (CERT) (D1). This would improve coordination between the Mill Brook Civic Association
and Nassau County Office of Emergency
Management. By strengthening local communication networks, this strategy would facilitate
education and awareness about disaster
preparedness and emergency response and
help to identify vulnerable populations.

5.
Maintain and Enhance
Economic Viability
The economic stress caused by Superstorm
Sandy has the potential to substantially impact
the stability of South Valley Stream’s residential
neighborhoods.
This is evidenced in the
decrease in home values since Superstorm
Sandy. The Resilient Home Construction
Incentive Program (E1) is included as a
Featured Project in the NYRCR Plan. The Program
would maintain and enhance economic viability
of South Valley Stream by incentivizing resilient
design practices to strengthen the housing stock
against the impacts of future storm events.
Executive Summary

13

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

South Valley Stream: Proposed and Featured Projects
A. Manage Tidal Flow

C. Reinforce Powergrid

A1 Repair Bulkheads and Restore Shoreline at Brook Road Park

[Proposed]

C1 Implement Microgrid Network Pilot Project

[Featured]

A2 Restore Natural Shoreline along ‘The Path’

[Proposed]

C2 Establish Community Assistance at Forest Road School

[Featured]

A3 Corridor Restoration and Riverbank Stabilization

[Featured]

D. Strengthen Communication & Coordination

		Watts
Creek
A3a
		 A3b

D1 Establish A Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) [Proposed]

Valley Stream: North, Southeast, Southwest

A3c
		Clear
Stream

		 A3d

E. Maintain and Enhance Economic Viability

Fosters Brook Lower

E1 Resilient Home Construction Incentive Program

B. Retain Stormwater
Develop Community Information Regarding Green 		

B1 Infrastructure and Living Shorelines

Green Infrastructure Implementation Program on Residential

B2 and Public Property

[Featured]

B3 Stormwater Infrastructure Upgrades

[Featured]

County-wide Stormwater Mitigation Plan with Community

[Featured]

Encourage implementation of Green Infrastructure and

[Featured]

B4 Education and Awareness

B5 Subsurface Stormwater Retention at Green Acres Mall,
Including Sunrise Multiplex Site

14

[Proposed]

Executive Summary

[Featured]

R. Regional
R1 South Shoreline Improvement Program Study

[Proposed]

R2 Coordinate with Hydrologic and Hydraulic study of the

[Featured]

Hook Creek / Head of Bay Watershed

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Rosedale Station
T

Sun

rise

en A

two

ntw

C2

te R

Pearl St

ok R

n

C
Sch abonar
ool
o

B2

A3d

ower

r

on D

Daws

Gibson Station T

l
Janet P

h
Oakleig

e
Longview Av

Hewlett Dr

Woodmere Dr

Cherry Ln

Og
Elem den
en
Sch tary
ool

Rd

ert W

kL
roo
sB

C1

Cedarhurst St

yS

ett

Rob

st
er

Ln

Vall e

Clu

A3b

tre

l Dr

Pa
rk

S

Valley Stream

Va
Sou lley Str
e
th H
igh am
Sch
ool
d
R
k
c
le Ro
Sadd

l Hil

Dr

d

Rd

re
Lau

rc
Ma

Furth R
Roseda

le Rd

Jewel Dr

Oak Ln

ty
s Coun
Queen County
Nassau

ok
Ho

ek
Cre

Bro

A1

A3b

ield

verf

Clo

A2

Fo

Rd

A3c

A3b

d

thga
Sou

Cr eek

C

ld
rfie
the am
Healear Stre

Rosedale

n

est
R
Sch oad
ool

n

Mill Rd

Ln

A3a

ts
at
W

od L

For

d

ood

am

Bre

ne L
n

d

tatio

ry L

er R

Eas

rber

N

am S

Rd

Elde

Flow

Stre
T

C1

B2

val

St

sO

land

ore

Forest Rd

Lotu

Woo
d

land
Ln

t

Rd

thor

cres

Valle
y

Pl

thm

th S

ney

Gar

en A

Sid

Mall

Str
a

255

Gre

cres

Fire

Gre

Hw y

Rd

Ke
arn
yD

n

dL

iel

inf

Pla

B2
r

NYRCR Planning Area

Woodmere
0

0.25

miles
0.5

Source: NYRCR Planning Area: US Census Bureau; Basemap: ESRI, Nassau GIS,
Tiger; Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau;

Executive Summary

15

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

This page is intentionally left blank
16

Section I
Community Overview

Valley Stream

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

A.	Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Program South Valley Stream
Community
(Community),
located
in
southwestern Nassau County, New York,
encompasses the Hamlet of South Valley
Stream including the Mill Brook and North
Woodmere neighborhoods. The South Valley
Stream Community is located in the southern
part of the Town of Hempstead in Nassau
County and lies just south of Sunrise Highway.
The Community is bordered to both the north
and east by the Village of Valley Stream. To the
west is the Borough of Queens in New York City,
and to the south are the Five Towns (Figure 1).

Head of Bay
sub-watershed

The South Valley Stream Community is named
for and surrounded by water. It is bordered
by Clear Stream to the west, and divided by
Valley Stream, a tidally influenced water body
which cuts through the Community in roughly
northeast-southwest direction, with the Mill
Brook neighborhood to the north and North
Woodmere neighborhood to the south, as
discussed in greater detail below.
The Community lies within the Head of Bay
sub-watershed, which is part of the Atlantic
Ocean/Long Island Sound watershed. Water
flows from tributaries north of the Community
into Mill Pond and from Mill Pond into Valley
Stream (Figures 1 & 2). Valley Stream, Watts
Creek, and Clear Stream combine into Hook
Creek. Hook Creek flows into the Head of Bay
(Jamaica Bay), which flows into the Atlantic
Ocean.

18

Section I: Community Overview

Figure 1:

Site Location within Watershed Context

NYRCR Planning Area
Watershed Boundary
Source: Watersheds: NYS; NYRCR Planning Area: US Census Bureau; Basemap: ESRI, Nassau GIS,
Tiger; Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau; Assets: Nassau County GIS; Coastal Risk Zones: NYS
Department of State Coastal Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA

0

2.5

Miles

N

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

History and Land Use

Brook Road Park
Green Acres Mall

Valley Stream HS

wy

Robert W. Carbonaro School
Valley Stream

Mill Brook
ee
Cr

am

Cl
e

ar

Va

St
re

Ogden Elementary School

k
roo

Rosedale

rs B

am

te
Fos

tre
yS
lle

k

er
Low

According to the US Census, in 2010 there
were 5,962 people, 1,969 households and
1,554 families in South Valley Stream.2 The
median household income in South Valley
Stream is $107,328, and the median income

Forest Rd School

ise H

Sunr

k

k

oo
H

South of Valley Stream is the neighborhood
of North Woodmere, an unincorporated area
of single-family residences that lies within
South Valley Stream but is considered by some
residents to be part of the Five Towns. Fosters
Brook Lower, another tidal creek, divides North
Woodmere from Woodmere. Woodmere is part
of the Five Towns NYRCR Community.

Demographic Overview

The Path

ts
at
W

North of the tidal creek known as Valley Stream
is the Mill Brook neighborhood, a planned
development of single-family residences built
in the 1940s. 1 Originally called Green Acres,
the community was built in two phases, 400
homes before World War II, and another 400
after the war. Green Acres Mall was built as
part of the same development. Now known as
the Mill Brook neighborhood, the development
was planned as an answer to the newly arrived
automobile age—limited through streets,
culs-de-sac, several parks, and foot paths were
all meant to limit outside traffic. The Mill Brook
neighborhood is bordered to the north by
Green Acres Mall, which serves as an economic
driver for South Valley Stream (Figure 2). Access
to the Mill Brook neighborhood is limited to
two entry points: one via Old Central Avenue
to Flower Road and one via Rosedale Road to
Heatherfield Road.

ee
Cr

North Woodmere

Woodmere

Woodmere

Figure 2:

Community Overview

NYRCR Planning Area
Commercial

Residential
Schools

Source: NYRCR Planning Area: US Census Bureau; Basemap: ESRI, Nassau GIS, Tiger; Roads: Tiger/
Line, US Census Bureau; Assets: Nassau County GIS; Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State
Coastal Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA

Not to Scale

N

Section I: Overview

19

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

New Yo
Reco
Sou

Rosedale Station

T
for a family is $111,964. As determined by the
Federal government, 6.3% of families and 8.3%
of the total population in South Valley Stream
are below the poverty line, including 7.7% of
those under age 18 and 7.5% of those age
65 or older. None of the South Valley Stream
residents are below the poverty line.3

Gre

en A

cres

Hw y
Valle
y
Stre
a
Stat m
ion

Rd

T

Legend:

NY

Sa

C reek

Mill Rd

m
rea

In total, there are 427 businesses in South Valley
Stream, mainly located along the perimeter of
the Community on Mill Road, Rosedale Road,
and at the Community’s major economic asset,
Green Acres Mall. These businesses employ
approximately 4,747 people; however, 4,667
(98.3%) lived outside of South Valley Stream. 6

rise

t
ar S
Cl e

South Valley Stream remains a planned
residential community, with approximately
2,000 housing units, more than 96% of which
are occupied and 75% are owner-occupied.
Nearly 70% of the owned houses have a
mortgage or loan, and the average household
size is approximately three people. 4South
Valley Stream is largely a bedroom community
for New York City, given its accessibility to the
Long Island Railroad (LIRR). Three Long Island
Railroad stations are within one half-mile
distance from the Community, with service along
four commuter rail lines and a one-seat ride
of approximately 30 minutes to Penn Station.
According to the US Census, 2,051 South Valley
Stream residents (43.2%) are employed in New
York City, and the majority of the Community’s
workforce (96.3%) is employed outside of South
Valley Stream, with only 80 residents employed
in the Community. 5

Sun

ts
at
W

y
Vall e

am
Stre

Roseda

le Rd

Tidal Flow
k
ok Cree

Ho

Gibson Station T
0

Source:
Roads: Tiger/L
Assets: Nassa
Coastal Risk Z
Management P
Base map: ES

Figure 3:

Diagram of Superstorm Sandy Impacts
NYRCR Planning Area
Superstorm Sany Inundation

Source: Buildings: Nassau Co GIS; Superstorm Sandy Inundation: NYS; NYRCR Planning Area: US
Census Bureau; Basemap: ESRI, Nassau GIS, Tiger; Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau; Assets:
Nassau County GIS; Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal Management Program,
NOAA, and FEMA

20

Section I: Community Overview

0

450

900

1,800
Feet

N

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B.

Description of Storm Damage

In October 2012, Superstorm Sandy ran along
the east coast of the United States, bringing with
it damaging winds and high tidal surges. Even
though it was not categorized as a hurricane
when it made landfall, Superstorm Sandy was
large and dangerous, extending nearly 1,000
miles in diameter7. The storm was characterized
by a combination of factors that are considered
rare. It occurred during a “spring” tide, meaning
a high tide that occurs during a full moon, which
translated into higher storm tides and flooding.
It picked up strength from the warm Atlantic
Ocean down south, and as it traveled north, it
hit a cold, arctic blast. 8 The difference between
Superstorm Sandy’s extremely low pressure
and high pressure to its north increased wind
speeds, heightening storm surge. On October
29, the storm made landfall in New York and hit
the region directly,9 causing flooding and power
outages in South Valley Stream.
Flooding in South Valley Stream during
Superstorm Sandy largely resulted from a tidal
storm surge that came through Jamaica Bay
and flowed through Hook Creek in a northerly
direction to Valley Stream, Clear Stream, and
Watts Creek, overtopping bulkheads and
overflowing stream banks and areas lower
than the storm surge levels of three to six feet10
(Figure 3).
The residential neighborhoods of Mill Brook
and North Woodmere were inundated, with the
highest impacts to single-family residences in
the proximity of Watts Creek and Valley Stream.
Severe flooding occurred along Heatherfield,

Southgate, Brook, and Cloverfield roads, with
inundation extending as far north as Flower
Road. Athletic fields, such as those at Forest
Road School were flooded, and most homes
with basements or recessed driveways were
severely impacted.
In August 2011, Hurricane Irene made landfall
in New York. Although it was downgraded to
a tropical storm, it produced heavy damage
due to flooding, both from heavy rainfall
and storm surge in coastal areas, as well as
wind gusts in excess of hurricane force. In
comparison to Superstorm Sandy, the impacts
from Hurricane Irene were largely a result of
precipitation and wind. Localized rainfall totals
during Irene exceeded 10 inches in New York,
with rainfall ranging from five to nine inches
in Nassau County,11 while storm tide levels
reached 1.3 feet at the Battery.12 According to
FEMA, 470,000 residents were evacuated in
Nassau and Suffolk Counties.13 South Valley
Stream experienced localized flooding due to
Irene, however the damage did not approach
the scale of destruction experienced during
Superstorm Sandy.
Feedback received during Public Engagement
Events indicated that since Superstorm Sandy
occurred, the Community has been experiencing
tidal flooding on a more frequent basis. The
general Mean High Water tidal datum closest
to Jamaica Bay is approximately three feet, with
Mean High Water spring tide elevations near
four feet, which is higher than low-lying areas
of South Valley Stream14. Bulkheads protect

against property erosion and can provide some
measure of protection from tidal flooding.
Bulkheads along the NYRCR Community’s
shoreline vary in height and structural integrity.
Superstorm Sandy, and previously Hurricane
Irene, left several of the Community’s bulkheads
in a poor condition. As a result, these bulkheads
no longer provide adequate erosion protection
during the average high tide flow.
During Superstorm Sandy, stormwater flows
exacerbated tidal flooding. The Community
is located at the confluence where tidal flow
coming from the south (Jamaica Bay) meets
with river flow from the Hook Creek / Head of
Bay regional watershed to the north (Mill Pond).
The storm surge raised water levels in the
streams above the elevation of the stormwater
outlets that discharge the area’s stormwater into
the stream. Under such conditions, the already
increased amount of water entering the storm
sewer system could not exit the system at the
same rate, thus resulting in flooding within the
Community. Given its location close to the Bay,
the groundwater table of South Valley Stream
is very high, which reduces the area’s capacity
for stormwater infiltration and causes basement
flooding.
Both Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy
caused heavy damage to trees within the
Community. This reduction in the number of
trees after the storms decreased the amount of
infiltration possible during a storm event, which
contributes to stormwater flooding by increasing
surface runoff. Due to flooding and downed
Section I: Overview

21

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

trees, the Superstorm Sandy severely disrupted
the electrical network, leaving residents without
power for up to seven weeks.15 Direct impacts
on electricity infrastructure varied across South
Valley Stream. The neighborhood near South
Gate Drive experienced electricity outages for
longer than one month due to the Long Island
Power Authority (LIPA) substation that was
flooded in Cedarhurst, while the neighborhood
near Forest Road School was without power for
13 days. Vulnerable populations were especially
impacted, particularly those dependent on
steady electrical service to power medical
devices or to refrigerate medications. High
winds and water-logged soils also brought
down trees and power lines during Hurricane
Irene.16 Power outages were widespread in
Nassau County, with more than 450,000 Long
Island Power Authority Customers losing power
across the Island.17

22

Section I: Community Overview

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

C.

Critical Issues

Critical issues facing South Valley Stream are
addressed in greater detail in the Assessment
of Needs and Opportunities in Section II of
this plan. In brief, Superstorm Sandy exposed
several issues within the Community that the
NYRCR Plan addresses. These critical issues,
which can be categorized by the six Recovery
Support Functions described below, were
identified throughout the NYRCR Process
during Planning Committee meetings, Public
Engagement Events, and meetings with the
Town of Hempstead, Nassau County, and
New York State agencies. These issues helped
to guide the development of the NYRCR Plan
and the identification of Proposed and Featured
Projects to address problems faced by the
Community.

Community Planning and
Capacity Building
Community Planning and Capacity Building
refers to the ability of residents and businesses
in South Valley Stream to organize, plan,
manage, and implement recovery strategies.
This recovery support function includes the role
of local regulations in improving emergency
preparedness and communications capacity
during a disaster; collaboration between
disaster recovery organizations; and the
importance of resilience as an objective in
planning processes.
The Committee considered the need for policy
changes that impact stormwater management
within the Community, as well as the importance
of educational campaigns targeted towards
residents and businesses.

Critical Issues for Community Planning
and Capacity Building
• There is a need within South Valley
Stream for greater coordination and
communication at all scales, from
residents, to local civic organizations, to
Nassau County and Town of Hempstead
jurisdictions. Homeowners in the
Community helped to provide critical
information about ongoing erosion and
stormwater flooding; however, they could
benefit from additional information
about the ways resilient design elements
and green infrastructure during
rebuilding, enhance the economic value
and resiliency of the Community.
• Local community-based organizations,
such as the Mill Brook Civic Association,
serve as important advocates for the
Mill Brook neighborhood. However,
an additional critical issue in South
Valley Stream is the need for increased
coordination between Nassau County
and the Town of Hempstead with the
Mill Brook Civic Association. Further,
there is no equivalent group in operation
to represent the North Woodmere
neighborhood.
• Some of the impacts that extreme
weather and climate change have on
South Valley Stream occur on a regional
level. Nassau County and he Town of
Hempstead can help to address this issue
by adopting the recommendations put
forth by existing regional plans that seek
to increase resilience to extreme weather
and climate change.

Economic Development
The Committee recognized that increasing the
Community’s economic resilience was about
improving the ability of the area’s key retail and
commercial businesses to recover after major
disasters. Economic resilience is important to
South Valley Stream for three key reasons. First,
businesses that are able to recover quickly after
disasters are more likely to keep their doors open
in the future. Second, if businesses are closed
for extended periods of time, employees will
suffer from lost wages, even as they struggle to
recover themselves. Third, businesses in South
Valley Stream provide important services that
residents need so they can also quickly recover.
Further, businesses provide necessary revenue
that can support local government operations.

Critical Issues for Economic Development
Many local businesses in South Valley Stream
were unprepared for Superstorm Sandy.
Continuity of operations for local businesses is
critical after a disaster to both provide recovery
support functions and prevent lost wages. Small
businesses in particular would benefit from
expanded resources, such as capacity-building
for disaster recovery and business continuity
planning, to help local businesses reopen after
disasters and to provide incentives to encourage
residents to shop locally.

Section I: Overview

23

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Health and Social Services
Health and Social Services organizations
provide critical resources to the Community,
especially socially vulnerable populations.
Organizations, such as health care facilities,
senior centers, religious institutions, and civic
organizations, provide resources for members
of the Community, but are even more important
to the well-being and ability to recover from
disasters for people with disabilities and limited
mobility, low-income populations, and elderly
populations.
The Committee considered the impact on
vulnerable populations of all projects, from
infrastructure projects that protect critical
assets, to the capacity and resilience of
individual Health and Social Services assets.
The Committee identified maintaining electrical
power and communications during disasters as
an important need. This need is addressed by
Proposed and Featured Projects that improve
upon the existing electrical grid and increased
the capacity of existing health and social
services organizations to respond to disasters.

Critical Issues for Health and Social
Services
Critical Issues related to Health and Social
Services cover a broad range of factors in
improving South Valley Stream’s ability to
recovery from future disasters, including
activities of the Mill Brook Civic Association,
communications systems, schools, disaster
recovery services, and assistance for socially
vulnerable populations.
While the Mill Brook Civic Association operates
24

Section I: Community Overview

a block-captain system to provide education and
assistance within the Mill Brook neighborhood,
other neighborhoods in the area could benefit
from similar resources, especially North
Woodmere.
Residents in South Valley Stream suffered
after Superstorm Sandy due to failures in the
communications network. Reliance on grid
power for such as important system is a critical
issue that poses additional risk in the event of
future storms.

Housing
Neighborhoods in the Community’s high and
extreme risk areas continue to be at risk of
catastrophic flooding, such as experienced
during Superstorm Sandy. Homeowners in
these same neighborhoods are also facing very
significant increases in flood insurance rates
and declining property values due to flood risks,
which pose a threat to neighborhood vitality.

After Superstorm Sandy local schools struggled
to return to service, preventing school children
from returning to their daily routine. School
buildings could also serve an additional function
as heating and cooling centers if the facilities
are made more resilient to severe weather and
power outages.
Finally, socially vulnerable populations, especially
the elderly, children and people with disabilities
or limited mobility are dispersed throughout
South Valley Stream, which complicates efforts
by local emergency responders to provide
recovery services when critical communications
systems are down or roads are blocked.
Community-based organizations could expand
their coordination with Nassau County Office
of Emergency Management to identify the
location of vulnerable populations.

Committee Member ideas for community vision

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

The Committee recognized the need to
encourage resilient design and construction
practices for home improvement projects and
new home construction as a roadmap for a
faster recovery, to mitigate future risks and
address potential declines in property value.

Critical Issues for Housing:
The risk of future damage to residential
properties is a critical issue in South Valley
Stream for multiple reasons. Future flood
risks present potential danger to property in
the event of another extreme storm such as
Superstorm Sandy; however, the Community is
also at risk of declining property values due to
the flood risks that Sandy exposed. Economic
incentives for homeowners to repair and retrofit
their homes for increased resilience can help to
resolve both of these issues.

Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure refers to the strategies that the
Committee has identified to restore, repair, and
manage essential services, such as stormwater
systems, transportation networks, and coastal
defenses.
The Committee recognized that while some
infrastructure projects could be implemented
within the NYRCR Program allocation for
South Valley Stream, other projects would
require additional study, significant regional
coordination, and greater capital investment.
Therefore, the Infrastructure strategies proposed
by the Committee contain a combination
of short- and medium-term projects for
implementation, along with long-term studies
that will ultimately provide the framework for

a comprehensive approach to more resilient
infrastructure in South Valley Stream.

Critical Issues for Infrastructure
Critical Issues relating to infrastructure are
both local and regional in nature, impacting
stormwater systems and the resilience of the
power grid. Local stormwater systems are
prone to backups due to heavy rains and
high tides. Improving ongoing maintenance
of existing drainage structures, planning for
maintenance of new drainage structures, and
installation of tide gates or check valves on
stormwater outfalls are all important issues to
address. On a regional basis, it is critical for
stormwater mitigation efforts to be coordinated
and inclusive of stormwater retention projects in
upstream communities.
Deficiencies in the electrical grid led to
widespread power outages in South Valley
Stream and across Long Island after Superstorm
Sandy. This issue may be resolved by creating a
more resilient power supply network that utilizes
renewable energy and micro-grid networks.

Critical Issues for Natural and Cultural
Resources:
The water bodies that pass through South
Valley Stream suffer from erosion, destabilized
riverbanks, and loss of tree cover. These issues
all contribute to sedimentation of Valley Stream,
Clear Stream, Watts Creek, and Fosters Brook
Lower. Erosion and sedimentation may cause
debris to block stormwater outfalls, contributing
to flooding during heavy rain events. “The Path”
is a key natural resource asset that requires
improved tree maintenance and reforestation.
Although South Valley Stream as a whole has
significant tree cover and parks that provide
pervious surfaces, there are also several areas
with large impervious surfaces that lead to
stormwater runoff and impact the residences in
South Valley Stream. In particular, the parking
lot at Green Acres Mall contributes to significant
runoff in the Community.

Natural and Cultural Resources
Natural and Cultural Resource recovery support
functions address the management of natural
and cultural resources from a risk reduction
and economic development perspective.
The Committee placed a great deal of emphasis
on the role that green infrastructure can play
in reducing stormwater flooding. In particular,
the Committee supported strategies that restore
living shorelines and encourage installation of
green infrastructure on private property.
Section I: Overview

25

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

D.

Community Vision

Developing a Vision
The NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) created a Vision Statement to address regional and community recovery and resilience for South Valley
Stream. The objective of the Vision Statement is to address damage caused by Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical Storm Lee; capitalize
on social and economic assets to improve the local economy; and rebuild a more resilient community to expand the economy and reduce future risk.
The Vision Statement is phrased in the voice of the Committee as representatives of the larger South Valley Stream Community.

Vision Statement
As a civically minded and culturally diverse community, we will work towards creating a resilient South Valley Stream; founded upon a
diverse economy, protected and restored natural and man-made shoreline, and environmental stewardship.
South Valley Stream’s Community Reconstruction Plan will guide the community to:
•

•

•

Create and restore continuous shoreline
protection through a range of man-made
and nature-based measures that provide
South Valley Stream enhanced ecological
connections to the bay, protect residents
and businesses from flooding due to severe
weather and do so where possible in
combination with measures to meet other
needs of the community.
Anticipate potential changes within the
business district and use such changes to
contribute to a more resilient community.
Help community members understand how
they can contribute to the physical and social
resilience of South Valley Stream.
South Valley Stream Word Map | Source: Wordle.com

26

Section I: Community Overview

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

E.

Relationship to Regional Plans

Regional Perspective
South Valley Stream’s geographic location
within the Town of Hempstead and proximity to
neighboring jurisdictions means that regional
plans and projects may have significant
relevance for the Community’s NYRCR Plan
(Figure 4); thus, regional plans and projects in
neighboring jurisdictions may have significant
relevance for NYRCR Plan.
The Committee’s membership reflects the many
different issues and stakeholders within the Mill
Brook and North Woodmere neighborhoods.
The open nature of NYRCR Planning Committee
meetings encourages collaboration with other
regional initiatives and strengthens the lines of
communication with the Nassau County and
Town of Hempstead.
Current and proposed projects, such as the
ongoing Mill Pond eco-restoration, the recently
approved rezoning of regional shopping malls,
and the proposed repair of the nearby Mill
Road Pump Station, will impact the proposed
reconstruction strategies developed through the
NYRCR planning process.
Noted regional initiatives and organizations
reviewed during or engaged through this
process include:
•
•
•

US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE);
National Park Service Gateway/Jamaica
Bay (National Park Service);
New York State Coastal Management

Program;
• New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation;
• Long Island Regional Economic
Development Council;
• Long Island Regional Planning Council;
• Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve;
• Cleaner Greener Consortium of Long
Island;
• Long Island Regional Economic
Development Council Infrastructure
Working Group;
• Nassau County;
• Nassau Urban County Consortium;
• NYRCR Jamaica Bay Regional Working
Group;
• Five Towns NYRCR Planning Committee;
and
• Town of Hempstead.
Many challenges and reconstruction strategies
identified are beyond the oversight of the South
Valley Stream Planning Committee. Therefore, it
is important that the NYRCR Process is inclusive
of community, Federal, State, County, and Town
agencies that have jurisdictional authority in
South Valley Stream and surrounding NYRCR
Communities.
Reconstruction strategies have been evaluated
by the NYRCR Planning Committee on a regional
basis, rather than in a vacuum. The Committee
has considered both current and proposed
projects as well as parallel planning efforts

such as the Long Island Regional Economic
Development Council (LIREDC) Regional
Plan. In addition, collaboration with Planning
Committees in other parts of Nassau County
as well as New York City and Long Island has
led to coordinated reconstruction strategies that
can serve multiple Recovery Support Functions
across NYRCR Community boundaries.

Regional Plans and Studies
Several plans, policies, procedures, and
resources exist that address the present
conditions, regulatory framework, community
goals and issues, and resilience opportunities in
South Valley Stream. These resources have been
produced by a variety of stakeholders including
public agencies at all levels (federal, state,
county, and town), regional planning groups,
nonprofit organizations, academic institutions,
community residents, and private groups. A list
of relevant regulatory and advisory documents
is included below.
Regulatory
•

•

•

Federally approved Significant Coastal
Fish and Wildlife Habitats (NYS DOS,
NYS DEC, 2008)
New York State Coastal Management
Program and Final Environmental
Impacts (NYS DOS, 1982 to 2006)
Environmental Conservation Law, §
17-0301, Part 885: Nassau County
Waters (NYS DEC)
Section I: Overview

27

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

•

•
•

Nassau County Department of Public
Works Drainage Requirements (Nassau
County DPW)
Nassau County Stormwater Management
Program Plan (Nassau County DPW,
2009)
Town of Hempstead Adopted 2014
Budget (Town of Hempstead, 2014)
Town of Hempstead General Code
(including legislation adopted through
12-10-2013)

Advisory
•

•

Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Strategy
(U.S., Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Task
Force, 2012)
USACE Continuing Authorities Program
(USACE)
The Atlantic Ocean/Long Island Sound
Basin Waterbody Inventory and Priority
Waterbodies List (NYS DEC, 2011)
Water Body Inventory for the South Shore
Long Island Watershed, Water Body
Inventory for the Western Long Island
Sound Watershed (NYS DEC, 2011)
Long Island Regional Economic
Development Council Strategic Plan
(LIREDC, 2011)
The Long Island Index: “Places to Grow”
(Long Island Index, 2010)
Long Island Infrastructure Priorities to
Recover from Hurricane Sandy (Long
Island Association, 2012)
Cleaner Greener Long Island (CGCLI,
2013)
Long Island 2035 Sustainability Plan

28

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

•
•

•

•

•
•

•

•

•
•
•

•

•

•

•

and Visioning Initiative (LIRPC/Nassau/
Suffolk/NYMTC/RPA, 2009)
Long Island 2035 Comprehensive
Sustainability Plan (Nassau/Suffolk/
LIREDC/LI2035, 2010)
Long Island South Shore Estuary Reserve
- Comprehensive Plan (NYS DOS, 2001)
Nassau County Draft Master Plan
(Nassau County, 2010)
Nassau County Multi-Jurisdictional
Hazard Mitigation Plan (Nassau County,
2007)
Nassau County 2013 Annual MS4 Report
(Nassau County Stormwater Coalition,
2013)
Nassau Urban County Consortium 5
Year Consolidated Plan (Nassau County,
2010)
Nassau County Infill Redevelopment
Feasibility Study: Cultivating
Opportunities for Sustainable
Development (Nassau County, Regional
Plan Association, and NY-CT Sustainable
Communities Consortium, 2013)
NYC Plans (NYRCR process as well
others)

Nassau County Stormwater Management
Program Plan (2009)
The Nassau County Stormwater Management
Program (NCSWMP) includes a listing of Best
Management Practices (BMPs) that have been
implemented by the County and a coalition of
local municipalities to achieve the regulatory
standard of reducing pollutants in the County’s
stormwater to the maximum extent practicable.
Initial measurable goals and an implementation

schedule were developed for each of the BMPs
in the NCSWMP.
While the NCSWMP plan emphasizes practices
to limit discharge of pollutants into Nassau
County waterways, additional education
and assistance campaigns should also help
homeowners, businesses, and municipalities
improve stormwater control facilities to prevent
flooding. In many locations within South Valley
Stream, improved maintenance and controls
of stormwater drainage equipment could
prevent flooding during extreme events such as
Superstorm Sandy and during more frequent
heavy rain events.

Nassau County Hazard Mitigation Plan
(2007, current update in progress)
The Nassau County Hazard Mitigation Plan
provides a description of various hazards,
identification of assets in hazard areas, estimated
damages in assessment areas (including
assets exposed to storm surge), development
trends in hazard areas and capabilities and
resources. Asset information and community
specific recommendations are developed for
some communities however this information is
sparse for South Valley Stream. Implementation
strategies and mitigation measures must be
drawn from recommendations for neighboring
communities. This document also lists federal
technical assistance and funding programs to
assist in long-term recovery.
The Town of Hempstead, which assumes
jurisdictional control over South Valley Stream,
contributed to the development of the 2007
Hazard Mitigation Plan. When the county
officially submits the plan, the residents can take

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

an active role in reviewing the draft revisions to
ensure that risks exposed by Superstorm Sandy
are addressed for South Valley Stream.

Long Island Regional Economic
Development Council Strategic Plan (2011,
update in 2012, 2013)
The
Long
Island
Regional
Economic
Development Council Strategic Plan (LIREDCSP)
is a long term economic development strategy
that outlines a list of priority projects to advance
key strategies for innovation, education,
economic development, sustainability, and
improved infrastructure.
Infrastructure strategies include: Revitalize
downtowns and commercial centers; Repair
and upgrade aging infrastructure; Create new
housing opportunities; Promote new government
policies to foster economic growth. Natural
Asset Strategies include: Improve sustainable
agriculture enterprises; Improve the Economic
Potential and Employment Opportunities of
Fisheries and Aquaculture; Enhance Ecotourism
Activities and Infrastructure.
While none of the priority projects are located
within South Valley Stream, businesses within
the area should advocate for future attention
by the LIREDC, especially to gain additional
support and funding for economic development
projects recommended by this NYRCR Plan.

Figure 4:

NYRCR Jamaica Bay Regional Working Group Map

Cleaner Greener Long Island Regional
Sustainability Plan (2013)
Cleaner Greener Consortium of Long Island is a
group of municipalities and non-governmental
organizations organized to articulate a
community based vision for a more sustainable
future. The Cleaner Greener Long Island
Regional Sustainability Plan (CGLI) is intended
to serve as a common point of reference
for local governments, non-governmental
organizations, businesses and residents. It
includes initiatives for implementation, objectives

and performance targets, as well as a wealth
of baseline information (in the appendices)
that can be incorporated into comprehensive
plans, management plans, zoning, and other
planning and strategy initiatives.
Goals and strategies were developed for the
following subject areas: Economic development
and workforce housing; energy; transportation;
land use and livable communities, waste
management; water management; governance
and implementation.
Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

29

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

NYRCR Jamaica Bay Regional
Working Group
From Sea Gate on the western edge of the
Southern Brooklyn Peninsula, to South Valley
Stream at its headwaters in Nassau County,
communities in and around Jamaica Bay
suffered enormous damage from Superstorm
Sandy. The Bay, known as a unique ecosystem
in an urban landscape, is famous for its salt
marsh islands, intertidal flats, horseshoe crabs,
and migratory birds that use the area as a
critical refuge during their seasonal travels.
Beyond the water, Jamaica Bay is surrounded
by woodland and forests that host a wide array
of wildlife. This dynamic system has attracted
people for generations, and many of its
surrounding communities are partially defined
by their close proximity to Jamaica Bay’s
waters. However, this proximity also served as a
hazard during Superstorm Sandy. At the height
of the storm, the Bay swelled and water flowed
through a network of creeks and streams,
infiltrating neighborhoods and inundating
homes, businesses and roadways.
As described in the Description of Storm
Damages section of this Plan, Superstorm Sandy
had a devastating impact on communities, and
individual NYRCR Committees have developed
strategies to rebuild and become resilient to
future storm risks. At the same time, communities
in and around Jamaica Bay realize the need for
collaboration. Understanding that projects and
other actions in one area can have profound
impacts across the estuary, these communities
have sought to create a unified, collective voice
in support of resiliency efforts throughout
the Bay. Mindful of the communities’ call for
30

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

cooperation, the Governor’s Office of Storm
Recovery created the Jamaica Bay Regional
Working Group (JBRWG), a collection of
representatives from the NYRCR communities
closest to Jamaica Bay, shown in Figure 5. The
JBRWG views this final plan as the vehicle for
its collective voice in support of ongoing and
emerging resiliency efforts by stakeholders in
Jamaica Bay.
The JBRWG believes that collaboration with
agencies active in Jamaica Bay, namely the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and
the National Park Service (NPS) is paramount.
Through various habitat restoration projects,
in addition to coastal protective measures
along the Rockaway Peninsula, USACE
has long been a committed partner in the
sustainability of Jamaica Bay. Moreover,
because of its management of the Gateway
National Recreation Area, NPS has an ongoing
interest as a responsible steward of its federally
protected lands.
The JBRWG supports the following USACE
and NPS projects, which would further protect
communities in and around Jamaica Bay from
future storm hazards:
•

Breezy Point/Roxbury Long-Term
Comprehensive Edge Protection – This
project envisions a system of dunes,
berms, marsh restoration, raised roads,
floodwalls and baywalls, partially on NPS
land, for comprehensive protection of the
Breezy Point and Roxbury communities.
This would include work at the Cove,
as well as the property lines along the
cooperative, including Breezy Point Tip.

•

•

•

Breezy Point Comprehensive Flood
Protection System – This proposed
dune system would provide sustainable,
natural flood and erosion protection
utilizing the area’s existing natural
features. The plan is comprised of an
ocean side double dune system and
complementary set of bayside flood and
erosion protections that are designed to
safeguard the community from future
storm events. An application for this
project was formally submitted by the
State to FEMA on March 20, 2014,
through FEMA’s Hazard Mitigation Grant
Program (HMGP).
Broad Channel Shoreline Protection – A
potential project from the Broad Channel
NYRCR committee is a “Resiliency
Campus,” a rebuilding program to
enhance the resiliency of several
important community centers damaged
during Sandy. The NPS property line
hugs the campus site, the northwest
quadrant of the neighborhood, and
interventions here would further protect
these community assets.
Edge Protection for Upper Jamaica Bay
– The JBRWG supports the inclusion of
protective measures for communities
located in upper Jamaica Bay, including
Gerritsen Beach, Sheepshead Bay,
and Manhattan Beach, in the USACE
East Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway Inlet
Reformulation Study. This would include
protections for Plumb Beach and the
water body of Sheepshead Bay, which
were points of entry for storm surge
during Superstorm Sandy.   

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

•

•

Howard Beach Shoreline Protection
– The New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC)
is currently working toward designing
and implementing protective strategies
on NPS property in lower Spring Creek.
The Howard Beach NYRCR committee
has also proposed work on NPS
property at Upper Spring Creek, Charles
Memorial Park, and Shellbank and
Hawtree Basins.
Rockaway East and West Bay and
Coastal Protection – A system of bay
walls, groins, and dunes are being
implemented to protect Rockaway West.
The JBRWG also supports additional
bayside protections including bulkheads
and natural solutions at vulnerable
locations in Rockaway East, along
the western, northern, and eastern
shoreline of Arverne, in Sommerville,
and in Bayswater. Additionally, Jacob
Riis Park, the westernmost boundary
of the Rockaway West Planning Area
geographic scope, remains NPS
property. The JBRWG supports work
at this location, through either dunes
along the beachfront or berms within
the property, and believes the project
would ensure protection of the entire
community.
Surge Barrier at Rockaway Inlet – The
JBRWG supports New York City Special
Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency’s
(SIRR) call for the USACE to initiate
an expedited study to examine the
feasibility of developing a surge barrier
and alternative measures at Rockaway

Inlet as part of the previously mentioned
Rockaway reformulation study.
Lastly, the JBRWG supports the Science and
Resiliency Institute at Jamaica Bay, a partnership
among academic institutions, government
agencies, nongovernmental organizations and
community groups dedicated to the promotion
and understanding of resilience in Jamaica Bay
and its surrounding communities. Institutions
taking part include: Columbia University,
Rutgers University, SUNY Stonybrook, Stevens
Institute of Technology, Cornell University,
CUNY, NASA Goddard Institute for Space
Studies, the Wildlife Conservation Society,
and New York Sea Grant. The Science and
Resiliency Institute at Jamaica Bay was created
in response to a RFEI (Request for Expression of
Interest) put out by the NPS, City of New York,
and Trust for Public Land, with grant funding
from the Rockefeller Institute.

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

31

This page is intentionally left blank

Section II
Assessment of Risk and Needs

Valley Stream

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

This page is intentionally left blank
34

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section II: Assessment

of

Risk

and

Needs

The process of completing the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction Plan (NYRCR) Plan
for South Valley Stream was largely framed
by the Community’s critical assets and the
risks faced due to disasters like Superstorm
Sandy. Assessing the value and status of the
Community’s assets is a vital component of
the NYRCR Plan because these assets include
facilities, institutions, and networks that are
essential to day-to-day life, rapid disaster
recovery, and long-term resilience in South
Valley Stream. In defining the assets to be
reviewed in this planning process, the NYRCR
Planning Committee (Committee) especially
considered assets that were critical or locally
significant and which provide services for
socially vulnerable populations.
To create a plan that protects critical assets, the
Committee also considered the relative risk that
these community assets face. By developing
an Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment, the
Committee was able to identify those assets at
highest risk for negative impacts from future
storm events. Identifying the assets at highest
risk helped the Committee to understand the
Community’s needs and opportunities. This
information empowered the Committee to
develop projects that reduce the risk of these
assets. The Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment
Process is illustrated in Figure 5: Asset Inventory
and Risk Assessment Process.

Figure 5:

Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment Process

The Asset Inventory and Risk Assessment were
conducted to measure the current risk levels of
assets in South Valley Stream. Because the goal
of the risk assessment is to determine those
assets at highest risk, the Asset Inventory and
Risk Assessment were limited to all assets within
extreme and high risk areas (Figure 5: NYS Risk
Assessment Map), as well as critical or locally
significant assets within the entire Community.
This risk assessment will serve as a baseline
for determining the risk-reduction benefits of
potential NYRCR projects.

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

35

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

A.

Description of Community Assets and Assessment of Risk

To become a more resilient community South
Valley Stream must identify ways to strengthen
and protect its social, economic and natural
resource assets that have been, or will be,
affected by coastal hazards. The NYRCR Plan
seeks to ensure that reconstructed assets and
new post-storm construction are more resilient
and can better withstand the impacts of future
storms.
The Committee has identified several assets that
were either impacted by Superstorm Sandy, are
at risk of being impacted by future storms, or
provided critical recovery functions for residents
and businesses in the inundation zone. Assets
were defined in the Conceptual Plan according
to the following categories:
• Economic;
• Health and Social Services;
• Housing;
• Natural and Cultural Resources;
• Infrastructure Systems; and
• Socially Vulnerable Population.
Assets were identified through a series of
exercises that involved community input,
research, and analysis, including:
•
•
•

36

Discussions at NYRCR Committee
Meetings;
Feedback at Public Engagement
Meetings;
Meetings in the local communities with
Committee members, local officials, and
community members;
Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

• Site tours; and
• Data Analysis.
The following presents a summary of the
assets at risk within the South Valley Stream
Community identified through the above
assessment process.

New York State Risk Maps
As defined by NYS DOS for the NYRCR
Program, risk is the chance that an asset will
be damaged or destroyed by flooding in future
storm events. Assessing the risk to the South
Valley Stream Community’s assets provides a
context for developing reconstruction strategies
and projects that would reduce these risks.
NYS has developed risk assessment area
mapping to define areas at risk from coastal
hazards in relation to their topography, FEMA
flood zones, previous storm surge inundation,
sea level rise, National Weather Service (NWS)
shallow coastal flooding advisory thresholds,
and natural shoreline features. The resulting
coastal risk assessment areas illustrate a wide
range of coastal risk in South Valley Stream as
measured for regular precipitation and extreme
storm events as well as for future storms
amplified by projected sea level rise. The risk
maps are categorized into three levels of risk:
extreme, high, and moderate (Figure 6: NYS
Risk Assessment Map).
The Risk Assessment Maps were used in the
NYRCR Plan for the South Valley Stream
Community to show the corresponding risk

(extreme, high, and moderate) for each of the
asset categories.
Extreme Risk Areas: Areas currently at risk
of frequent inundation, vulnerable to erosion
in the next 40 years, or likely to be inundated
in the future due to sea level rise. Extreme risk
areas include:
•

•

•
•

FEMA V zone, areas subject to
inundation by the 1% annual flood risk
zone with additional hazards associated
with storm-induced waves.
Shallow Coastal Flooding per the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) NWS’s advisory
threshold.
Natural protective feature areas
susceptible to erosion.
Sea level rise - Added three feet to the
Mean Higher High Water (MHHW)
shoreline and extended this elevation
inland to point of intersection with
ground surface.

High Risk Areas: Areas outside the extreme
risk area that are currently at infrequent risk of
inundation or at future risk from sea level rise.
High risk areas include:

•
•

Area bounded by the 1% annual flood
risk zone (FEMA V and A zones).
Sea level rise - Added three feet to
NOAA NWS coastal flooding advisory
threshold and extended this elevation
inland to point of intersection with
ground surface.

Rosedale Station

N

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

T

Sun

Moderate Risk Areas: Areas outside the
extreme and high risk areas but currently at
moderate risk of inundation from infrequent
events or at risk in the future from sea level rise.
Moderate Risk Areas include:

rise

Gre

Gre

en A

en A

cres

cres

Rd

Hw y
Vall
e

Sid

ney

Mall

Woo
d

•

Forest Rd

sO

Bre

val

ntw

er R

d

Eas

two

Ln

T
Rd

od L

te R

Clu
d
Bro

m
rea

ts
at
W

y
Vall e

Ln

Daws

Jewel Dr

e St

Strathmor

T

l
Janet P

h
Oakleig

Cedarhurst St

Pearl St

0

Rd

So
Ro
As
Co
M
Ba

e

Longview Av

Cherry Ln

Oak Ln

Hewlett Dr

C

r

on D

Pa

rk

r

ill D

le Rd

ck Rd

le Ro

Sadd

rel H

Roseda
Woodmere Dr

H

am
Stre
Lau

d

ook

ie

Clo

Rd

dS

ld R

verf

ok R

Sou

C reek

t
ar S
Cl e

thga

ett

Furth R

k
ree

L

n

d

ood

Flow

N

ion

Gar

Lotu

Stat

land
Ln

land

ream

Mill Rd

Area bounded by the 0.2% annual risk
(500-year) flood zone, where available.
• Sea level rise - Added three feet to the
Base Flood Elevation for the current 1%.
• Annual risk flood event and extended this
elevation inland to point of intersection
with ground surface.
• Area bounded by Sea, Lake and
Overland Surges from Hurricanes
(SLOSH) Category 3 hurricane
inundation zone.
The risk maps illustrate that the entirety of the
South Valley Stream Community is at risk for
future coastal storm events. The majority of the
Community is located in the high risk area, with
a small but significant extreme risk area located
near where South Valley Stream crosses under
Rosedale Road and the Chase Bank. The area
at lowest risk is Green Acres Mall, which sits in
the moderate risk area.

y St

Pl

r
yD

arn

n

dL

iel

Ke

inf
Pla

Figure 6:

NYS Risk Assessment Map

Moderate Risk Zone
High Risk Zone
Extreme Risk Zone
Source: Basemap: ESRI, Nassau Co GIS, Tiger; NYRCR Planning Area: US Census Bureau; Assets:
Nassau County GIS, NYS; Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal Management
Program, NOAA, and FEMA

0

450

900

1,800
Feet

N

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

37

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Economic Assets
Economic assets include employment hubs
and downtown centers, ranging from large
retail stores to industrial complexes, small
businesses, service establishments, and
tourism destinations. Figure 7 illustrates
economic assets within South Valley Stream.
The primary economic assets in South Valley
Stream are the Green Acres Mall, with anchor
stores Macy’s and Sears, and the adjacent
Green Acres Plaza, with several large retailers
such as Home Depot and BJ’s Wholesale
Club. The mall has a variety of small and
large businesses and restaurants and serves
as an employment hub. Additional economic
assets are primarily located along Rosedale
Road and Mill Road, including the Chase Bank
on Rosedale Road. Economic assets outside
of the Community on which residents rely
include Key Food and the Parkdale Pharmacy
on Rosedale Road as well as businesses along
Sunrise Highway.

Chase Bank

Green Acres Mall

38

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

BJ's Wholesale Club

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

New York RisingCommunity
Reconstruction Program
Figure 7: Economic South
Assets Valley Stream

sedale Station
T

Sun

rise

E3

Hw y

Economic Assets
Asset ID

Vall
e

y St

ream

Sta

tion

T

Asset Name

E2

Chase Bank

E4

Hoffner’s Service Station

E5

Mill Road Shopping

E1

Auto Repair Shop
Legend:
Green Acres Mall

E3

NYRCR Planning Area Boundary

Moderate Risk Zone
High Risk Zone
Extreme Risk Zone

E5

Economic Asset

E1
E2

E4

00.25
Miles

T

N

Source: Basemap: ESRI, Nassau Co GIS, Tiger; NYRCR Planning
Area: US Census Bureau; Assets: Nassau County GIS, NYS;
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA

0

0.25

0.5 miles

Source:
Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau
Assets: Nassau County GIS
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA
Base map: ESRI

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

39

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Mill Brook Neighborhood

Housing Assets
Housing in South Valley Stream is largely
divided into two neighborhoods of single-family
residences, the Mill Brook neighborhood north
of Valley Stream and North Woodmere south
of Valley Stream. As shown in Table 1: Housing
Tenure Comparison, 2013, they are primarily
owner-occupied neighborhoods with very few
vacant properties. Multi-family housing assets
include the Condominiums on Vanderbilt Way
and Mayfield Apartments (Figure 8: Housing
Assets).

Nassau County

Primary Market Area

South Valley Stream CDP

0%

10%

Owned Housing Units

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

Rented Housing Units

Source:
Census Bureau,
Esri Community
Analyst; 4ward
Table
1:USHousing
Tenure
Comparison,
2013Planning Inc., 2013
Source: US Census Bureau, Esri Community Analyst; 4ward Planning Inc., 2013

40

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

70%

80%

90%

Vacant Housing Units

100%

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

New York RisingCommunity
Reconstruction
Program
Figure 8: Housing
Assets
South Valley Stream

ale Station

T

Sun

rise

Hw y

Housing Assets
Asset ID

Gre

Gre

en A

en A

cres

cres

Rd

Sid

ney

Mall

Woo
d

Vall
e
Pl

land

sO

Flo

Bre

ntw

Fore

ood

st R

Gar
la

Valley Stream

ream

Sta

tion

H1

Condominiums on Vanderbilt Way

H2

Eastern South Valley Stream
Housing Assets

T

H5

Northern South Valley Stream
Housing Assets
Legend:
Southern South Valley Stream
NYRCR Planning Area Boundary
Housing Assets

H3

Green Acres Senior Center

H4

nd L

wer
al N
Rd
South
H4 Northern
v

Rd

n

H3
Lotu

y St

Asset Name

Ln

te R

Clu
d

Sou

thga

ett

ield

ok R

verf

Bro

Clo

d

Housing Asset

ck
le Ro
Valley
Stream

Sadd

Pa

rk

Ln

r
ill D

Woodmere Dr

l
Janet P

h Rd

e

Longview Av

Cedarhurst St

Strathmor
Oakleig

Cherry Ln

Oak Ln

Hewlett Dr

Pearl St

H5 Southern Southe St

Valley Stream

r

on D

Daws

Jewel Dr

Moderate Risk Zone
High Risk Zone
Extreme Risk Zone

South
H2 Eastern
Rd

rel H

Furth R

Lau

H1

Rd

S
Rd

Mill Rd

d

d

00.25
Miles

N

T Basemap: ESRI, Nassau Co GIS, Tiger; NYRCR Planning
Source:
Area: US Census Bureau; Assets: Nassau County GIS, NYS;
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA

0

0.25

0.5 miles

Ke
r
yD

n

dL

arn

iel

inf

Pla

Source:
Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau
Assets: Nassau County GIS
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA
Base map: ESRI

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

41

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Valley Stream South High School and Robert W. Carbonaro Athletic Fields

Health and Social Services Assets
Health and Social Services assets include
schools, health care facilities, day care and
elder care, government buildings, media and
communications, and first responders such as
police, fire, and rescue. Identified health and
social services assets are shown in Figure 9:
Health and Social Services Assets.
The South Valley Stream Community has
several schools, including the Forest Road
School, Valley Stream South High School,
Robert Carbonaro School, and Ogden
Elementary School, as well as day care centers
such as Yale Academy After School, Harbor
Kidz and Forbin Francoise (Figure 9). Forest
Road School serves as a hub for community
42

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

activity in the Mill Brook neighborhood and
hosts Mill Brook Civic Association meetings
and NYRCR Committee meetings. Various
residential medical offices and personal health
care services assets at high risk are dispersed
throughout the Mill Brook neighborhood. Other
health and social services on the periphery of
the Community, include Sunrise Family Foot
Care, Valley Stream Medical Office, and
pharmacies at Wal-Mart and Target, as well as
Parkdale Pharmacy. Health and social services
assets also include government services and
emergency operations, which in South Valley
Stream is limited to the Nassau County Police
outpost at Green Acres Mall, serviced by the
Fifth Precinct.

Valley Stream South High School

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

New York RisingCommunity
Reconstruction Program
Figure 9: Health and Social Services Assets
South Valley Stream
Health and Social Service Assets

dale Station

T

Sun

rise

Gre

en A

cres

Hw y

Asset ID
Sid

ney

Mall

Woo
d

S9

Bre

ntw

Fore

ood

st R

er R

N

d

Eas

two

Ln

od L

n

d

d

te R

Clu

ok R

ve
Clo

Bro

dS

dR

rfiel

d

Sou

thga

ett

Ln

S8

e St

Janet P

Strathmor

l

h Rd

Oakleig

Cedarhurst St

Pearl St

e

Longview Av

Cherry Ln

Woodmere Dr

S10
S2

r

on D

Pa

rk

S11

ck Rd

le Ro

Sadd

r
ill D
rel H

d

Lau

Furth R

S3

Rd

Daws
Hewlett Dr

Oak Ln

S6

S13

S4

S5

Jewel Dr

Sta

tion

T

S4

Athletic Fields (Valley Stream South High
School)

S5

Physical Therapy

S6

Forbin, Francoise Daycare

S12

Shalhevet High School (at Temple Hillel)

S13

S2

Valley Stream South High School
NYRCR Planning Area Boundary
Athletic Fields (Forest Road School)
Moderate Risk
Athletic Fields (Ogden Elementary School)

S3

Risk
Athletic FieldsHigh
(Robert
W. Carbonaro School)

S7

Extreme Risk
Forest Road School

S8

Harbor Kidz Day Care

S10

Ogden Elementary School

S11

Robert Carbonaro School

S9

NCPD Booth I

S14

Yale Academy

S1

S1 S7

S12

ream

n

Flow

nd L

val

Rd

Gar
la

sO

y St

Pl

land

S14
Lotu

Vall
e

Asset Name

Legend:

Moderate Risk Zone
High Risk Zone
Extreme Risk Zone

Health and Social
Services Assets

00.25
Miles

N

T
Source: Basemap: ESRI, Nassau Co GIS, Tiger; NYRCR Planning
Area: US Census Bureau; Assets: Nassau County GIS, NYS;
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA

0

0.25

0.5 miles

Ke

n

r
yD

arn

dL

iel

inf

Pla

Source:
Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau
Assets: Nassau County GIS
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA
Base map: ESRI

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

43

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Infrastructure Systems Assets
Infrastructure systems include transportation
such as roadways and transit, stormwater,
wastewater and water supply infrastructure, gas
stations and solid waste and recycling facilities.
The NYRCR Plan includes infrastructure systems
located within South Valley Stream, but also
considers those systems located outside of
the Community, to the extent that impairment
of those assets due to flooding would affect
community assets or functions.
Key roadways include Sunrise Highway to the
North, Mill Road to the east, and Rosedale Road,
which cuts across the Community from east to
west, as well as the only two entrances to the
Mill Brook neighborhood at Flower Road and
Heatherfield Road (Figure 10: Infrastructure
Assets). The stormwater and storm sewer
systems are comprised of pipes maintained
by the Town of Hempstead under local roads,
which feed into larger mains and pump stations
maintained by Nassau County.

It is important to note that, flood and erosion
defense works are not considered assets for
the purpose of the Asset Inventory and Risk
Assessment. Bulkheads, seawalls, and rip
rap are not assets, but rather erosion control
measures that affect the exposure of an asset
and adjacent assets and properties to storms
or other hazards. For further discussion on
bulkheads and exposure, please see Section
II-B. Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems:
Exposure.

Rosedale Road

Green Acres Mall Substation

Gulf Gas Station

Infrastructure assets also include fuel
distribution. The only gas station within the
planning area is Hoffner’s service station.
Several gas stations immediately outside the
study area are also critical, including the Shell
Station located in an extreme risk area on
Rosedale Road.
One LIPA substation was identified in the
Community, located on an elevated platform
near Green Acres Mall. According to LIPA,
this substation was not damaged. Several
transmission lines operating at 69 and 33 kV
supply power to substations in the communities
of South Valley Stream and Five Towns.
44

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

New York RisingCommunity
Reconstruction Program
Figure 10: Infrastructure
SouthAssets
Valley Stream

dale Station
T

Sun

rise

Gre

Gre

en A

en A

cres

cres

Rd

Hw y

Infrastructure Assets
Sid

ney

Mall

Vall
e
P

I8l

Woo
d

sO

Bre

val

ntw

ood

Fore

st R

Flow

nd L

Lotu

er R

N

d

Eas

two

Ln

Gar
la

I1

I6

od L

(
!

n

d

te R

d

!
(
(
!

thga

!
(
(
!

ett

d
Bro

I3
(
!

dS

am
Stre

Rd

(
!

(
!

Gulf Gas Station
Rosedale Rd
STC Five LLC Antenna
Mill
Rd_High
Legend:
Jedwood Place Pedestrian Bridge

NYRCR Planning Area Boundary

Rosedale Road Bridge

Moderate Risk

101 Green Acres Road
RemediationHigh
SiteRisk

I1
I8

Risk
Green AcresExtreme
Mall Substation

Storm Sewer
Outfall
Roadways
Sewer Pipe

Stormwater Outfalls

Moderate Risk Zone
High Risk Zone
Extreme Risk Zone

Ln

(
( !
!

Pa

rk

ck Rd

le Ro

Sadd

r

d

(
!

e St

l

h Rd

Oakleig

Janet P

Strathmor

(
!

Infrastructure Asset

r

on D
Daws

00.25
Miles

T

N

Source: Basemap: ESRI, Nassau Co GIS, Tiger; NYRCR Planning
Area: US Census Bureau; Assets: Nassau County GIS, NYS;
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA

0

0.25

0.5 miles

Source:
Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau
Assets: Nassau County GIS
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA
Base map: ESRI

e

Longview Av

Cherry Ln

Hewlett Dr

Oak Ln

Cedarhurst St

Sewer Pipe

Water Supply System

ill D

I5 Rosedale R

Jewel Dr

Asset Name

(
!

rel H

(
!

T

I2
I5
I6
I4
I3
I7

(
!!
(

Lau

(
!

Woodmere Dr

ek

re
kC

tion

(
!

(
!

o

ve
Clo

y
Vall e!
(

Sta

dR

rfiel

ok R

(
!

I7
(!
!
(

Ho

Clu

(
!

C reek

Sou

m
rea

I2

!
(
!

I4

!!
(
(

ts
at
(W
!

(
!

ream

(
!

Mill Rd

t
ar S
Cl e
(
!

Rd

n

land

Asset ID

y St

arn

Ke

n

r
yD

dL

iel

inf

Pla

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs
Roadway

45

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

View looking north from Rosedale Rd Bridge to edge of Brook Road Park

Natural and Cultural Resources Assets
Natural and Cultural Resources include a diverse range of assets from
natural and ecological habitats, wetlands and marshes, parks, recreation,
and open space, to museums, libraries, historic landmarks, and religious
establishments. Water is both a valuable natural resource and a key risk
factor in South Valley Stream, with water bodies including Valley Stream,
Watts Creek, Clear Stream, and Fosters Brook Lower. Several parcels
of undeveloped land and walking paths in the northeastern end of the
Mill Brook neighborhood are owned by the Town of Hempstead, as well
as ”The Path,” a greenway walking path along Valley Stream at the end
of Cloverfield Road North (Figure 11: Natural and Cultural Resources).
46

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

South Valley Stream has several recreational assets, including the Forest
Road School Ball Fields and Brook Road Park, both of which were flooded
during Superstorm Sandy. The fields at Valley Stream South High School,
Ogden Elementary School, and Robert Carbonaro School are also
recreational assets, while cultural resources include Temple Hillel and
Congregation Ohr Torah. The Pagen-Fletcher House is outside of the
study area but is an important historical resource for the Community.

New York RisingCommunity
Reconstruction Program
South Valley Stream

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

edale Station
T

Sun

rise

Gre

Gre

en A

en A

cres

cres

Rd

Figure 11: Natural and Cultural Resources

Hw y

Sid

ney

Mall

Woo
d

Vall
e
Pl

Bre

ntw

ood

Fore

st R

Flow

nd L

val

er R

N

d

Eas

two

Ln

Gar
la

sO

od L

n

N6

te R

d

d

Clu

ett

d

Sou

thga

N8
ok R
Bro

C

d

Ln

Asset ID

Sta

tion

T

Asset Name

N2

Clear Stream

N1

Brook Road Park

N5

Legend:
Temple
Hillel

N6

The Path

N7

Valley Stream

N8

Watts Creek

N4

Fosters Brook Lower

N3

Congregation Ohr Torah

ck Rd

NYRCR Planning Area Boundary

Natural and Cultureal Resources Asset

N4

Pa

r

rk

Natural and Cultural Resource Assets

Moderate Risk Zone
High Risk Zone
Extreme Risk Zone

r

on D

Daws
Pearl St
e St

Strathmor

h Rd

e
Longview Av

Ke

T

00.25

0

Miles

N

0.25

0.5 miles

Source: Basemap: ESRI, Nassau Co GIS, Tiger; NYRCR Planning
Source:
Area: US Census Bureau; Assets:
Nassau County GIS, NYS;
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department
of State CoastalUS Census
Roads: Tiger/Line,
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA

Bureau
Assets: Nassau County GIS
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA
Base map: ESRI

r

yD

n

dL

arn

iel

inf

Pla

N3

Oakleig

Cedarhurst St

l
Janet P

Hewlett Dr

Cherry Ln

Oak Ln

Woodmere Dr

Jewel Dr

ream

le Ro

ill D

N5

S

Sadd

rel H

Furth R

Rd

Lau

N7

N1

ield

rf
love

Rd

Mill Rd

N2

Rd

n

land

Lotu

y St

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

47

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Brook Road Park play equipment

Bus Stop at Green Acres Mall

Assets that Serve Socially Vulnerable Populations
Socially vulnerable populations in South Valley
Stream are concentrated among children,
elderly populations (over age 65), and people
with disabilities or limited mobility. Elderly
populations are dispersed throughout high-risk
neighborhoods and concentrated in the Green
Acres Senior Center on Flower Road. 18
Facilities providing services to children include
two day care centers, three elementary schools,
and Valley Stream South High School (Figure
12). All of these facilities are within high-risk
areas. The percentage of elderly residents and
children under nine years old is the same at
16%. Elderly and people with limited mobility
are clustered between Green Acres Road
and Cloverfield Road. The majority of young
children and lower income residents live in the
48

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Mill Brook neighborhood between Green Acres
Road and Flower Road. 19
For the purposes of this planning process,
low-income households are generally defined
as those with an annual income of less than
$35,00020. One in four households earn
less than $35,000 per year, and one in 10
residents do not own a vehicle. The Mill Brook
neighborhood contains a larger share of
low-income households (40% of households
in Mill Brook) than North Woodmere (less
than 10% of households in North Woodmere).
Similarly, households with no access to a vehicle
are concentrated in Mill Brook. The share of
households that lack access to a car ranges
from 11 to 19% in the block groups within Mill
Brook, compared to less than 1% in North

Woodmere. South Valley Stream does not have
a substantial number of non-English-speaking
households. 21
South Valley Stream’s elderly populations
primarily reside in the southern and central
areas. Approximately 26% of the southernmost
block group in North Woodmere consists of
elderly populations, while more than 23% of
the block group near Cloverfield Road South
in Mill Brook consists of elderly populations.
Within South Valley Stream, the Mill Brook
neighborhood is composed of the greatest
share of children under the age of nine, with
more than 26% of the population in the area
near Green Acres Road South consists of young
children.

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Green Acres Senior Center
Forest Rd School

Valley Stream HS

wy

ise H

Sunr

Robert W. Carbonaro School
Day Care

ts
at
W
ee
Cr

am

k

ar

St
re

y
lle
Va

re
St

Ogden Elementary School

am

s
ter
Fos

Cl
e

Bro
ok
er
Low

Day Care
k

k

oo
H

ee
Cr

Woodmere

Figure 12: Assets that Serve Socially Vulnerable Populations
NYRCR Planning Area

Source: NYRCR Planning Area: US Census Bureau; Basemap: ESRI, Nassau GIS, Tiger; Roads: Tiger/
Line, US Census Bureau; Assets: Nassau County GIS; Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State
Coastal Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA

N

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

49

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Critical and Locally Significant
Assets
Special consideration was given to identifying
critical or locally significant assets, the loss
or impairment of which would compromise
essential services for the South Valley Stream
Community. According to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), critical facilities
are essential to the health and welfare of the
whole population and are especially important
following hazard events. 22 Examples of critical
facilities include emergency service facilities,
such as hospitals and other medical facilities,
jails and juvenile detention centers, police and
fire stations, emergency operations centers,
public works facilities, generating plants and
other principal point of utility lines, evacuation
shelters, schools, and other uses that house
vulnerable populations.
FEMA-defined critical facilities may not include
the full range of assets considered critical by the
Community. Therefore, the NYRCR Plan also
identifies locally significant facilities that are
considered critical by other federal agencies,
state, and local officials, and the Committee.
Together, these two groups of critical assets
provide a more complete picture of risk to
important assets. Figure 13 illustrates the
critical and locally significant facilities within
South Valley Stream.

50

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Critical and Locally Significant Assets
Asset ID

Health and Social Services Assets

S7
S10
S11
S12
S13
S14
S9

Forest Road School
Ogden Elementary School
Robert Carbonaro School
Shalhevet High School (at Temple Hillel)
Valley Stream South High School
Yale Academy
NCPD Booth I
Infrastructure Systems Assets
Mill Rd
Rosedale Rd
Gulf Gas Station
Jedwood Place Pedestrian Bridge
Rosedale Road Bridge
STC Five LLC Antenna
Housing Assets
Green Acres Senior Center
Natural and Cultural Resources
Assets
Clear Stream
Watts Creek
Fosters Brook Lower
Valley Stream

I4
I5
I2
I3
I7
I6
H3

N2
N8
N4
N7

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

New York RisingCommunity
Reconstruction Program
Figure 13: Critical and Locally Significant
South Valley Stream
Assets

ale Station

Sun

rise

Gre

Gre

en A

en A

cres

cres

Rd

Hw y

Sid

ney

Mall

S9

Bre

ntw

Fore

ood

st R

er R

d

Eas

two

Ln

od L

Legend:

Natural and Cultural Resources Asset

n

I4

d
te R

Health and Social Services Asset
Infrastructure
Asset
NYRCR
Planning Area Boundary

N8
d

Sou

thga

Rd

S7

d

ield

ok R

verf

Bro

Clo

I3

S
Rd

d

Ln

ck Rd

N4

Pa

rk

r
ill D

I5

Rd

le Ro

Sadd

rel H

Furth R

ett

S13
Lau

I7 S12

Clu

S11

N7

I2

e St

l
Janet P

Strathmor

h Rd

Oakleig

Cedarhurst St

Pearl St

e

Longview Av

Woodmere Dr

Cherry Ln

Oak Ln

Hewlett Dr

S10

r

on D

Daws

Jewel Dr

Housing Asset

T

Mill Rd

N2

tion

n

Flow

N

Sta

nd L

val

ream

Moderate Risk Zone
High Risk Zone
Extreme Risk Zone

Gar
la

I6

sO

land

S14

H3
Lotu

y St

Pl

I8

Woo
d

I1

Vall
e

00.25

T

Miles

N

Source: Basemap: ESRI, Nassau Co GIS, Tiger; NYRCR Planning
0.25
Area: US Census 0
Bureau; Assets: Nassau County
GIS, NYS;
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA

0.5 miles

a
Ke
Dr

Ln

rny

eld

i
inf
Pla

Source:
Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau
Assets: Nassau County GIS
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA
Base map: ESRI

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

51

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Assets with High Community
Value

Assets with a High Community Value
Asset ID

Economic Assets

Asset ID

Housing Assets

The preparation of the NYRCR Plan was a
participatory planning process that incorporated
input from both the Committee and the broader
public. Therefore, Community preferences and
appraisal weighed heavily in determining which
assets the NYRCR Plan identified as important
for protective interventions. In the context of
the Risk Assessment Tool, “community value”
means the value of the asset to the Community
expressed as high, medium, or low. The
following assets have a high community value:

E1

Auto Repair Shop

H3

Green Acres Senior Center

E2

Chase Bank

E3

Green Acres Mall

I3

Gulf Gas Station

E4

Hoffner’s Service Station

I10

Rosedale Road Bridge

E5

Mill Road Shopping

I12

Sewer Pipe

Health and Social Services
Assets

I13

STC Five LLC Antenna

I15

Stormwater Outfall

•

Assets noted as important to protect by
the Committee and public;
• Critical facilities and locally significant
facilities;
• Facilities that serve socially vulnerable
populations;
• Key elements of infrastructure systems
(e.g., gas stations and certain roadways);
• Emergency Operations and Response
Facilities;
• Schools and Community Facilities; and
• Significant Economic assets.
Figure 14: Assets with a High Community Value
illustrates assets with a high community value in
South Valley Stream.

52

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Infrastructure Systems Assets

S6

Forbin, Francoise Daycare

S8

Harbor Kidz Day Care

S7

Forest Road School

N1

Brook Road Park

S1

Forest Road School Athletic Fields

N6

The Path

S10

Ogden Elementary School

N5

Temple Hillel

S2

Ogden Elementary School Athletic
Fields

N2

Clear Stream

N8

Watts Creek

S11

Robert Carbonaro School

N4

Fosters Brook Lower

S12

Shalhevet High School (at Temple
Hillel)

S13

Valley Stream South High School

S4

Valley Stream South High School and
Junior High School Athletic Fields

S14

Yale Academy

S9

NCPD Booth I

Natural and Cultural Resources
Assets

New York RisingCommunity
Reconstruction
Program
South Valley Stream NY Rising Community
Reconstruction
Plan
South Valley Stream

n

Sun

rise

Gre

E3

en A

en A

cres

Figure 14: Assets with a High Community
Value

cres

Rd

Sid

ney

Mal

l

S9

Bre

val

ntw

ood

Fore

st R

Flow

er R

N

d

Eas

two

Ln

od L

(
!

d
te R
thga

N8
ok R
Bro
(
!

Furth R

S12

d

S4
le
Sadd

S13
Rock

(
( !
!
N4

S10

S2

Pearl St
e St

Strathmor

l

Oakleig
h Rd

e

Longview Av

Cedarhurst St

(
!

r

on D

(
!

Janet P

Hewlett Dr

Cherry Ln

Oak Ln

S6

Woodmere Dr

Jewel Dr

Natural and Cultural
Resources
Asset
Stormwater
Outfalls

S8

Pa
(
!

Rd

Infrastructure Asset
Sewer Pipe

I5

Rd

r

rk

I7

(
!
(
!

E5

S11
E1

ill D

Ln

(!
!
(
!
(

(
!!
(

rel H

I2

(
!

ield

verf

Clo
(
!

N1
(
!

ett

I3
(
!

S
Rd

N6
Clu

(
!

d

Sou

E2 E4

Housing Asset
NYRCR Planning Area Boundary
Health and Social Services Asset
Roadways

(
!

!!
(
(

Lau

!
(
!

Legend:

n

!
(
(
!

(
!

Economic Asset

!
(
(
!

(
!

T

Rd

S1 S7

d

(
!

tion

Mill Rd

(
!
N2

Moderate Risk Zone
High Risk Zone
Extreme Risk Zone

Sta

n

sO

I8

ream

nd L

I6

Lotu

y St

Pl

land

S14

H3

I1

Woo
d

Vall
e

Gar
la

Gre

Hw y

Daws

00.25
Miles

T

N

Source: Basemap: ESRI, Nassau Co GIS, Tiger; NYRCR Planning
Area: US Census Bureau; Assets: Nassau County GIS, NYS;
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA

0

0.25

0.5 miles

Ln

yD

arn
Ke

d
iel
inf
Pla

Source:
Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau
Assets: Nassau County GIS
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA
Base map: ESRI

r

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

53

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

B.	Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems
Quantifying Risks: Coastal Hazard
and Risk Assessment Tool
The risk to each asset has been quantified
using a tool developed by NYS DOS. This risk
assessment provides a baseline level of risk
for each group of assets. The reduction in risk
caused by implementing a potential project
will be a key determinant of the risk-reduction
benefit generated by that project.
For the purposes of the Coastal Hazard and
Risk Assessment Tool, the Asset Inventory and
Risk Assessment was limited to critical or locally
significant assets within the South Valley Stream
Community and all assets within extreme and
high risk areas.
Assets within the tool are grouped by:
•
•

Asset Category;
Systems, noting key elements of each
system (e.g., “Roadway Network” and
“Lawson Ave.”);
• Location (e.g., municipality, close
proximity); and
• Similar Exposure and Risk Characteristics
(e.g., NYS Risk Area).
Risk is an expression of hazard, the likelihood
and magnitude of a future storm; exposure,
or the moderating effect of topographic and
shoreline features; and vulnerability, the ability
of an asset to resist damage from a future storm
event for each group of assets.

54

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Hazard
Hazards are storms that are typical for the
region, not unlikely or unpredictable events.
South Valley Stream faces varying types of
hazards:
•

Frequent, low-intensity storm events, such
as average rainfall, causing stormwater
drainage issues and stormwater induced
flooding in the 100-year floodplain.
• Infrequent, high-intensity storm events,
such as above average rainfall,
northeasters, or hurricanes, causing
storm surge and tidally induced flooding
in the 500-year floodplain.
• Combinations of stormwater and tidal
flooding.
• High winds, possibly in combination with
either type of hazard above.
• Long-term hazards posed by bank
erosion and seal level rise.
Because the magnitude of storm events
increases as the likelihood decreases (i.e.,
100-year storms have higher magnitude than
10-year storms), the hazard increases as the
likelihood goes down. The hazard score is
defined as follows:
Very likely or expected to occur. Low intensity
event. >90% probability of occurring
Likely to occur. Moderate intensity event.
66-90%

About as likely as not (possible). High intensity
event. 33-66%
Unlikely to occur. Very high intensity event.
10-33%
Highly unlikely, but
intensity event. 1-10%

conceivable.

Extreme

For the purpose of preparing the NYRCR South
Valley Stream Plan, the design storm event
is a 100-year storm (1% annual chance of
occurring). According to NYS DOS guidance,
the hazard score for a 100-year event is 3,
which is therefore the hazard score noted for all
assets in the risk assessment.

Exposure
South Valley Stream is exposed to tidal flooding
rising from Jamaica Bay through Hook Creek
and Motts Creek past Rosedale Road to Clear
Stream, Watts Creek, Valley Stream, and Fosters
Brook Lower. As demonstrated by Superstorm
Sandy’s inundation of low-lying areas, much
of the community south of Sunrise Highway
is exposed due to lower elevations. The high
point of South Valley Stream is the Green Acres
Mall at an elevation of 18 feet, which slopes
downward to an elevation of two feet at Watts
Creek, and as low as zero at Valley Stream.
Exposure to tidal flooding is heightened by
sandy soils with a high erosion rate along
Watts Creek and limited shoreline defenses
along all water bodies, putting the waterline in
frequent, even daily contact with neighboring

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

homes and parkland. These local topographic
and shoreline conditions increase the impacts
of tidal flooding and coastal hazards on the
assets identified by the Community, notably on
the residential neighborhoods of Mill Brook and
North Woodmere.
Exposure is an expression of the local
topographic and shoreline conditions that tend
to increase or decrease the effects of coastal
hazards on assets. Exposure is determined
by evaluating landscape attributes for assets.
Landscape attributes are features of the
landscape that lie between an asset and the
source of flood waters, which may reduce the
exposure of the assets to flooding. The following
landscape attributes were evaluated for each
group of assets in South Valley Stream:
• Erosion Rate;
• Beach Width;
• Shore Defenses;
• Vegetation;
• Dunes or Bluffs; and
• Soils.
For definitions of these landscape attributes,
see Section V: Additional Materials.
The resulting exposure score for each group
of assets considers the risk area in which the
asset is located and the landscape attributes
that influence the assets’ potential for storm
impacts, as described above. Assets that are
closer and more exposed to hazards are at
greater risk than those that are less exposed.

Vulnerability
At the community level, South Valley Stream is
significantly vulnerable to the impacts of storm
events given its low elevation in relation to base
flood elevation. Vulnerability is an expression
of the assets’ ability to return to service after
a storm. Vulnerability relates to both the
assets’ material strength relative to the coastal
hazard and its regenerative capacity. Based on
feedback from Committee members and the
public during the preparation of the conceptual
plan, a vulnerability score was defined for each
group of assets as follows:

Risk Assessment Tool automatically generates
this risk score, which represents the relative
risk of the assets in the South Valley Stream
Community. Note: risk scores include some
subjective analysis and should not be compared
from one community to another.

Insignificant: Limited Interruption.

Residual (Risk Score <6)
Residual risk scores result from both low
exposure and vulnerability; however, if assets
are critical or have a very high community
value, actions may be warranted to reduce their
risk.

Minor: Service loss of less than 1 week.
Moderate: Service loss 1-4 weeks.
Significant: Service loss greater than 1 month.
Major: Permanent loss.
Vulnerability
scores
were
subsequently
confirmed by the Committee. The average
vulnerability score within South Valley Stream
is 3, with most assets (63% of asset inventory)
experiencing a service loss of one to four weeks
after Superstorm Sandy. Assets along Rosedale
Road experienced greater loss of service of
over one month (24% of asset inventory), while
Green Acres Mall and assets within its vicinity
located in a moderate risk area experienced the
lowest loss of service of less than one week (13
% of asset inventory).

Risk Scores
The Risk Score for each group of assets is
determined by multiplying its hazard, exposure,
and vulnerability. The Coastal Hazard and

Risk = Hazard x Exposure x Vulnerability
Risk scores can range from 1.5, the lowest score
reflecting negligible or residual risk, to 75,
the highest score reflecting severe risk. These
ranges are broken down as follows:

Moderate (Risk Score 6 - 23)
A moderate risk score represents that the assets
may suffer moderate to serious storm impacts,
but that adaptation may be of a lower priority
because either exposure or vulnerability is low.
High (Risk Score 24 - 53)
Risk scores in the high range are indicative of
conditions that could lead to significant negative
impacts from a storm, and actions should be
taken to reduce the assets’ vulnerability and
restore the assets’ coastal protections.
Severe (Risk Score >53).
A severe risk score represents that the assets are
in a dangerous situation and that both exposure
and vulnerability should be reduced.

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

55

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk scores help identify assets with increased
potential for storm damage and serve as one
of many factors in developing the potential
reconstruction
strategies
and
projects
included in the NYRCR Plan; see Section IV:
Implementation—Project Profiles for further
discussion on project evaluation. In addition
to the risk score, other contributing factors
in determining which assets should be
addressed and how immediately they should
be addressed include:
•
•

The assets’ contribution to life safety;
If the asset(s) are critical or locally
significant;
• The assets’ community value;
• Environmental services provided by the
assets;
• Economic contribution of the assets;
• Availability or alternative assets or
facilities; and
• The capacity of the assets to adapt.
See Section V: Additional Materials for the
complete Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment
Tool for the South Valley Stream Community.

56

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Assets and Risks
Economic Assets
Figures 15 & 16 illustrates the risk of each
group of Economic Assets included in the Asset
Inventory and Risk Assessment.
Economic assets located along Rosedale Road
and Mill Road lie in extreme risk areas and suffer
from routine flooding. Of these, Chase Bank
and Hoffner’s Service Station are at extreme risk
for future inundation. Hoffner’s Service Station
is regularly flooded during minor precipitation
events. Key Food, an asset located just outside
of the Community, lies within the extreme risk
area, and when inundated, causes loss of
service to the only grocery store within walking
distance of the Mill Brook neighborhood. Small
businesses in a strip shopping mall along Mill
Road are also at high risk. Among the economic
assets in South Valley Stream, the Green Acres
Mall and Plaza are at moderate risk due to their
higher elevation and greater distance from tidal
flooding conditions than other economic assets
in the Community.

Health and Social Services
Figures 16 illustrates the risk of Health and
Social Services Assets included in the Asset
Inventory and Risk Assessment.
Several schools in South Valley Stream are
located in the high risk area, including Shalhevet
High School, Valley Stream South High School,
and Robert W. Carbonaro School. A day care
near Valley Stream South High School and a
physical therapy practice near Brook Road

Park are also at high risk (Figure 16). These
assets are especially vulnerable due to the
absence of protective vegetation and shore
defenses around them. Most of the schools in
South Valley Stream are at moderate risk such
as Forest Road School, Ogden Elementary
School, and Robert W. Carbonaro School. The
Nassau County Police Department Booth 1, a
FEMA-designated critical facility that serves the
Fifth Precinct, is at moderate risk.

Housing Assets
Figures 16 illustrates the risk of Housing
Assets included in the Asset Inventory and Risk
Assessment, grouped by location, NYS Risk
Area, and similar exposure characteristics.
Multi-family housing assets include the
Vanderbilt Way Condominiums, which straddle
the high and extreme risk areas, and are at
high risk for future inundation. With two access
roads both susceptible to flooding, the Mill
Brook neighborhood is at high risk for future
hazards, with Heatherfield Road at extreme risk
where it borders Hook Creek. North Woodmere
is also located entirely within a high-risk area.
In general, single-story homes throughout
South Valley Stream and those with basements
or driveways below ground elevation are also
particularly vulnerable.

Infrastructure Systems
Figure 15 illustrates the risk of Infrastructure
Systems Assets included in the Asset Inventory
and Risk Assessment. As noted above, each
infrastructure system (e.g., roadway assets) was
analyzed as a group, and key segments of these

infrastructure systems that were noted as locally
significant by the Committee (e.g., Rosedale
Road) were analyzed separately.
The stormwater and sewer systems suffer
varying degrees of extreme to moderate risk,
and while their specific localized conditions are
unknown, the storm sewer system in its current
condition generally appears to be inadequate to
handle high volumes. The storm sewer system
within the Community was built in some cases
half a century ago when upland development
was not as dense as it is today. The existing
system was constructed to handle flows from
past development patterns and is not sized for
current or future needs.
Sewer pipes throughout the South Valley Stream
community are at high risk, as is the roadway
network. Key elements of the roadway network
are Rosedale Road and Mill Road, which are the
main transportation arteries for the Community
and are both at high risk. They also provide
access to the only two entrances to the Mill
Brook neighborhood, via connecting arterials
Heatherfield Road and Old Central Avenue to
Flower Road.
Fuel shortages after Superstorm Sandy
increased the vulnerability of most assets
beyond the infrastructure systems class,
especially the ability of businesses to open and
residents to recover from the storm. Therefore,
all gas stations within South Valley Stream were
noted as locally significant, including the Gulf
Gas Station on Rosedale Road and the Shell
Station located on Rosedale Road just outside
of South Valley Stream but within the Five Towns
Community.
Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

57

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

New York RisingCommunity
Reconstruction Program
Figure 15: Risk to Infrastructure
AssetsStream
South Valley

sedale Station
T

Sun

rise

Hw y
Vall
e

y St

I2

I17

ream

Legend: Risk Levels
Moderate
High

Sta

Storm Sewer Outfall

tion

Sewer Pipe

T

Water Supply System
Legend:

I7
I13

I1

NYRCR Planning Area Boundary
I7

Roadways

(
!

I17

(
!

I6

Sewer Pipe

I5

Mill Rd

!!
(
(

I7

I12

!

m
rea
I6
!
I14!I11 I3
I16 I8

ok

(
!

(
!

ts
at
(W
!

Stormwater Outfalls

( I4
!

C reek

t
ar S
Cl e
!

Ho

!
(
(
!

(
!
!
(

m
trea
yS !
(

I4

I15

(
!!
(

Vall e!
(
(
!

(
!

(
!

I15

(
!

I10

!!
(
!

I9Rose

dale Rd

ek
Cre

(
( !
!

I9

(
!

(
!

(
!

00.25

Gibson Station

N

Source: Basemap: ESRI, Nassau Co GIS, Tiger; NYRCR Planning
Area: US Census Bureau; Assets: Nassau County GIS, NYS;
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA

0

I11

58

Miles

T

0.25

0.5 miles

Source:
Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau
Assets: Nassau County GIS
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA
Base map: ESRI

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs
Roadway

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Infrastructure Assets: Risk Level
Asset
ID

Asset Name

Risk
Level

I3

Gulf Gas Station

High

I6

Roadway Assets_Extreme

High

I8

Rosedale Rd_Extreme

High

I11

Sewer Pipe_Extreme

High

I16

Water Supply System_Extreme

High

I7

Roadway assets_High

High

I9

Rosedale Rd_High

High

I12

Sewer Pipe_High

High

I13

STC Five LLC Antenna

High

I14

Stormwater Outfall_Extreme

High

I17

Water Supply System_High

High

I5

Mill Rd_High

High

I4

Jedwood Place Pedestrian
Bridge

Moderate

I10

Rosedale Road Bridge

Moderate

I15

Stormwater Outfall_High

Moderate

I1

101 Green Acres Road
Remediation Site

Moderate

I2

Green Acres Mall Substation

Moderate

Legend: Risk Levels
Residual
Moderate
High
Severe

Electric utility systems maintained by the Long
Island Power Authority are critical assets at
especially high risk, including the substation
on Flower Road, as power outages following
Superstorm Sandy reportedly lasted for
longer than one month. Limited natural gas
infrastructure is maintained by National Grid.
The only noted communications antenna in
South Valley Stream is also at high risk.

Natural and Cultural Resources
Figure 16 illustrates the risk of Natural and
Cultural Resources Assets included in the Asset
Inventory and Risk Assessment.

Valley Stream South benefits from being built
at a slightly higher elevation. Forbin Francoise
day care center is located further inland but can
experience flooding from both Valley Stream to
the north and Fosters Brook lower to the south.
Facilities at moderate risk include Ogden
Elementary School, Forest Road School, Robert
Carbonaro School, and Harbor Kidz Day
Care. The Green Acres Senior Center and Yale
Academy are at comparatively lower risk, but
are still considered at moderate risk for future
storm events.

Brook Road Park and the fields at Valley
Stream South High School, Ogden Elementary
School, and Robert Carbonaro School are
all recreational assets located in the high risk
area. Temple Hillel is also at high risk for
future inundation. Congregation Ohr Torah
and Fosters Brook Lower are at moderate risk,
but both are close to Motts Creek and the
Congregation Ohr Torah is located on filled
wetland.

Socially Vulnerable Populations
Figures 16 illustrates assets serving socially
vulnerable populations included in the Asset
Inventory and Risk Assessment.
The Forbin Francoise day care center, Shalhevet
High School, and Valley Stream South High
School are all at high risk for future storm events.
Shalhevet High School and Valley Stream South
High School are highly vulnerable because
they are located along Valley Stream; however,
Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

59

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
sedale Station

New York RisingCommunity
Reconstruction Program
South Valley
Stream
Figure 16: Risk to Economic,
Housing,

T

Sun

rise

Gre

Gre

en A
E3 c

en A

cres

res

Rd

Health and Social Services, and Natural
and Cultural Assets

Hw y

Sid

ney

Mall

Woo
d

S9

Vall
e
Pl

land

S14

y St

ream

Sta

tion
T

Legend: Risk Levels
Moderate
High

Rd

Legend:

Bre

ntw

ood

Fore

st R

Flow

er R

N

d

Ln

Northern South
Valley Stream
N6

d
te R

Clu

H1

N1

Furth R

d

Ln
rk

S3 S11

ck Rd

H2

le Ro

Sadd

S8

Pa

e St

Strathmor

l

Janet P

h Rd

n

r

yD

dL

arn

Ke

iel

inf

Pla

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

N3

Eastern South
Valley Stream
r

on D

Daws

Pearl St
Oakleig

Cedarhurst St

E1

r

S10

e
Longview Av

Woodmere Dr

Hewlett Dr

Oak Ln

S2

S6

60

S4

N4

Jewel Dr

Southern South
Valley Stream

S13

S4

ill D

Roseda

le Rd

Cherry Ln

H5

C

am
Stre

rel H

ok

Ho

ll ey
N7Va

S5

N5
S12

k
ree

Clo

Rd

S
Rd

Lau

E4

d
Bro

N8

ield

verf

ok R

Sou

C reek

thga

ett

ts
at
W

m
rea
E2

E5

Mill Rd

t
ar S
Cl e

N2

NYRCR Planning Area Boundary

S7

S1

d

H4

nd L

val

Gar
la

sO

n

H3

Lotu

00.25

Gibson Station

T

Miles

N

0.25

Source: Basemap: ESRI, Nassau Co GIS, Tiger; NYRCR Planning
Area: US Census Bureau; Assets: Nassau County GIS, NYS;
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA,
and FEMA
Source:

0

0.5 miles

Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau
Assets: Nassau County GIS
Coastal Risk Zones: NYS Department of State Coastal
Management Program, NOAA, and FEMA
Base map: ESRI

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Economic Assets: Risk Level
Asset
ID

Asset Name

Risk
Level

E2

Chase Bank

High

E4

Hoffner’s Service Station

High

E5

Mill Road Shopping

E1

Auto Repair Shop

Moderate

E3

Green Acres Mall

Moderate

High

Housing Assets: Risk Level
Asset
ID

Asset Name

Risk
Level

H1

Condominiums on Vanderbilt
Way

H2

Eastern South Valley Stream
Housing Assets

H4

Northern South Valley Stream
Housing Assets

Moderate

H5

Southern South Valley Stream
Housing Assets

Moderate

H3

Green Acres Senior Center

Moderate

Health and Social Service Assets: Risk
Level

Natural and Cultural Resource Assets:
Risk Level

Asset
ID

Asset
ID

Asset Name

Risk
Level

S4

Athletic Fields (Valley Stream
South High School)

High

S5

Audrey L. Gulian, Physical
Therapy

High

S6

Forbin, Francoise Daycare

High

S12

Shalhevet High School (at
Temple Hillel)

High

S13

Valley Stream South High
School

S1

Athletic Fields (Forest Road
School)

Moderate

S2

Athletic Fields (Ogden
Elementary School)

Moderate

S3

Athletic Fields (Robert W.
Carbonaro School)

Moderate

S7

Forest Road School

Moderate

S8

Harbor Kidz Day Care

Moderate

S10

Ogden Elementary School

Moderate

S11

Robert Carbonaro School

Moderate

S9

NCPD Booth I

Moderate

S14

Yale Academy

Moderate

High

Moderate

High

Asset Name

Risk
Level

N2

Clear Stream

High

N1

Brook Road Park

High

N5

Temple Hillel

High

N6

The Path

High

N7

Valley Stream

High

N8

Watts Creek

High

N4

Fosters Brook Lower

Moderate

N3

Congregation Ohr Torah

Moderate

Legend: Risk Levels
Residual
Moderate
High
Severe

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

61

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

C.	Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
Superstorm Sandy exposed the greater
system-wide inadequacy of existing flood
mitigation and protection systems in South
Valley Stream, as well as the need for more
robust comprehensive planning. The objective
of the Needs Assessment is to evaluate the
potential for increased resilience in the short,
medium, and long term in South Valley Stream.
The following section builds upon the initial
evaluation of the needs and opportunities
within the Community, which was presented in
the NYRCR Conceptual Plan. This more detailed
Assessment of Needs and Opportunities was
refined through additional analysis of the
assets and risks within the Community and
demographic and economic data and through
input from the Committee and the public.
For each of the six Recovery Support Functions,
the following Needs Assessment has identified
areas in which South Valley Stream could
improve its resilience to major storms and other
disasters. This analysis incorporates input that
the Committee received at Planning Committee
Meetings and Public Engagement Events and
has helped to guide the Committee identify
strategies to guide the process and projects
that will contribute to resilience in South Valley
Stream.

62

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Community Planning and
Capacity Building
To assess needs for Community Planning and
Capacity Building, South Valley Stream was
studied for its ability to:
•
•
•

Mobilize storm recovery activities;
Adequately educate residents; and
Implement long-term plans to mitigate
storm damage.
Public education and awareness in relation
to emergency preparedness emerged as a
critical need due to the presence of disbursed
vulnerable populations and because so many
residents did not evacuate prior to Superstorm
Sandy making landfall. Existing regional plans
that included South Valley Stream were studied
for their specific focus on resilience to major
storms. The Needs Assessment also reviewed
Nassau County and Town of Hempstead
programs and land use policies that impact
resilience on the Community.

Community Planning and Capacity
Building Needs
Nassau County is currently in the process of
updating the Nassau County Multi-Jurisdictional
Hazard Mitigation Plan (Hazard Mitigation
Plan). While the Hazard Mitigation Plan was
originally implemented in 2007, the current
update is meant to help prioritize mitigation
projects in the future, using the risks exposed
by Superstorm Sandy as a way to learn more
about potential damage from natural disasters
in the future. 23 As a community that was heavily

impacted by the flooding caused by Superstorm
Sandy, representatives from South Valley Stream
should play an integral role in providing data
to the Nassau County Office of Emergency
Management. The development of an updated
Hazard Mitigation Plan presents an opportunity
for South Valley Stream to gain additional
resources and attention from Nassau County in
creating plans to protect the community from
future storms.
Nassau County also has other programs
to help residents, including those in South
Valley Stream, remain prepared for extreme
weather and other disasters. For example, the
SWIFTREACH program, instituted by County
Executive Edward Mangano, sends information
and emergency notification updates to email
addresses and cellphone numbers. The Town
of Hempstead provides a similar emergency
notification system, Swift911.

Community Planning and Capacity
Building Opportunities
To provide more effective education campaigns,
South Valley Stream has an opportunity
to benefit from the institutional resources
possessed by the Town of Hempstead and
Nassau County, as well as the local knowledge
of the Mill Brook Civic Association. Greater
coordination between the Town and the County
with local community-based organizations can
help to better educate residents and improve
disaster preparedness and recovery. Improved
communication, information sharing, and
awareness can help to facilitate emergency

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Economic Resiliency

Green Acres Mall

response by connecting external resources to
those in need.
To improve public education and preparedness,
South Valley Stream can build upon a strong
network of community-based organizations,
civic pride, and neighborhood education to
strengthen outreach. The Mill Brook Civic
Association has served as an advocate for
residents in South Valley Stream, and Project
Hope has proven to be a critical asset in reaching
people impacted by Superstorm Sandy across
Nassau County. Efforts such as these could be
combined to help connect relief organizations
with a greater number of residents.

Although the business community in South
Valley Stream includes a variety of small
businesses, Green Acres Mall is the clear retail
anchor. Since opening as a super-regional
center in 1956,24 Green Acres Mall has been an
important asset in that it provides the greatest
share of tax dollars in the Community. The
Mall and surrounding retailers were the least
impacted of all economic assets in South Valley
Stream, as they are located on higher ground.
Therefore, as a large facility with backup power
at only moderate risk, Green Acres Mall could
serve a higher utility for disaster recovery.
Even though the residential neighborhoods
within South Valley Stream are physically cut off
from the mall, the Community relies on this retail
anchor for both services and for the tax revenue
that it provides to schools in the Community.
However, in the long-term, over-reliance on
Green Acres Mall could create vulnerabilities
in South Valley Stream from heavy dependence
on a single economic asset, especially since
national trends show a decline in the popularity
of malls in an era of online retail25. The
long-term viability of the mall is important to
South Valley Stream from a fiscal standpoint.
The Mall’s tax contribution of more than $13
million to local schools is a vital component of
long-term economic resilience in South Valley
Stream. 26 Without the property taxes generated
by the mall, local property tax rates would likely
have to increase dramatically to support the cost
of existing public services, including emergency
management and infrastructure investments.
Therefore, the South Valley Stream Community
should be ready to respond in a proactive rather
than a reactive manner should the mall follow
national trends of decline. (Note: for details on

property tax contributions by Green Acres Mall,
see Section V: Additional Materials).
Further, the Community should see to support
smaller, local businesses, especially those which
were damaged by Superstorm Sandy. These
businesses include those along Rosedale Road
and Mill Road, some of which are also subject
to routine flooding.

Economic Resiliency Needs
• Ensure local businesses have the
business continuity resources they need
to reopen as a result of a storm event.
• Market local businesses and make sure
that residents are aware when local
businesses reopen following a storm
event.27
• Consider whether certain businesses (for
example, the small businesses located on
Rosedale Road) could be relocated to a
non-flood prone location.
• Diversify the tax base by supporting new
businesses that will help fill employment
and tax base gaps should Green Acres
Mall decline with market trends.
Economic Resiliency Opportunities
• Opportunity to engage developers
to look at mutually beneficial
redevelopment opportunities for
commercial and industrial vacancies
within (and on the border of) South
Valley Stream. As of fall 2013, vacant
properties were located on West Sunrise
Highway (four vacancies), in the Airport
Industrial Office Park (one vacancy), and
in a Green Acres Mall Pad Site.28
• Consider commercial opportunities for
Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

63

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

•

services, entertainment, and dining to
diversify the tax base.
Create an economic development plan
for South Valley Stream to guide future
growth.

Health and Social Services
In the event of a future disaster that impacts
South Valley Stream, it is critical that public
health, health care facilities, and essential
social service needs are restored to best serve
businesses and residents in the Community.
The Committee gave extra focus to the needs of
assets that serve socially vulnerable populations,
including children, the elderly, and people with
disabilities or limited mobility.

Health and Social Services Needs
Nearly the entire area of South Valley Stream
was inundated by Superstorm Sandy. Although
some structures within the Community were
built at a higher elevation and avoided
flooding, many organizations that serve socially
vulnerable populations were impacted by the
storm due to building damage, impassable
roads, and power outages.
Health and Social Services assets in South Valley
Stream could better provide comprehensive
services after future storms if they were able
to improve their means of communication,
emergency recovery capabilities, and ability to
operate after extreme conditions have passed.
Communication issues in South Valley Stream
fit into three primary categories: education and
preparedness, resilience to power outages, and
reaching vulnerable populations. Education
64

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

and preparedness is an issue that relates to
all residents in South Valley Stream. The Mill
Brook Civic Association assigns block captains
to coordinate neighbors; however this program
does not extend to the North Woodmere
neighborhood and could benefit from improved
technology and face-to-face interaction among
neighbors. Power outages are a persistent risk
during extreme weather, making it critical to
develop communication strategies that are
not dependent on grid-based power sources.
Vulnerable populations, such as the elderly
and people with disabilities or limited mobility,
are dispersed throughout South Valley Stream.
There is a need to create a database to make
sure that individual residents are accounted for
after an emergency.
Emergency recovery in South Valley Stream
necessitates the siting of facilities in accessible
locations on high ground that provide resources
to local residents in the event of significant
flooding, power outages, extreme heat events,
nor’easters, or other disasters. These facilities
require the capability to serve as heating and
cooling centers during power outages and
when residents are unable to return to their
homes following a flood event.
It is important for Health and Social Services
assets, especially South Valley Stream’s schools,
to be able to withstand extreme weather events
and bounce back quickly from disasters. The
schools fulfill critical functions and provide
resources to local children and their families
and these facilities during recovery.
Assistance is necessary during evacuation and
emergency response for elderly populations,

Identifying Housing Needs and Opportunities

children and people with disabilities or
limited mobility. The Nassau County Office
of Emergency Management (OEM) is a key
resource for evacuation and emergency
response. However, OEM has experienced
difficulty in identifying dispersed vulnerable
populations that reside in private homes and
are not concentrated in senior communities or
other health care facilities.
Increased individual awareness of nearby
vulnerable
community
members
could
complement
Nassau
County’s
formal
emergency assistance protocols. With this
understanding, the Community could better
coordinate with the County for emergency
operations and disaster response and could be
better prepared to respond to conditions that
may not qualify as a severe emergency but
could still be disruptive, especially to vulnerable
residents.

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Health and Social Services Opportunities
South Valley Stream is well-placed to promote
the independence and preparedness of socially
vulnerable populations in the event of future
disasters. Strategies that could be considered
to build upon existing social networks in the
Community range from having emergency
response plans, to utilizing existing infrastructure
to serve residents during emergencies, to
creating a system of tracking socially vulnerable
populations within the Community.
Active civic organizations within the Community
can help to establish more formal emergency
response and recovery plans. The Mill Brook Civic
Association and parent-teachers associations
at the Hewlett-Woodmere Union Free School
District and the Valley Stream Union Free
School District are all heavily involved in their
communities and well-connected to a network
of residents. By creating a coordinated disaster
plan, these groups could provide education and
resources to many households in South Valley
Stream. Further, the existence of an established
Civic Association in Mill Brook presents an
opportunity to expand this organization’s
reach by partnering with residents in North
Woodmere. Of particular impact would be an
expansion of the Mill Brook Civic Association’s
block captain program.
Green Acres Mall could also serve as a critical
resource in the event of a future disaster. The
mall has existing backup power supplies and
could serve as an informal heating and cooling
center. Residents also used the mall’s parking
lot for storing personal vehicles during and in
the aftermath of Sandy, making it a potential
location for future emergency parking.

Because of its deep connections to the
Community, the Mill Brook Civic Association
could assist the County in identifying vulnerable
populations using social networks within Mill
Brook and North Woodmere. By working with
local organizations such as the Mill Brook
Civic Association to locate the most vulnerable
people during a storm event, the County
could better monitor the need for assistance.
In addition, LIPA maintains a list of vulnerable
residents, which could be used by Nassau
County OEM to locate vulnerable populations,
pending the resident’s authorization to share
this information with the County.

Housing
The Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
for Housing guided the Committee’s process in
developing strategies to achieve local housing
goals. This section takes into account both the
impact of Superstorm Sandy on residential
areas within the Community and the impact
of projected housing trends on future risk to
residents in South Valley Stream.

Housing Needs
As a result of damage from Superstorm Sandy,
some homes in South Valley Stream still require
repair, additional housing is necessary for
displaced residents. Further, homes need to
be repaired in a way that makes them more
resilient against future storm events, to maintain
the residential, neighborhood character of
South Valley Stream. A more resilient housing
stock could help stabilize property values and
preserve neighborhood integrity.
The Storm highlighted the need for improved
coordination of evacuation for vulnerable
populations prior to storm events, identification
of where vulnerable populations reside, and
improved provision of resources to these
populations following storm events.

Housing Opportunities
Immediate opportunities exist for short-term
repairs and physical flood prevention measures
to houses that continue to flood regularly, such
as dry-proofing or wet-proofing. However, more
lasting solutions are required for long-term
recovery, such as relocation of utilities or
removing recessed garages and basements.
Therefore, homeowners could benefit from
Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

65

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

incentives to undergo home retrofits that
improve the resiliency of South Valley Stream’s
housing stock.
In addition, the Community could advocate
for strengthening residential building codes
for storm resilience. This would also contribute
to a sense of safety and trust in South Valley
Stream’s housing stock. Housing values are
a concern to some residents of South Valley
Stream, but long-term recovery presents an
opportunity to increase property values by
making homes more resilient against future
storm events. The Community could examine
housing trends to see which issues can be
addressed, in a context-appropriate manner,
by future residential development.
Lastly, South Valley Stream could capitalize on
the opportunity presented by its close knit social
infrastructure of the Mill Brook Civic Association
to identify vulnerable populations and
implement evacuation strategies for vulnerable
populations.

Infrastructure
Improving infrastructure was identified as a
primary need in the Community. Upgrades
could strengthen coastal protections, improve
storm drainage water capacity, expand storm
drain networks, and build a more reliable
power grid and transportation network system.
These infrastructure improvements will benefit
the local planning area and will add to the
resiliency of neighboring communities.
The Assessment of Needs and Opportunities
for Infrastructure focused on systems that
66

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

not only failed during Superstorm Sandy and
Hurricane Irene, but also result in flooding
during less extreme events. By addressing these
frequent infrastructure needs and identifying
potential opportunities for improved systems,
the Committee recognized that investments
infrastructure have co-benefits that allow first
responders to operate more effectively and
support economic resilience by protecting local
businesses.

Infrastructure Needs:
Flooding and the Stormwater Drainage
Systems
The Valley Stream system accumulates
stormwater from upstream in its watershed
as the water flows to Hook Creek and on to
Jamaica Bay. In addition to this load, water
from spring tides and tidal flows also enter the
system, creating backups. The amount of water
entering the system cannot exit at the same rate
and results in flooding of within the Community.
The small area of pervious surfaces in the
planning area limits the potential for infiltration
and increases the need for other types of runoff
water storage facilities.
The increase in stormwater runoff, inadequate
drainage system capacity, and the potential
for increased coastal flooding due to climate
change leave South Valley Stream susceptible to
flooding events. According to public feedback,
since Superstorm Sandy, spring tides (the
exceptionally high and low tides that occur when
the Sun, Moon, and Earth are approximately
aligned) have been regularly flooding the
areas around the head of Hook Creek in
North Woodmere. The conditions of bulkheads
in the South Valley Stream Community have

Existing Intact Bulkhead

Existing Compromised Bulkhead

Existing Deteriorated Bulkhead

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

deteriorated, leading to increased erosion. In
most areas, outlet pipes do not have backflow
prevention valves to keep water from entering
into the system at high tide. In low lying areas
near Valley Stream and Hook Creek, these open
pipes allow water to backflow in the stormwater
system and up through the catchment basins,
creating street flooding during high tide.
Flooding also occurs farther north in the South
Valley Stream area due to an inadequate
stormwater sewer system. The existing system,
even if it were clear of obstructions, has
insufficient capacity to convey current load.
The interior condition of the stormwater sewer
system was unknown before Hurricane Irene
and Superstorm Sandy, but since the storms,
noticeable buildup of silt and debris within
the stormwater conveyance system has been
identified. This buildup impedes the discharge
of stormwater, further exacerbating flooding.
As many as 23 stormwater outfalls are located
along Valley Stream, Watts Creek, and Clear
Stream, as well as four outfalls located along
Fosters Brook Lower. The condition of these
outfalls is not known. A hydrologic and
hydraulic study is necessary to determine
the existing stormwater system flows and
capacity, deficiencies within the system, and
recommended improvements to the system.
After stormwater exits the stormwater system,
the tributaries of Valley Stream, Clear Stream,
and Watts Creek naturally carry stormwater to
Hook Creek and on to Head of Bay. The ability
of these stream systems to convey stormwater
depends in part on their carrying capacity,
which is a function of the depth and width of

the channel and the gradient, as well as other
obstructions in the channel. It is suspected that
Superstorm Sandy and other storm events have
deposited silt in these channels and reduced the
carrying capacity. Additionally, the footbridge
over Valley Stream at Cloverfield Road North
has been removed but the abutments remain
and extend into the stream bed, likely reducing
drainage capacity.
Some of the bulkheads in the Community are
deteriorating, and the riverbanks along Valley
Stream, Watts Creek, Clear Stream, and Hook
Creek have become destabilized over the
years. Shoreline restoration along key corridors
in South Valley Stream, including Clear Stream,
Valley Stream, Watts Creek, and Fosters Brook
Lower, would likely decrease flooding by
making improvements to bulkheads, restoring
ecosystem functions, removing sediment, and
stabilizing riverbanks.

Utilities
In addition to stormwater sewer system
inadequacies, Superstorm Sandy illustrated
the weaknesses of the South Valley Stream
Community’s utility systems. Currently, the
majority of the Community is powered solely by
electrical power, with all of the electrical wires
above ground and susceptible to damaging
winds and windborne debris. The effect of
Superstorm Sandy was not just flooding, but the
weeks and months after the storm during which
the community went without power and without
the ability to produce heat and hot water within
their homes without the aid of generators.
Although natural gas can be a vital backup
source for heat and power when electrical

utilities are down, according to the Committee,
the number of homes and businesses with
natural gas connections is limited.

Infrastructure Opportunities
Despite the many challenges presented by
overtaxed and unmaintained infrastructure in
the South Valley Stream Community, there are
also several opportunities to build upon the
systems that exist, making stormwater, flood
protections, and utilities networks more resilient
to future disasters. Since many of these systems
are regional in nature, the NYRCR Plan may help
draw attention to the need for coordination by
Nassau County and the Town of Hempstead in
encouraging projects in upstream communities
to reduce stormwater runoff and increase the
capacity of the drainage system.
Also at a regional level, residents of the
Community and representatives of the County
and Town could participate in the study of
regional tide water control measures in Jamaica
Bay, at Rockaway Inlet, and at the barrier island.
There is limited potential to resolve the risk of
tidal flooding within the boundaries of South
Valley Stream, so a regional approach is critical
to addressing future risk of catastrophic storms
like Superstorm Sandy.
While stormwater runoff is a major issue in
South Valley Stream, a strategic approach to
the implementation of green infrastructure
strategies alongside traditional stormwater
management measures could create a
comprehensive response to a widespread
problem. A County-wide stormwater mitigation
plan would help to guide these strategies,
Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

67

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Natural and Cultural Resources
The Assessment of Needs and Opportunities for
Natural and Cultural Resources addresses the
impact that Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene,
and other major storms have had on the ability
of coastal protections, such as bulkheads and
living shorelines, in mitigating future inundation.

‘The Path’ During Flood Condition

which could include incentives to implement
green infrastructure and subsurface stormwater
retention, installation of backflow preventers
on stormwater outfalls, and the establishment
of guidelines for the maintenance of the
existing drainage structures and channels and
maintenance of any new or planned drainage
structures.
Finally, opportunities also exist to create a more
resilient power grid that is less susceptible to
outages. A more resilient power grid would
utilize renewable energy and microgrids to
provide backup power to critical and locally
significant facilities.

68

Section II: Assessment of Risks and Needs

Natural and Cultural Resource Needs
Tidal flows from major storms and the failure
of erosion control structures have resulted in
increased sedimentation buildup within Valley
Stream, Hook Creek, and their tributaries. This
limits the amount of extra storage capacity within
these water bodies during storm events, particularly
during high tide. The increased sedimentation and
debris routinely washes onto residential properties
in South Valley Stream because of the inadequate
storage capacity, eroded banks, and deteriorated
bulkheads.
Natural resource assets contribute to environmental
quality and public health. Street trees in the
Community help filter air pollutants, reducing
illnesses such as asthma, cooling air temperatures
and conserving energy. Trees and natural areas,
such as Brook Road Park and “The Path,” can
reduce and filter stormwater runoff before it
reaches waterways, thus improving water quality.
Although the South Valley Stream Community has
open space and recreation space, an increase
in green infrastructure would be very beneficial
for stormwater detention/retention. South Valley
Stream does not have adequate space to develop
large wetland areas to act as buffers between the
Community and tidal and stormwater flows, which
creates a need to develop green infrastructure in
existing open spaces. Green infrastructure solutions

will also require a long-term management strategy
including community education and ongoing
maintenance. Athletic fields, Brook Road Park,
and other parks provide opportunities for green
infrastructure and educational opportunities.
Further, these natural assets provide benefits such
as increasing property values, neighborhood
beautification, and traffic calming.
In recent years, Superstorm Sandy and other
major storms, including Hurricane Irene, have
damaged and severely diminished the vegetation
in the South Valley Stream area. Multiple locations
in the area, most notably “The Path,” are in need
of replanting, which would increase the absorption
capacity of the area and reduce stormwater
runoff and flooding. While new tree plantings are
needed, proper maintenance is also required to
reduce the possibility of damage to power lines, as
was experienced during Superstorm Sandy.

Natural and Cultural Opportunities
The South Valley Stream Community can build
upon the many parks, open spaces, and living
shorelines to improve stormwater retention and
mitigate inundation. Living shorelines along
Valley Stream, Clear Stream, Watts Creek, Fosters
Brook Lower, and Hook Creek have experienced
erosion, but the riverbanks could be stabilized to
restore the stream corridors. Bulkheads that are in
disrepair could be repaired or replaced to provide
additional erosion protections. Improved tree
maintenance and reforestation of “The Path” could
provide opportunities for wetlands restoration
and increased buffering of Valley Stream, while
restoring the natural shoreline along “The Path” to
improve absorption capacity.

Section III
Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Town of Hempstead Property

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section III: Reconstruction

and

Resiliency Strategies

The South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Planning Committee (Committee) developed a series of Reconstruction
Strategies that emerged from the public engagement process:
•
•
•
•

Strategy 1: Manage Tidal Flow;
Strategy 2: Retain Stormwater;
Strategy 3: Reinforce the Power Grid;
Strategy 4: Strengthen Communication and Coordination;
and
• Strategy 5: Maintain and Enhance Economic Viability.
These strategies were used to guide the development of the South Valley
Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan (NYRCR Plan) (Figure
17). Together, they effectively address each of six Recovery Support
Functions.

Assessment and Risk Assessment, five strategies emerged to guide
development and evaluation of Proposed and Featured Projects. These
five strategies, which were introduced above, were used by the Committee
throughout the NYRCR process to ensure that the Proposed and Featured
Projects created a comprehensive set of solutions to the needs identified
for South Valley Stream.
The Committee developed Proposed and Featured Projects to address
the strategies. The Proposed and Featured Projects have been assessed
for their ability to mitigate future risk, vetted by the Committee and
the public; and categorized by their capacity to address the strategies
described below.
A full description of Proposed Projects and Featured Projects can be found
in Section IV: Implementation—Project Profiles.

Based on input from the Planning Committee, feedback from Public
Engagement Events, and the outcome of the Needs and Opportunities

Strategy 1: Manage Tidal Flow
Though Superstorm Sandy was an unprecedented event, the sources and
causes of flooding observed during the disaster are regularly reflected
on a smaller scale during high tides, rain storms, and nor’easters. Due
to the low elevation of the development throughout the Community and
immediately adjacent to the water, the creek shorelines in South Valley
Stream provide incomplete protection against certain levels of tidal
inundation. Inundation from tidal waters occurs relatively frequently and
is expected to increase as a result of climate change, which increases both
the general sea level and the frequency of extreme events such as high
wind induced surges.

70

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Strategy 1 addresses the Infrastructure and Natural and Cultural Resources
recovery support functions. Proposed and Featured Projects within
Strategy 1 improve infrastructure by minimizing tidal flooding impacts
through natural and man-made measures to manage tidal flow. Strategy
1 impacts natural and cultural resources because corridor restoration and
riverbank stabilization, including bulkhead repair where appropriate, will
help to prevent erosion along Hook Creek and Valley Stream.

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

STRATEGY 1: Manage Tidal Flow
Project Name

Short Description

Estimated
Cost

Project Regional
Category
(Y/N)

$50,000

Proposed

Y

South Shoreline Improvement Program
Study

Study methods for facilitating coordinated shoreline improvements to achieve a
contiguous shoreline, including funding mechanisms, streamlining permitting, and
incentivizing bulkhead repairs and living shoreline improvements.

Repair Bulkheads and Restore Shoreline
at Brook Road Park

Provide necessary repairs to Brook Road Park by replacing failing bulkhead with
a vegetated buffer and a rock edge, constructing a sculpted mound tied into
the higher elevation to protect against tidal flooding, repairing outfalls, and
constructing a fishing pier for waterfront access.

$2,000,000

Proposed

N

Restore Natural Shoreline along ‘The
Path’

Restore the natural shoreline along ‘The Path’ by constructing a living shoreline
to buffer tidal flow, planting trees and other vegetation, repairing outfalls and
installing green infrastructure measures with educational signage to capture
stormwater runoff.

$1,700,000

Proposed

N

Corridor restoration and
riverbank stabilization: Valley Stream,
Clear Stream,
Watts Creek, Fosters Brook Lower

This project seeks to establish continuous shoreline protection through bulkhead
and living shoreline restoration, where appropriate, along water bodies in South
Valley Stream.

Featured

N

Sub-project A: Watts Creek

Living shoreline improvements would be made to both sides of Watts Creek.

$1,520,000

Sub-project B North: Valley Stream
North

Living shoreline improvements would be made to the north side of Valley Stream
between Brook Road Park and the Path.

$1,100,000

Sub-project B Southwest: Valley
Stream Southwest

The Bulkheads would be repaired along the western portion of the south side of
Valley Stream.

$2,700,000

Sub-project B Southeast: Valley
Stream Southeast

Living shoreline improvements would be made to the eastern portion of the south
side of Valley Stream.

$1,300,000

Sub-project C: Clear Stream

Bulkheads would be repaired along both sides of Clear Stream.

$2,800,000

Sub-project D: Fosters Brook Lower

Living shoreline improvements would be made to both sides of Fosters Brook Lower.

$1,000,000

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

71

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy 2: Retain Stormwater
Strategy 2 is a response to the potential for dangerous flooding that
could occur during large storms that bring a greater extent of rainfall
than occurred during Superstorm Sandy. Strategy 2 also addresses more
frequent flooding that occurs during much smaller rain events, ranging
from tropical storms, nor’easters, and even light rains accompanied
by everyday high tides. Many roads in South Valley Stream experience
recurring flooding because the stormwater drainage system is not
operating properly at lower elevations. The drainage system capacity
is not sufficient to handle current and future conditions and siltation of
the pipes and recurring tidal flows have reduced the ability of the system
to function at its intended capacity. Mitigating frequent flooding due to

stormwater backups will serve everyday benefits while also limiting the risk
posed by severe flooding due to inadequate stormwater infrastructure.
These sources of flooding are systemic throughout the Community and
have exacerbated risk during extreme events.
Strategy 2 addresses the recovery support functions of Community
Planning and Capacity Building, Infrastructure, and Natural and
Cultural Resources. Proposed and Featured Projects within Strategy 2
contribute to community planning and capacity building by encouraging
policy changes to improve stormwater management controls over
future development and by providing additional tools to educate the

STRATEGY 2: Retain Stormwater
Project Name

Short Description

Estimated
Cost

Project Regional
Category
(Y/N)

$60,000

Proposed

N

Develop Community Information
regarding Green Infrastructure and
Living Shorelines

Educate the community about living shoreline plantings and improvements, tree
pruning near power lines, and ways to reduce their individual impact on the
stormwater system through green infrastructure, water conservation, and rain water
harvesting.

Coordinate with Hydrologic and
Hydraulic Study of Hook Creek –
Head of Bay Watershed

Advocate for an engineering study that would provide a regional, watershed-level
understanding of the hydrology affecting South Valley Stream, to better inform
stormwater management projects.

N/A

Featured

Y

Green Infrastructure Implementation
Program on Residential and Public
Property

Install green infrastructure on public property and rights-of-way, and incentivize
green infrastructure installation on residential property. Goal is to capture 5% of
stormwater falling on impervious surfaces.

$2,300,000

Featured

N

Stormwater Infrastructure Upgrades

Conduct a Hydrologic and hydraulic study on the stormwater system to determine
deficiencies; install check valves, upgrade stormwater pipes, drains, and catch basins
as recommended by the study.

$2,000,000

Featured

N

County-wide Stormwater Mitigation
Plan

Coordinate with Nassau County to develop a stormwater system maintenance and
monitoring plan which will identify maintenance needs to prevent system backups.

$500,000

Featured

Y

Encourage Implementation of
Green Infrastructure and Subsurface
Stormwater Retention at Green Acres
Mall, including Sunrise Multiplex site

Encourage utilization of green infrastructure at Green Acres Mall, as well as
redevelopment of Sunrise Multiplex that supports long-term economic stability while
controlling stormwater through green infrastructure and subsurface retention.

N/A

Featured

N

72

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

community about ways to reduce individual impact on the stormwater
system. Strategy 2 helps to improve infrastructure by addressing the
intersection between green infrastructure, including living shorelines
such as “The Path;” and more traditional infrastructure such as storm

drains and outfalls. Strategy 2 impacts natural resources in South Valley
Stream by increasing stormwater retention capacity through man-made
and nature-based systems.

Strategy 3: Reinforce the Power Grid
Like many communities in Nassau County, South Valley Stream
experienced severe power outages during Superstorm Sandy. A more
resilient power grid would allow critical community resources to operate
in the event of a future disaster, it would also increase the Community’s
resiliency by stabilizing communication systems, improving operations at
warming and cooling centers, and helping schools get back in service
more quickly after disasters. Recovery support functions addressed by
Strategy 3 include Infrastructure and Health and Social Services. Proposed
and Featured Projects in Strategy 3 address infrastructure by providing
redundancy in electricity infrastructure and establishing alternative
sources of energy by identifying critical facilities, such as Forest Road

School or Green Acres Mall, that would benefit from implementation
of microgrids or resilient communication systems. Strategy 3 addresses
health and social services by providing places of refuge during extreme
weather by establishing warming/cooling centers at available facilities
within South Valley Stream.
Risks to vulnerable populations are amplified during power outages that
interrupt communications networks to critical support services and the
need for electricity to power personal medical devices. Strategy 3 helps
to mitigate those risks by providing backup power sources to prevent
utility service interruptions.

STRATEGY 3: Reinforce the Power Grid
Project Name

Estimated
Cost

Short Description

Implement Microgrid Network Pilot
Project

Develop a microgrid storm resistance plan and implement micro-grid pilot project
connecting to locally significant facilities.

Establish Community Assistance Center
at Forest Road School

Establish Forest Road Schoolas a Community Center Assistance Center as well as
a warming / cooling location for the community to obtain resources after storm
events.

Project Regional
Category
(Y/N)

$6,000,000

Featured

N

N/A

Featured

N

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

73

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy 4: Strengthen Communication and Coordination
Strategy 4seeks to improve the capacity, communication ability, and
coordination among emergency response groups and civic organizations
that are active in South Valley Stream. Strategy 4 addresses the
recovery support function of Community Planning and Capacity
Building. Superstorm Sandy exposed the challenges that communities
like South Valley Stream face in coordinating with regional emergency
management organizations and in playing a proactive role in helping
neighbors who are especially vulnerable to disaster risks. Even residents
who are active in South Valley Stream, including members of the Mill
Brook Civic Association, require greater support in spreading information

about disaster preparedness and in finding ways to stay in contact with
neighbors who need assistance during extreme weather.
Strategy 4 addresses risks to vulnerable populations by improving
coordination between the Mill Brook Civic Association and Nassau
County Office of Emergency Management (OEM) to improve education
and awareness about disaster preparedness and emergency response.
By strengthening local communication networks, Strategy 4 will help to
identify vulnerable populations who need assistance with emergency
operations and response.

STRATEGY 4: Strengthen Communication and Coordination
Project Name
Establish a South Valley Stream
Community Emergency Response Team
(CERT)

74

Short Description
Coordinate with Nassau County OEM and CERT to establish a local CERT Team
that would assist with disaster response planning efforts, increase preparedness
and disaster response capability, and provide local education programs.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Estimated
Cost
$2,500

Project Regional
Category
(Y/N)
Featured

N

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy 5: Maintain and Enhance Economic Viability
Strategy 5: serves to help stabilize residential and commercial
neighborhoods that have struggled to recover from Superstorm Sandy
while also making South Valley Stream better prepared to bounce back
from future disasters. Strategy 5 addresses the recovery support functions
of Economic Resiliency and Housing.
The economic strain, blight, and displacement caused by Superstorm Sandy
have the potential to substantially impact the existing mature, suburban
character of the Mill Brook and North Woodmere neighborhoods. In
the short term, Sandy has caused the reduction of home values in South
Valley Stream. To maintain property values and the existing neighborhood
character, residents need strategies that help make their homes more

resilient and reflective of Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
requirements, support the economic base, improve public amenities, and
restore the surrounding ecosystem. Proposed and Featured Projects in
Strategy 5 promote Economic Resiliency by encouraging redevelopment
that supports long-term economic stability while detaining stormwater
through green infrastructure. Residential communities benefit from
Strategy 5 because projects that strengthen the housing stock against
future extreme weather events will help to stabilize property values and
protect residents from future storms.

STRATEGY 5: Maintain and Enchance Economic Viability
Project Name
Resilient Home Construction Incentive
Program

Short Description
Establish a tax incentive program for homeowners who make resiliency home
improvements and retrofits to sterngthen the existing housing stock.

Estimated
Cost

Project Regional
Category
(Y/N)

$850,000

Featured

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

N

75

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure 17:
76

Key Strategy and Reconstruction Opportunity Sites

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Section IV
Implementation - Project Profiles

Brook Road Park

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Section IV: Implementation Project Profiles
The NYRCR Program has allocated to the
Community up to $3 million. The funding
is provided through the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
Community Development Block Grant –
Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program. While
developing projects and actions for inclusion in
the NYRCR Plan, Planning Committees took into
account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses,
the effectiveness of each project in reducing
risk to populations and critical assets, feasibility,
and community support. Planning Committees
also considered the potential likelihood that a
project or action would be eligible for CDBG-DR
funding.
The projects and actions set forth in the NYRCR
Plan are divided into three categories, as
described below. The order in which the projects
and actions are listed in the NYRCR Plan does
not necessarily indicate the Community’s
prioritization of these projects and actions.
Proposed Projects are projects proposed for
funding through the Community’s allocation of
CDBG-DR funding.
Featured Projects are projects and actions
that the Planning Committee has identified as
important resiliency recommendations and has
analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for
funding through the NYRCR Program.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations (see
Section V) are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee would like to highlight and
78

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

that are not categorized as Proposed Projects or
Featured Projects.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in the
NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR Community’s
CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some
Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to
environmental review, HUD eligibility, technical
feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of
the projects and actions found in the NYRCR
Plan are subject to applicable federal, state
and local laws and regulations, including the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion
of a project or action in the NYRCR Plan does
not guarantee that a particular project or action
will be eligible for CDBG-DR funding or that it
will be implemented.

Project Profiles
This section provides an overview of each
proposed and featured NYRCR project including
the attributes listed below.
Project Description: details a brief summary of
the project, including tasks, components, or
phases.
Cost Estimate: provides an estimated cost to
implement the project. All costs are preliminary
and based on available data as well as an
understanding of the issues learned through
site visits, Committee member knowledge and
feedback, and input from the Community. Local
government entities and nonprofit organizations
also provided input regarding project scope and

estimated costs. As available, Construction costs
are based upon similar projects that have been
constructed within the greater Nassau County
area. Where applicable, actual construction
cost quotes from vendors were used. Each
phase within a project (design, construction,
construction management and other direct
labor costs) include a contingency factor; and,
costs are based on the level of detail available
for each individual project at the time of the
estimate.
Benefits or Co-Benefits: considers whether
anticipated benefits are local and direct within
South Valley Stream or regional, and whether
those benefits are primarily public or private;
provides a qualitative discussion of the project’s
potential economic, environmental, health
and social services benefits, as applicable. For
feasibility studies, action plans or advocacy
projects, the discussion of benefits related to the
potential benefits that would result from future
implementation of the selected alternative
or recommendations developed through the
course of study or advocacy. In addition, some
projects are scalable; the benefits of these
projects are considered in their current state,
and potential benefits that would result from
development into regional or larger-scale
projects are noted where appropriate.
Cost-Benefit Analysis: summarizes the findings
on the project’s estimated costs and potential
benefits.

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Anticipated Reduction of Risk: provides a
narrative description of the project’s potential
to reduce risk to assets, populations, or the
Community in general for future storm events.
Timeframe of Implementation: provides an
anticipated timeframe required to implement
the project.. This is classified as immediate (can
be completed in two years or less from start of
project), intermediate (can be completed in two
to five years from start of project), or long-range
(will required more than five years to complete
from start of project).
Regulatory Requirements: considers potential
federal, state and local government regulatory
requirements related to the project, if applicable.
Entity with Jurisdiction: provides the entity with
jurisdiction over the project, such as Nassau
County or the Town of Hempstead.

Project Screening and Evaluation
The NYRCR Committee weighed the applicability
of the projects according to the nature of the
risk and immediacy of hazard, entities involved,
and available resources. Six initial factors were
evaluated to determine Proposed Projects and
Featured Projects. Each project was evaluated
individually on its capacity to reduce immediate
exposure to risk, serve multiple recovery
functions, and support the larger recovery
strategy.
Risk Reduction: projects that have high risk
reduction benefits relative to the initial level of
risk.

Co-Benefits: projects that have many co-benefits,
including: 1) Sustainability; 2) Economic Benefits;
3) Environmental Benefits; 4) Health and Social
Benefits; and 5) Access to essential health and
social services during disaster events.
Cost: projects that have a high (greater than
$1 million), medium (between $500,000 and
$1 million), or low (less than $500,000) cost,
and consideration of the project’s cost to risk
reduction ratio.

Economic Viability. The projects were evaluated
within each of these five strategies and the
information was synthesized both by strategy, and
overall. The Committee also met as a working
group via conference call to provide further
feedback. This iterative process determined the
initial proposed and featured projects. After the
Committee determined the Proposed Projects
and Featured Projects, a public engagement
meeting was held to gauge the overall level of
public support for the projects.

Feasibility: a consideration of whether a project
is technically feasible, likely to face regulatory
obstacles including issues with permits or other
approvals, any real property constraints, and
project readiness.
Funding Availability: is a consideration of
whether projects that have several possible
funding sources available and options to
leverage, as well as whether they are best suited
for funding through the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction program.
Public Support: level of Planning Committee,
public, and government support.
The Committee reviewed the evaluation of
the first five factors above (risk reduction,
co-benefits, cost, feasibility, and funding
availability), and assessed the level of support
for each project through Committee meetings
and Public Engagement events. The Committee
then reviewed potential projects in a round table
discussion according to five recovery strategies:
Manage Tidal Flow, Retain Stormwater, Reinforce
Power Grid, Strengthen Communication and
Coordination, and Maintain and Enhance
Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

79

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

NYRCR Planning Area
0

Figure 18:

0.5

1.0

2.0
Miles

N

South Shoreline Improvement Program Study Area

South Shoreline Improvement Program Study

South Shoreline Improvement Program Study [Proposed Project]
This study would examine methods for making
coordinated improvements along the shoreline
of the Town of Hempstead to achieve a
contiguous shoreline (Figure 18). The goal
of the study would be to investigate funding
mechanisms, streamline permitting, and identify
options for incentivizing bulkhead repairs and
living shoreline improvements.
The Town of Hempstead shoreline is largely
privately-owned and individual homeowners
have limited resources to make necessary
improvements. Feedback from Committee
Meetings and Public Engagement Events
reinforced the need to study the potential for
a coordinated approach to making necessary
improvements.
80

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

The Town of Hempstead shoreline is
characterized by a mix of hard protection,
such as bulkheads, and “soft” protection,
such as wetlands, shoals, etc. Both types of
protection are in need of maintenance, repair
or improvement to be able to withstand the
eroding forces of the tides and future sea level
rise. Because the elevation of many of the areas
behind the Town’s shoreline are below the
existing shoreline, any opening in the shoreline
protection has the potential to spread flooding
landside. Furthermore, as vulnerable spots in the
shoreline erode, they progressively erode faster,
leading to even more widespread flooding. The
current condition of the Communities’ shoreline
provides incomplete protection against certain
levels of tidal inundation, particularly bay water
elevations of seven feet and above. Although

such water levels include the conditions
experienced with Superstorm Sandy, the specific
water levels associated with Superstorm Sandy
are rare.

The proposed study would address:
A preliminary analysis of South Shore estuary
shoreline conditions, including an inventory
and assessment of shoreline conditions,
development of a GIS database of current
shoreline protection, and development of
options for potential solutions to restore
shorelines with hard, hybrid-structural, living
shoreline, and wave attenuation measures;
Regulatory considerations and coordination
between the government agencies that would
need to be involved with this effort (including

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

DOS, DEC, Town of Hempstead, the US Army
Corps of Engineers);
Streamlining the permitting process to enable
further control by the potential implementing
agency over the process, while still maintaining
the established guidelines of New York State
Department of State Coastal Zone Management
Program;
Implementation and administrative costs to be
borne by the potential implementing agency
(e.g., inspections, developing geographic
information systems data, etc.); and financing
and funding opportunities (including grants) for
improvements on privately owned properties.

Cost Estimate
A suggested allocation of $50,000 per village
or hamlet within each NYRCR Community
would be utilized for the purposes of this study.
Participation by additional NYRCR Communities
would provide economies of scale for expanding
the scope and outcomes of the study.
Benefits or Co-Benefits
The recommended implementation actions
resulting from the study could provide local,
private benefits to each participating NYRCR
Community and regional, public benefits to the
south shore of the Town of Hempstead. The
populations that would benefit from a reduction
of risk are those people that live along the
shoreline. The combined population of block
groups along the project area shoreline is
33,213 persons.

Economic Benefits
This project should create an estimated six
full-time equivalent jobs.29 While the study
would not have direct economic benefits, its
goal of contiguous shoreline improvements
could have a positive impact on property
values in the immediate area around the
shoreline. As the shoreline becomes more
attractive, the resale value of the homes could
increase. This could ultimately have an impact
on the taxable values of the homes, which
would translate into increased income for the
Township.
Additionally, the repaired bulkheads and
restored shoreline could prevent future property
damages. Since this area is a major contributor
to tidal flooding damage, the savings from
damages could be significant. Combined, the
implementation actions resulting from the South
Shoreline Improvement Program Study, the
proposed flood gates at Hook Creek and Motts
Creek, Reynolds Channel, and both in Island
Park, as well as the Elevated Rockaway Turnpike,
cumulatively protect approximately 12,000
individual residential or commercial properties
that belong to either residents or businesses.
According to Nassau County Tax data, 97% of
these properties are residential properties and
the rest are industrial or commercial properties.
The combined estimated market value of the
properties that would be impacted if not for
these projects, would be $6.1 billion in real
estate. This amount assumes total destruction
of the property due to flooding. FEMA claims
were only a fraction of this amount, but still 29%
of the value stated, or $1.75 billion.

residential and commercial properties number
19,700 with an estimated real estate market
value of $9.7 billion. It should be noted that this
estimate does not include tax exempt properties
such as parklands or communal service
properties such as churches and community
centers, but does include non- exempt properties
that extend outside of the current study area but
still benefit from these projects. 30

Environmental Benefits
Implementation of the study’s potential
recommendations would help to secure all of
the Natural Resource assets in the South Valley
Stream Community due to increased resiliency.
The living shoreline component of the project
could protect wetlands, enhance or maintain
habitat for plants and animals, and provide
aesthetic value.
Health and Social Benefits
The resulting recommendations from the
proposed study could impact all populations
along the shoreline in multiple communities
within the Five Towns, South Valley Stream and
East Rockaway-Bay Park Communities. The
total population within each block group along
the Hempstead shoreline is 33,213, which
represents the overall population with improved
access to health and social service facilities as
a result of the proposed project. Approximately
16.1% of this population is considered
low-income and 16.2% are considered seniorcitizens. This project aims to protect the multiple
health and social services assets along the
Hempstead shoreline among several different
Communities that serve multiple populations.31

When the impacted real estate from these
projects is aggregated, the total amount of
Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

81

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Cost-Benefit Analysis
In addition to protecting against storms of
Superstorm Sandy’s magnitude, South Valley
Stream is one of several NYRCR Communities
along the South Shore that recognizes the
need for regionally coordinated shoreline
improvements to create a contiguous line of
protection against smaller, more frequent storm
events. The modest proposed project investment
of $50,000 for the South Valley Stream
Community would spur regional cooperation to
determine the most cost-effective and feasible
way to achieve this necessary level of coastal
protection.
Anticipated Reduction of Risk
The study seeks to develop a mechanism for
implementing coastal defenses that creates
risk reduction along the entire south shoreline.
Coastal defenses, including features such as
bulkheads and living shorelines, decrease the
exposure experienced by landside assets by
preventing or reducing the frequency of marine
inundation, and by moderating damage
caused by storm surge and wave action. Assets
protected are less likely to experience flooding
and are therefore less vulnerable.
The implementation actions resulting from this
study should reduce the vulnerability (loss of
service) of assets to the impacts of 100-year
storms, reducing risk to affected assets in East
Rockaway-Bay Park, South Valley Stream, and
the Five Towns Communities, as well as other
Communities along the south shoreline.

82

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Timeframe of Implementation
Immediate (< two years)
Regulatory Requirements
No permits should be required to complete a
study, however, the resulting recommendations
of the study may require permits. Coordination
is recommended with NYS Department of State
(NYS DOS), NYS Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYS DEC), Town of Hempstead,
and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).
Entity with Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Bulkhead Repair and Shoreline Restoration at Brook Road Park [Proposed Project]
This project would provide necessary repairs
to Brook Road Park, a municipal park owned
by the Town of Hempstead. During Superstorm
Sandy, the bulkheads at Brook Road Park were
overtopped, and the Park was flooded. The
asphalt is caving in due to repeated flood events,
including Superstorm Sandy, and deteriorating
bulkheads. The Town has added fencing to
minimize the safety hazard associated with the
cracked asphalt and failing bulkheads.
With a mix of bulkhead improvements, shoreline
restoration, and living shoreline installation,
the project would: create a vegetative resilient
buffer island at the confluence of Valley Stream
and Watts Creek, replace failing bulkhead
with vegetation and a rock toe/edge, and
construct a sculpted berm tied into the higher
elevation to protect against flooding. The
surrounding planted edge would also provide
flood protection, while vegetation would filter
drainage from the park into the brook. A
fishing and educational pier would also be
constructed, as the project aims to improve
waterfront access and bring the community
closer to nature (Figure 19).
Tasks associated with the project include
surveying existing conditions and conducting
baseline studies, installation of erosion and
sediment control elements, removal of existing
bulkheads and construction of new bulkheads,
installation of living shoreline elements, pier
construction, and installation of a rip rap
island, planting of trees and other vegetation,
and educational signage. The costs indicated
would also include environmental review and

acquiring required permits.

Cost Estimate
Approximately $2,000,000
Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would generate primarily local,
public benefits for residents within South Valley
Stream, and could benefit the greater Town
of Hempstead by increasing the resiliency of
a Town-owned Park and avoiding potential
damage from future storms.
Economic Benefits
It is anticipated that this project could create
22 full-time equivalent jobs.32 The repaired
bulkheads and restored shoreline could prevent
property damages from occurring in the future.
This project would improve upon an existing
public space, a public park in which the Town
has already invested, for an additional benefit
of increasing resilience from future storm events.
Since this area is a major contributor to tidal
flooding damage, the savings from damages
could be significant.

Environmental Benefits
Three environmental assets would be secured
by the proposed project: Brook Road Park and
two water bodies, Valley Stream and Watts
Creek. Shoreline restoration would increase the
resiliency of the park, helping to protect against
future flooding. Other aspects of the project –
living shoreline elements, vegetation, erosion,
and sediment control – would result in improved
water and air quality.
The project would improve the wildlife habitat
of the park and the aquatic habitat of adjacent
water bodies. These habitats may support
threatened/endangered species and may be
important for habitat connectivity. The project
also includes construction of a pier, adding
a nominal amount of new open space which
would provide opportunities for community
enjoyment of open space.

Shoreline improvements that protect against
flooding could positively impact property and
resale values of homes along the shoreline.
Improvements to open space and neighborhood
beautification may also increase property
values. This would ultimately have an impact on
the taxable values of the homes which would
translate into increased income for the Town.
Birds-eye view of Brook Park Road

Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

83

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project impacts the block group
surrounding Brook Road Park, with a total
population of 2,832. Approximately 15.2%
of this population is considered low-income
and 16.2% are considered senior-citizens.33
Construction would conform to all applicable
federal, state and local public access rules
and regulations. Designing a more accessible
shoreline and constructing a fishing pier would
provide increased public access, recreational
uses, and connectivity to the waterfront for
populations throughout the Community. The
additional trees and vegetation proposed may
improve air quality by filtering air pollutants,
reducing illnesses such as asthma, as well as
cooling air temperatures, conserving energy.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Deteriorating bulkheads and unsafe conditions
created by broken asphalt pavement warrant
repairs at Brook Road Park. The total proposed
project cost of $2,000,000 would serve a
greater purpose beyond bulkhead repair for
managing tidal flow by protecting against
floods up to seven feet, reducing the costs of
property damage from future storm events
and improving environmental quality while

84

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

benefitting public waterfront access, open
space and recreation.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
While the current park design is conducive
to recreational activity, it does not take into
account the higher tides now experienced
by the community and could serve a greater
purpose for managing tidal flow. This project
would correct the pre-storm issues of failing
bulkheads and caving asphalt, which was
exacerbated during the storm. As part of the
new park design, the change to this berm
would be a natural design solution to create
flood protection from tidal flows that the lower
elevations of the park currently do not provide,
and also maintain the aesthetic appeal for
the community that the park provides. This,
in combination with the repair of bulkheads,
would create a buffer between the park and
water levels up to approximately seven feet,
therein reducing flooding of private properties
and minimizing exposure for water levels up
to approximately a 10-year event. Replacing
deteriorated bulkheads with vegetation and a
rock toe would create a more natural defense
against erosion and sedimentation of the creek.
The berm could also provide protection from
debris entering and settling in the park during

high tides and flooding events.
This project should reduce the vulnerability (loss
of service) of assets to the impacts of 100-year
storms. The populations that could benefit
from a reduction of risk are those people that
live in the Brook Road Park project area. The
combined population of block groups in the
area is 2,832.34 The new protective structures
would protect homes from flooding.

Timeframe of Implementation
Immediate (< two years)
Regulatory Requirements
Regulatory approvals from the Town of
Hempstead, NYS DEC and NYS DOS, and US
Army Corps of Engineers may be necessary,
and a consistency determination from the NYS
DOS will be required for all federal funding and
permits. Seasonal restrictions on construction
would likely be necessary as per permit
requirements.
Entity with Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Landscaped Mound for
Recreation and Resiliency

Landscaped Mound for
Recreation and Resiliency, elev. 7ft

Existing Playground

Boulder Mound to Lessen the Impact
of Storm Surge and Riparian Habitat
Fishing Pier

Figure 19:

Proposed Brook Road Park streamedge restoration
Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

85

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Increased Tree and Shrub Vegetation for
Homeowner Privacy and Animal Habitat

Educational Signage
New Path Surface
Tidal Marsh Vegetation

MHW: +3 ft
MLW: -2 ft

Figure 20:

Proposed Tidal Marsh at 'The Path'

Natural Shoreline Restoration along “The Path” [Proposed Project]
This project would restore the natural shoreline
on Town of Hempstead property along Valley
Stream, from approximately Cloverfield Road
North to Mill Road, a stretch of the stream
known as “The Path.” “The Path” was flooded
during Superstorm Sandy due to a combination
of tidal flow that entered Valley Stream from
the south (Jamaica Bay) and stormwater flows
from the north (Hook Creek - Head of Bay
Watershed).
86

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

The project would improve coastal protection
from water levels up to approximately seven feet
and employ green infrastructure for stormwater
retention. Potential elements include terracing
the pathway with a natural sloped shoreline,
providing habitat restoration in the littoral zone,
and improving open space. The project may
also include removing the abutments to the
former pedestrian bridge at Cloverfield Road
North, subject to further analysis. The project
would involve surveying existing conditions

and conducting baseline studies; installation
of erosion and sediment control elements;
construction of new bulkhead and installation
of living shoreline and bioswale elements;
installation of pervious pavements in some
areas; planting of trees and other vegetation;
educational signage; and dredging. The costs
indicated would also include environmental
review and acquiring required permits.

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Connection to
Forest Rd School
Educational Signage
Tidal Marsh

Figure 21:

Bioswale

Pocket Park
Additional Tree Canopy

Bioswale

Pocket Park

Living Shoreline

Proposed 'Path' restoration

The project would include littoral zone habitat
restoration, which is important for habitat
connectivity and could result in improvements
to the aquatic habitat of Valley Stream by
providing nesting and feeding places for birds
and juvenile fish species. These riparian and
aquatic habitats may also support threatened/
endangered species, especially avian species
(Figures 20-22).

Cost Estimate
Approximately $1,700,000

Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would result in primarily local
benefits within South Valley Stream, with
public benefits to the community and Forest
Road School, as well as private benefits to the
residences adjacent to “The Path” along Valley
Stream.

Economic Benefits
It is anticipated that this project could create
18 full-time equivalent jobs.35 Improvements of
natural shoreline area along “The Path” could
have a positive impact on property values in
the immediate area around the shoreline areas.
As the shoreline becomes more attractive the
resale value of the homes may increase. This
would ultimately have an impact on the taxable
values of the homes which would translate into
increased income for the township.

Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

87

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Additionally, the restored shoreline could
prevent property damages from occurring in
the future. Since this area is a major contributor
to tidal flooding damage, the savings from
damages could be significant.

populations throughout the Community. The
additional trees and vegetation proposed may
improve air quality by filtering air pollutants,
reducing illnesses such as asthma, as well as
cooling air temperatures, conserving energy.

Environmental Benefits
Two environmental assets would be secured
by the proposed project: “The Path” (an
existing park/ open space) and Valley Stream.
Installation of living shoreline, bioswale, green
infrastructure, and erosion and sediment
control elements would naturally treat the
runoff from impervious surfaces to improve the
water quality of Valley Stream, and also would
increase the resiliency and generally improve
the ecological condition of “The Path.” This
green infrastructure would improve stormwater
capture by maximizing the benefits of this
existing open space for retention. As the project
would include littoral zone habitat restoration,
it may be important for habitat connectivity
and could result in improvements to the aquatic
habitat of Valley Stream. These riparian and
aquatic habitats also may support threatened/
endangered species, especially avian species.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
With a total proposed project cost of $1,700,000,
natural shoreline restoration would maximize
the benefits of this public pathway along Valley
Stream by minimizing erosion, buffering against
flooding from minor tidal storms, adding
habitat value and improving waterfront access.
Utilizing green infrastructure would provide
additional benefits for stormwater retention,
environmental quality and public education
while reducing the costs of adjacent property
damage during future storm events.

Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project impacts the users and
nearby residents of “The Path” (from Cloverfield
Road North to Mill Road), with a total population
of 409. Approximately 25.2% of this population
is considered low-income and 16.8% are
considered
senior-citizens.36
Construction
would conform to all applicable federal, state
and local public access rules and regulations.
Designing a more accessible shoreline would
provide increased public access, recreational
uses, and connectivity to the waterfront for
88

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
Living shoreline protects the shoreline from
erosion by providing wetlands to buffer
tidal flows. A living shoreline also creates or
maintains habitat for plants and animals, and
provides aesthetic value. This project could
reduce flooding in the area and help protect
private properties from exposure to tidal flows.
This project should reduce the vulnerability (loss
of service) of assets to the impacts of 100-year
storms.
Timeframe of Implementation
Immediate (< two years)

Regulatory Requirements
Regulatory approvals from the Town of
Hempstead, NYS DEC, and US Army Corps of
Engineers may be necessary, and a consistency
determination from the NYS DOS will be
required for all federal funding and permits.
Seasonal restrictions on construction may be
necessary as per permit requirements.
Entity with Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Increased Tree and Shrub Vegetation for
Homeowner Privacy and Animal Habitat
New Path Surface
Living Shoreline Vegetation

MHW: +3 ft
MLW: -2 ft

Figure 22:

Proposed Living Shoreline along 'The Path'

Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

89

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Corridor Restoration and Riverbank Stabilization along Valley Stream, Clear Stream, Watts Creek, and Fosters
Brook Lower [Featured Project]
This project seeks to establish continuous
shoreline protection through bulkhead and living
shoreline restoration, where appropriate, along
water bodies in South Valley Stream, including
Clear Stream, Valley Stream, Watts Creek,
and Fosters Brook Lower. Superstorm Sandy
overtopped bulkheads and flooded residential
properties in South Valley Stream along all four
water bodies, leading to increased erosion and
sedimentation of the waterways. The project
would make bulkhead or living shoreline
improvements to privately and publicly owned
property, and restore ecosystem functions of the
water bodies in South Valley Stream, through
bank stabilization (Figure 23).
The following options are considered:
Sub-project A: Watts Creek. Both sides of Watts
Creek would have living shoreline improvements
under this option.
Sub-project B North: The north side of Valley
Stream between Brook Road Park and “The
Path” would have a living shoreline under this
option.
Sub-project B Southwest: The Bulkheads would
be repaired along the western portion of the
south side of Valley Stream.
Sub-project B Southeast: The eastern portion
of the south side of Valley Stream would be
improved with a living shoreline.

00.25
Miles

Figure 23:
90

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Hook Creek Tributaries

N

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

(e.g., natural areas, riparian habitat, etc.), as
it would reduce the flooding risk of adjacent
areas in general.

Sub-project C Clear Stream: This option would
repair bulkheads (7 ft elevation) along both
sides of Clear Stream. The project would also
include the construction of a wetland at the
head of Clear Stream.

Sub-project B Southwest: Approximately
$2,700,000
Sub-project B Southeast: Approximately
$1,300,000
Sub-project C: Approximately $2,800,000
Sub-project D: Approximately $1,000,000

Sub-project D Fosters Brook Lower: Both sides of
Fosters Brook Lower would have living shoreline
improvements under this option.

Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would result in local benefits within
South Valley Stream, benefitting both private
property owners and public property owners
with frontage along the water bodies.

This project would not include Brook Road
Park and “The Path,” which are considered
separate projects. Tasks associated with the
project include: surveying existing conditions
and conducting baseline studies; installation
of erosion and sediment control elements;
removal of existing bulkhead and replacing
with new bulkhead or living shoreline; and
construction of a wetland area at the head of
Clear Creek. The costs indicated would also
include environmental review and acquiring
regulatory permits.
The project would require outreach to and
agreements from participating property owners,
and voluntary participation would impact project
effectiveness. Coordination is recommended
with public property owners, including Nassau
County, the Town of Hempstead, and the Valley
Stream Union Free School District. Real property
constraints include the constructed wetland at
the head of Clear Stream, which would also
require an easement, and negotiation with
private property owners.

Cost Estimate
Sub-project A: Approximately $1,520,000
Sub-project B North: Approximately
$1,100,000

Economic Benefits
It is anticipated that this project could create
113 full-time equivalent jobs.37 Improvements
of creeks and minor waterways could prevent
property damages from occurring in the
future. Since the corridor is a major conduit for
storm tidal flooding damage, the savings from
damages could be significant.
Environmental Benefits
The project options entail living shoreline and/
or bulkhead improvements along various
segments of the South Valley Stream area water
bodies, and riverbank stabilization to restore
ecosystem functions of these water bodies. As
such, the various options would improve the
water quality and conditions of area water
bodies, helping to secure these environmental
assets. The project options also would improve
littoral zone and aquatic habitats that may
support threatened/endangered species.
Sub-project A: Two environmental assets would
be secured by this sub-project, Watts Creek and
Brook Road Park. The sub-project would also
serve to secure additional environmental assets
located in the immediate vicinity of Watts Creek

Sub-project B North: This sub-project would
secure one environmental asset, South Valley
Stream. As this project would increase the
resiliency of this portion of the South Valley
Stream shoreline, it would also secure other
environmental assets found in the immediate
area (e.g., natural areas, riparian habitat, etc.).
Sub-project B Southwest: One water body,
South Valley Stream, would be secured by this
option. The project would also generally reduce
the flooding risk of adjacent areas, thus helping
to secure additional environmental assets
located in the immediate vicinity (e.g., natural
areas, riparian habitat, etc.).
Sub-project B Southeast: One water body, South
Valley Stream would be secured by this option.
The project would include living shoreline along
the stream, improving the stream’s water quality
and would provide habitat for flora and fauna,
including that for threatened and endangered
species.
Sub-project C: This sub-project would secure
one water body, Clear Stream. The proposed
option would also increase the resiliency of
the Clear Stream area in general, serving
to secure additional environmental features
in the immediate area (e.g., natural areas,
riparian habitat, etc.). The proposed restoration
includes construction of a wetland at the head
of Clear Stream (southwestern portion of the
Green Acres Mall parking lot adjacent to Clear
Stream).

Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

91

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Sub-project D: Two environmental assets would
be secured this option - Fosters Brook Lower
and Doxy Brook Park. Sub-project D would also
serve to secure additional environmental assets
located in the immediate vicinity of Fosters
Brook Lower (e.g., natural areas, riparian
habitat, etc.), as it would reduce the flooding
risk of the area in general.

Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project impacts river corridor
frontage areas in South Valley Stream, with a
total population of 2,832. Approximately 15.2%
of this population is considered low-income
and 16.2% are considered senior-citizens.38
This project aims to protect all health and social
services assets within the river corridor area
such as the Valley Stream South High School,
Robert Carbonaro, and Forest Road Schools.
Construction would conform to all applicable
federal, state and local public access rules
and regulations. Designing a more accessible
shoreline along public property, owned by
Nassau County, the Town, and the School
District would provide safer, increased public
access, recreational uses and connectivity to
the waterfront for populations throughout the
Community.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Forming a continuous line of protection against
smaller, more frequent storm events and tidal
flooding that persists following Superstorm
Sandy is important to the NYRCR Committee.
The total featured project cost of $10,420,000,
divided among six sub-projects, would work in
conjunction with the proposed Brook Road Park
92

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

and Path projects to provide a contiguous line
of shoreline protection against a 10-year storm
event for both public and private property
owners, thereby reducing the costs of property
damage and government expenditures for
emergency response during future storm events.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
The proposed project is intended to improve
protection against water levels up to elevation
seven feet, which is estimated to be consistent
with a 10-year storm. These water level conditions
occur relatively frequently (approximately
twice a month during spring tides) and are
expected to increase in frequency as a result
of climate change, (which increases both the
general sea level and the frequency of extreme
events such as high wind induced surges). Both
bulkheads and living shoreline would reduce
flooding in the area, reduce exposure, and
improve community safety. A living shoreline
would protect the waterfront from erosion and
protect adjacent wetlands, create or maintain
habitat for plants and animals, and provide
aesthetic value. This project should reduce
the vulnerability (loss of service) of assets to
the impacts of 100-year storms. The corridor
restoration and riverbank stabilization should
provide a reduction of risk to those people that
live near river frontage areas in South Valley
Stream. The combined population of block
groups in the area is 2,832.39
Timeframe of Implementation
Long-Range ( > five years)

Regulatory Requirements
Regulatory approvals from the Town of
Hempstead, NYS DEC, and US Army Corps of
Engineers may be necessary, and a consistency
determination from the NYS DOS will be
required for all federal funding and permits.
Potential funding sources include NYRCR
funding allocated to South Valley Stream; US
Army Corps of Engineers Beach Restoration
and Shoreline Protection funding (financing and
federal-local cost share); and FEMA Hazard
Mitigation Assistance for shoreline stabilization
measures (federal-local cost-share).
Entity with Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study of Hook Creek – Head of Bay Watershed [Featured Project]
In coordination with the development of a
County-wide Stormwater Mitigation Plan,
this project responds to the need to better
understand what hydrologic an hydraulic
conditions contributed to stormwater flooding
during Superstorm Sandy, as well as significant
precipitation events, such as Hurricane Irene.

wy
Grand Central Pk

LIRR

Hook Creek | Head of Bay
Watershed

y

W atershed Boundr

yS
tre

am

Southern State Pkwy

Va
lle

This project would develop an engineering
study that would provide a regional, watershedlevel understanding of the hydrology affecting
South Valley Stream, which would better
inform stormwater management projects,
including those in South Valley Stream. The
Hydrologic and Hydraulic study would be used
to determine where the runoff is coming from,
runoff quantities, dispersion pathways, and
whether the current systems are adequate to
handle current and projected future conditions.
The study would identify what measures would
be needed to ensure adequate stormwater
management (Figure 24).

py

d Ex

slan

gI
Lon

Belt Pkwy
South
Valley
Stream

Cost Estimate
Approximately $750,000
Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would result in both public and
private benefits, locally within South Valley
Stream and regionally within the Hook Creek /
Head of Bay Watershed.
Economic Benefits
A regional hydrologic and hydraulic study
would have an insignificant direct economic
benefit impact. However, recommendations

LIRR

Head
of
Bay

Jamaica
Bay

Tidal Flow
0

Figure 24:

1.25

2.5

Miles

N

Hook Creek / Head of Bay Watershed
Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

93

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

resulting from the study could provide
significant cost savings to Nassau County
and the towns and villages in the watershed,
including the Town of Hempstead. Coupled
with a County-wide Stormwater Mitigation Plan,
this study could lead to more efficient spending
on capital improvements by recommending
synergetic projects at a macro level, instead of
approaching stormwater management issues
at a micro level.

Environmental Benefits
The project would not directly benefit
environmental or cultural assets in the
Community. However, the study would identify
options for improved stormwater management,
thereby reducing flooding and protecting
environmental and cultural assets in the
Community.
Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project would impact the
community of South Valley Stream, with a total
population of 6,025. Approximately 19.2% of
this population is considered low-income and
16.4% are considered senior-citizens.40 This
project aims to protect multiple health and
social services assets within the watershed and
Community, as well as positively impact public
health by improving water quality and reducing
flooding impacts.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Stormwater issues are larger than South Valley
Stream, which receives stormwater flows from
the entire Hook Creek / Head of Bay Watershed.
The total featured project cost of $750,000
would capitalize on economies of scale through
94

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

a watershed-level study that would identify
regional interventions for stormwater mitigation,
to cost-effectively benefit multiple communities
within the watershed.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
The project would not directly reduce risk to
populations in the Community. However, the
study would identify options for improved
stormwater management, thereby reducing
flooding and reducing vulnerability of assets in
the Community.
Timeframe of Implementation
Immediate (< two years)
Regulatory Requirements
A study is not likely to require permits, however
coordination is recommended with the Town of
Hempstead, NYS DEC, NYS DOS and USACE
because the recommendations resulting from
the study may require permits.
Entity with Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead, Nassau County. A
multi-jurisdictional
committee/consortium
consisting of all municipalities in the watershed
municipalities could be considered, as well.
This form of governance and administration
has proven successful on Long Island, as
represented by both the Hempstead Harbor
Protection Committee and Manhasset Bay
Protection Committee. Potential actions of such
a multi-jurisdictional committee/consortium
might include being able to appoint a fiduciary
to be responsible for grant management,
with the committee/consortium itself being

responsible for project management. The
recent New York – Connecticut Sustainable
Communities Consortium, a program funded
by a HUD Sustainable Communities Regional
Planning Grant, used this structure and was
successful in carrying out the planning program
over a wide geography and across numerous
municipal boundaries.

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Community Education regarding Green Infrastructure and Living Shorelines [Proposed Project]
Stormwater management was a key issue
for the South Valley Stream community in
Superstorm Sandy, as the volume of stormwater
could not exit the system, thereby exacerbating
the impacts of localized flooding caused by
tidal flooding. Upstream stormwater capture is
necessary to minimize peak stormwater flows
entering South Valley Stream’s stormwater
infrastructure system and three tributaries to
Hook Creek. Green infrastructure can minimize
stormwater volumes, lessening the impact of
future storm events, while living shorelines can
minimize erosion and reduce the impacts of
tidal flooding.
This project would educate the community
about ways to reduce their individual impact on
the stormwater system by providing information
to homeowners about stormwater capture
through green infrastructure, living shoreline
plantings and improvements, residential
backflow preventers, water conservation, rain
water harvesting, and tree pruning near power
lines. This project would develop general
green infrastructure information for South
Valley Stream, including creating brochures
and posters for community members. It
would provide an on-site green infrastructure
workshop for residents and a student workshop
at RobertW. Carbonaro Middle School. Green
infrastructure and sustainable stormwater
management techniques would be integrated
into school curricula and a rain barrel pilot
project would be launched at the Middle School.
This project would work in partnership with
Retain Stormwater on Residential and Public
Property where students would have a hands-on

learning experience created by implementing
green infrastructure on school property. This
project also aims to work in partnership with
the Town of Hempstead Rain Barrel Program
and Conservation and Waterways educational
programs.

Cost Estimate
Approximately $60,000
Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would result in primarily local
benefits, both public and private, for South
Valley Stream.
Economic Benefits
It is anticipated that this project would create one
full-time equivalent job. 41 Although the initial
job creation of the project would be minimal,
the long term impact may be felt in the reduction
of stormwater damages that could occur in
time of heavy storms or just minor rainfalls.
As the public begins to purchase and install
green infrastructure such as rain gardens, rain
barrels, and other strategies, their purchases of
materials and services would fuel the economy.
Environmental Benefits
Green Infrastructure is a cost-effective and
resilient approach to water infrastructure
that provides many benefits: water quality
and quantity, air quality, habitat and wildlife
improvement, livability, and reduced impact in
energy and climate change.

The project includes educating South Valley
Stream residents about green infrastructure
and sustainable stormwater management
techniques, including a community workshop,
student workshop, and rain barrel pilot project
at the local middle school. As such, the project
would not directly secure environmental
assets. However, it is reasonable to assume
that some residents and businesses would
implement some of the green infrastructure
elements that they learn about. As the project is
expected to improve stormwater management
community-wide, it would indirectly secure
various environmental resources throughout
the Community (e.g., parks, other natural areas
and open spaces, riparian habitat, improved
water quality of water bodies, etc.).

Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project impacts the community
of South Valley Stream, with a total population
of 6,025. Approximately 19.2% of this
population is considered low-income and
16.4% are considered senior-citizens.42 Green
infrastructure and living shorelines can provide
health and social benefits by filtering stormwater
runoff from impervious surfaces and improving
water quality for the entire Community. The
additional trees and vegetation proposed, may
improve air quality by filtering air pollutants,
reducing illnesses such as asthma, as well as
cooling air temperatures, conserving energy.

Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

95

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Feedback at public engagement meetings
demonstrated the Community interest in
property maintenance to mitigate stormwater
flooding and erosion issues. The total proposed
project cost of $60,000 is minor compared
to the potential cumulative benefits of actions
undertaken by individual homeowners for
on-site stormwater management, water
conservation, and shoreline maintenance.
Anticipated Reduction of Risk
Although this project would not directly reduce
exposure of assets or reduce their vulnerability,
the project would promote actions and
methods for the reduction of asset exposure
and vulnerability. This action should provide
a reduction of risk to entire the population
of the South Valley Stream Community. The
combined population of the Community is
6,052.43 Residents would benefit from increased
knowledge of green infrastructure and the
associated measures they could take to improve
stormwater management.
Timeframe of Implementation
Immediate (< two years)
Regulatory Requirements
The project is not likely to face regulatory
obstacles including issues with permits or other
approvals, has no real property constraints,
and is ready to begin.
Entity with Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead, Valley Stream Central,
24 and 30 School Districts, Mill Brook Civic
Association
96

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Green Infrastructure Implementation Program on Residential and Public Property [Featured Project]]
Stormwater could not exit the system during
Superstorm Sandy, causing backups and
localized flooding. Stormwater retention
upstream and within South Valley Stream would
minimize peak stormwater volumes entering
the system during rain events, reducing the
strain on the system. This project would focus
on implementing green infrastructure best
management practices on residential property
and public rights-of-way (roadways). The
project would install Green Infrastructure to
capture stormwater runoff where it falls, before
it travels downstream.
The goal of this project is to capture 5% of
the stormwater falling on impervious surfaces
using green infrastructure best management
practices. Further research is necessary
to identify appropriate locations for green
infrastructure
and
retention
structures.
Therefore, this project would begin with a green
infrastructure siting analysis involving a review
of existing information (hydraulic, topographic,
built and natural environment, etc.). Subsequent
elements of the project include identification
and design of best management practices
(BMPs); construction of wetlands, vegetated
swales, planting of stormwater street trees;
installation of rain gardens and other rainwater
harvest and reuse systems; and installation
of permeable pavements. In addition to
project construction, costs indicated below
include environmental analysis, regulatory
approvals, and permitting requirements.
Retaining stormwater at schools could serve
as a pilot project for a community-wide green
infrastructure strategy by installing permeable

pavements, vegetated swales and rain gardens,
and implementing rainwater harvest and reuse
programs at Valley Stream South High School
and Robert W. Carbonaro School. These green
infrastructure best management practices
could potentially capture the first inch of rain
that falls on the impervious surfaces of the
school property (approximately 36,925 cu. ft.)
including the parking lots, sidewalks, track,
and buildings. This project also aims to work in
partnership with the Town of Hempstead Rain
Barrel Program.
Voluntary participation by private property
owners would impact project effectiveness.
Real property constraints may exist if residential
homeowners are not willing to implement green
infrastructure practices.

Cost Estimate
Approximately $2,300,000
Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would result in primarily local
benefits, both public and private, within South
Valley Stream.
Economic Benefits
It is anticipated that this project could create 25
full-time equivalent jobs,44 and the long-term
impact may be felt in the reduction of
stormwater damages that could occur in time
of heavy storms or just minor rainfalls. As the
approved projects begin to purchase and install
green infrastructure such as rain gardens, rain
barrels, and other strategies, their purchases of

materials and services could fuel the economy.
Ancillary impacts of these projects would include
less strain on the stormwater infrastructure
system and less erosion on roadways. This
would produce cost savings for the township as
replacement and repair costs are reduced.

Environmental Benefits
Four environmental assets would benefit
from this project: South Valley Stream, Watts
Creek, Clear Stream, and Fosters Brook
Lower. Implementation of green infrastructure
BMPs program on private property and public
roadways throughout the area would more
effectively control runoff and help to protect
streams from polluted runoff, prevent stream
degradation of water bodies, and restore water
quality. Thus the proposed program would
have beneficial effects on water quality and
on aquatic habitat of the area’s water bodies.
In addition, the proposed program would
contribute to the increased resiliency of South
Valley Stream area, thereby helping to secure
all of the area’s environmental assets (e.g.,
parks and other natural areas, riparian habitat,
etc.). Such assets may include Brook Park, “The
Path,” and Doxey Brook Park.
Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project impacts the community
of South Valley Stream, with a total population
of 6,025. Approximately 19.2% of this
population is considered low-income and
16.4% are considered senior-citizens.45 This
project focuses on residential properties and
roadways, using public right of ways for higher

Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

97

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

benefits of stormwater retention and infiltration.
Green infrastructure can provide health and
social benefits by filtering stormwater runoff
from impervious surfaces and improving water
quality for the entire Community. The additional
trees and vegetation proposed may improve
air quality by filtering air pollutants, reducing
illnesses such as asthma, as well as cooling air
temperatures, conserving energy.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Using green infrastructure is a cost-effective
method for upstream retention of stormwater.
The total featured project cost of $2,300,000
would build upon the education provided by
the proposed Community Education project,
and other featured gray infrastructure projects
(i.e., Stormwater Infrastructure Upgrades) while
providing several co-benefits such as improved
water and air quality, public health, and
aesthetic value which could potentially increase
property values.
Anticipated Reduction of Risk
The project would reduce flooding by capturing
and storing rain water for later release. As such,
the project would reduce vulnerability of assets
in the vicinity of project implementation. This
action should provide a reduction of risk to the
entire population of the South Valley Stream
Community. The combined population of the
Community is 6,025.46 Residents would benefit
from increased knowledge and action of green
infrastructure techniques.
Timeframe of Implementation
Intermediate (two to five years)
98

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Regulatory Requirements
Regulatory approvals from the Town of
Hempstead, NYS DEC and USACE may be
necessary, and a consistency determination
from the NYS DOS will be required for all
federal funding and permits. Some regulatory
obstacles may exist in relation to site design
and construction. Coordination among the
Town of Hempstead and Nassau County is
recommended.
Entity with Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead, Nassau County, Valley
Stream Central, 24 and 30 School Districts,
Private Property Owners

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Stormwater Infrastructure Upgrades [Featured Project]
Flooding during Superstorm Sandy occurred
due to tidal flooding and inadequate stormwater
drainage systems. The conditions of the storm
water system were unknown before Superstorm
Sandy, but noticeable buildup within the
stormwater system may be impeding the
discharge of stormwater. The current piping in
the system and inlet basins may be inadequately
sized to handle the stormwater within it on a
regular event. Stormwater outfalls are located
along Valley Stream, Clear Stream, Watts Creek,
and Fosters Lower Brook (assumed locations).
The Valley Stream system accumulates the
stormwater from other systems of its watershed
as the water flows toward Jamaica Bay. Spring
tide waters and storm tides are also entering
the system and creating further water backup
in the system. The amount of water entering the
system cannot exit the system at the same rate
and is resulting in flooding.
The estimated project cost of $2 million
includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study on
the existing system to determine deficiencies,
and implementation of repair and upgrades
to stormwater pipes, drains, and catch basins.
It is assumed that the carrying capacity of
approximately 50% of the existing stormwater
system can be increased. This can be achieved
through installation of swirl separators and
check valves on outfalls, and upgrades
to achieve greater pipe volume. The cost
estimate includes typical regulatory, labor, and
construction contingency costs.

Cost Estimate
Approximately $2,000,000
Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would result in primarily local
benefits, public benefits within South Valley
Stream
Economic Benefits
It is anticipated that this project could create
22 full-time equivalent jobs.47 The addition of
stormwater upgrades would positively impact
the existing infrastructure by reducing erosion
and strain on the sewage systems. Over time,
this would save the township the additional
expenses for maintenance and replacement of
systems that are affected by stormwater.
Environmental Benefits
Construction of the project would reduce
flooding from precipitation. The project would
protect three water bodies in the Community:
Valley Stream, Clear Creek, and Fosters Brook
Lower, and would reduce erosion and other
degradation of living shoreline features.
Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project impacts block groups
covering the location of storm water outfalls
along Valley Stream, Clear Stream, Watts Creek,
and Fosters Lower Brook. The population of
these block groups totals 2,832. Approximately
15.2% of this population is considered
low-income and 16.2% are considered seniorcitizens.48 This project aims to protect all health
and social services assets within the area of the
stormwater outfalls such as the Valley Stream

South High School, Robert Carbonaro, and
Forest Road Schools. Through the use of swirl
separators, this project would positively impact
water quality and public health.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Improving the capacity of the South Valley
Stream stormwater infrastructure system would
mitigate localized flooding that can exacerbate
flooding from tidal flows. The total featured
project cost of $2,000,000 would reduce
costs of damaged property and government
expenditures for emergency response, while
improving the environmental quality of water
bodies within South Valley Stream.
Anticipated Reduction of Risk
This study would identify deficiencies to the
existing stormwater disposal system and
provide feasible alternatives to address the
system deficiencies. By upgrading system
capacity, stormwater would discharge faster
and reduce flooding events. Installation of
check valves would prevent backflow, also
reducing flooding. As such, these actions would
reduce vulnerability of assets in the Community.
Swirl separators would prevent the discharge of
pollutants to the canal and improve quality of
water, enhancing plant and animal habitat. This
action should provide a reduction of risk to the
entire population of the South Valley Stream
Community. The combined population of the
Community is 6,025.49

Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

99

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Timeframe of Implementation
Intermediate (two to five years)
Regulatory Requirements
The project may require permits from the Town
of Hempstead, Nassau County, NYS DEC and
USACE, and a consistency determination from
the NYS DOS will be required for all federal
funding and permits.
Entity with Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead, Nassau County. A multijurisdictional committee/consortium consisting
of all Nassau County municipalities could be
considered, as well. This form of governance
and administration has proven successful
on Long Island, as represented by both the
Hempstead Harbor Protection Committee and
Manhasset Bay Protection Committee. Potential
actions of such a multi-jurisdictional committee/
consortium might include being able to
appoint a fiduciary to be responsible for grant
management, with the committee/consortium
itself being responsible for project management.
The recent New York – Connecticut Sustainable
Communities Consortium, a program funded
by a HUD Sustainable Communities Regional
Planning Grant, used this structure and was
successful in carrying out the planning program
over a wide geography and across numerous
municipal boundaries.

100

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

County-wide Stormwater Mitigation Plan with Community Education and Awareness [Featured Project]
As discussed in the previous project, conditions
of the stormwater system are largely unknown,
but possibly sediment buildup in the system may
be impeding the discharge of stormwater, and
the system may have inadequate capacity. This
project seeks to identify system-wide stormwater
management issues and potential solutions.
The project would coordinate with and advocate
for Nassau County to develop a stormwater
system maintenance and monitoring plan
which would identify maintenance needs to
prevent system backups. Documentation of
flooding conditions would aid in understanding
specific storm conditions and the effectiveness
of stormwater management measures.

Cost Estimate
Approximately $500,000
Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would result in both public and
private benefits, locally within South Valley
Stream and regionally throughout Nassau
County.
Economic Benefits
The creation of a County-wide mitigation plan
would have an insignificant direct economic
benefit impact. However, if the plan was
completed and enacted, the cost savings to
towns and villages in the County could be
significant. The savings of a comprehensive
approach to stormwater mitigation would result
in efficient spending on plans that work for the
County as a whole and would rely on synergetic

projects to reduce costs, instead of approaching
the stormwater problem in a microcosmic, piece
meal approach.

Environmental Benefits
This project would not directly protect
natural and cultural resources, however the
recommendations resulting from the study
should reduce flooding from precipitation,
thereby protecting three water bodies in the
Community: Valley Stream, Clear Creek, and
Fosters Brook Lower. It would also reduce
erosion and other degradation of living
shoreline features for these assets
Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project can be expected to
benefit Nassau County as a whole, with a total
population of 1,346,158. Approximately 16.3%
of this population is considered low-income
and 16.3% are considered senior-citizens.50
This project aims to protect multiple health and
social services assets within Nassau County
and the Community, as well as positively impact
public health for populations throughout
Nassau County by improving water quality and
reducing flooding impacts.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Stormwater issues are larger than South Valley
Stream, as the stormwater infrastructure system
connects to the Nassau County system and
may connect to neighboring communities. The
total featured project cost of $500,000 would
capitalize on economies of scale through a
County-wide study that would identify systemic
interventions for stormwater mitigation, to

cost-effectively benefit multiple communities.
Adequate system functionality could reduce
the costs of property damage and government
expenditures for emergency response during
future storm events as well as costs of system
maintenance.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
Systematic maintenance of the stormwater
disposal system would reduce the system’s
vulnerability by reducing the frequency
and intensity of flooding. The education of
community members could promote awareness
of the conditions that degrade the stormwater
disposal system, thereby reducing the need for
system maintenance. This plan should provide
a reduction of risk to all persons in Nassau
County, a population of 1,346,158.51
Timeframe of Implementation
Immediate (< two years)
Regulatory Requirements
The project is not likely to face regulatory
obstacles including issues with permits or other
approvals, however the recommendations
resulting from the study may require permits,
therefore coordination is recommended with
local municipalities and NYS DEC, NYS DOS
and USACE.

Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

101

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Entity with Jurisdiction
Nassau
County.
A
multi-jurisdictional
committee/consortium consisting of all Nassau
County municipalities could be considered, as
well. This form of governance and administration
has proven successful on Long Island, as
represented by both the Hempstead Harbor
Protection Committee and Manhasset Bay
Protection Committee. Potential actions of such
a multi-jurisdictional committee/consortium
might include being able to appoint a fiduciary
to be responsible for grant management,
with the committee/consortium itself being
responsible for project management. The
recent New York – Connecticut Sustainable
Communities Consortium, a program funded
by a HUD Sustainable Communities Regional
Planning Grant, used this structure and was
successful in carrying out the planning program
over a wide geography and across numerous
municipal boundaries.

102

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Green Infrastructure and Subsurface Stormwater Retention at Green Acres Mall Area [Featured Project]
Stormwater flows from the large impervious
surfaces at Green Acres Mall Area may be
contributing to stormwater issues in South
Valley Stream. Stormwater management issues
contributed to flooding during Superstorm Sandy,
as stormwater could not exit the system through
outfalls which were blocked by tidal flows.
This project encourages utilization of green
infrastructure to retain stormwater from the
large impervious surfaces at Green Acres Mall
and adjacent properties, including Green Acres
Plaza and the former Sunrise Multiplex site. This
project seeks to support long-term economic
stability while controlling stormwater through
green infrastructure and subsurface retention.
It also has real property constraints as the
property owner of Green Acres Mall would need
to implement the stormwater retention on site.
Project success is conditional on cooperation
of the property owner and coordination with
the Town of Hempstead and Nassau County is
recommended.

Cost Estimate
N/A (Advocacy)
Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would result in local benefits, both
public and private, in South Valley Stream.
Economic Benefits
The economic benefits of a water retention site are
unclear unless additional analysis is performed.
However, if successful, the stormwater retention
could reduce the possibilities of flooding
properties within an influence area. The influence

area would be determined by the waterways
directly impacted by the retention. Possible
reductions in loss to property, life, and equipment
could result from a proper implementation.

Environmental Benefits
Advocating green infrastructure would not
directly protect natural and cultural resources.
However, if green infrastructure systems were
adopted at Green Acres Mall, less flooding and
nutrient loading would be expected, benefiting
Valley Stream, Clear Creek, and Watts Creek,
by improving water quality of those waterbodies.
Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project impacts the properties
near the Green Acres Mall with a total
population of 1,727. Approximately 27.9% of this
population is considered low-income and 16.7%
are considered senior-citizens.52 This project may
provide benefits to the adjacent Yale Academy,
which is classified as a health and social services
asset by the community, as well as positively
impact public health for populations in Mill
Brook by improving water quality and reducing
flooding impacts.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
This featured project does not have a projected
cost due to uncertainties regarding the existing
on-site stormwater retention at these commercial
properties; however, implementation of green
infrastructure could be a low-cost method for
treating the stormwater generated from these
large impervious surfaces, reducing stormwater
issues in the Community while potentially
increasing property values for these significant
commercial landowners.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
Utilization of Green Infrastructure at Green
Acres Mall and the Sunrise Multiplex would
reduce flooding downstream, thereby reducing
vulnerability of assets in the area. Additional
benefits include increased stormwater quality,
reduced stormwater quantity, enhanced
wildlife habitat, and improvements to the
urban landscape. This action should provide a
reduction of risk to those living near the Green
Acres Mall and Sunrise Multiplex site. The
combined population of the block groups near
the site is 1,727.53
Timeframe of Implementation
Long Range (> five years)
Regulatory Requirements
The project may require permits from the Town
of Hempstead, Nassau County and NYS DEC.
It has real property constraints as the property
owner would need to implement the stormwater
retention practices on site. Project success is
conditional on cooperation of the property owner
and coordination with the Town of Hempstead
and Nassau County.
Entity with Jurisdiction
Private Property Owners

Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

103

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Microgrid Network Pilot Project [Featured Project]
Areas within South Valley Stream were without
power for up to seven weeks after Superstorm
Sandy, including the northwest portion of Mill
Brook. The neighborhood needs backup power
supply sources that are available for homeowner
benefit during a disaster, and potentially
year-round.

of micro-grids and other energy saving devices
can reduce the overall strain on the regional
electrical network. In addition to storm-related
power outages, this project could have potential
economic benefits such as reducing the impact
of blackouts and brownouts due to demand out
pacing capacity.

This project would develop a microgrid storm
resistance plan and implement microgrid pilot
project, possibly at Green Acres Mall and Forest
Road School. Given its backup power supply,
Green Acres Mall is a candidate for a microgrid,
as a hub for resilient power. This initial node could
be connected to locally significant infrastructure
on the north side of Valley Stream, such as Forest
Road School. Other schools on the south side of
Valley Stream can be part of a microgrid network,
including Valley Stream High School and Robert
Carbonaro School.

Additionally, an effective microgrid could be used
in a demand response program that can generate
money for the community. The programs either
reduce power or generate power in times of peak
demand and therefore make a more secure
electrical grid network for the region.

It also has real property constraints as the property
owner of Green Acres Mall would need to
implement the microgrid on site. Project success is
conditional on cooperation of the property owner
and coordination with the Town of Hempstead
and Nassau County is recommended.

Cost Estimate
Approximately $6,000,000
Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would result in local benefits, both
public and private, in South Valley Stream.
Economic Benefits
It is anticipated that this project would create
65 full-time equivalent jobs.54 The installation
104

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project impacts the block groups
covering the Green Acres Mall and the Forest
Road School (potential sites) with a total
population of 3,529. Approximately 25% of
this population is considered low-income and
16.7% are considered senior-citizens.55 This
project involves the Forest Road School, which
is identified as a health and social services asset
by the community. The project would also benefit
populations by providing backup power, which
in addition to powering sumps, heat, and other
necessary utilities, can power medical devices
such as oxygen tanks, which was an issue during
Superstorm Sandy.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Superstorm Sandy illustrated the negative impacts
that power outages can have on emergency
response by interrupting the communications
network and disabling building systems.
Connecting critical and locally significant facilities
by a microgrid network, at a total featured project

cost of $6,000,000, would yield a high value in
providing reliable, efficient emergency response
operations and enabling locally significant
facilities, such as schools, to recover faster after
future storm events.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
This project would advocate implementation
of a microgrid at a strategic location. In areas
where power from microgrids is available, assets
experience reduced vulnerability as a result of
less frequent service disruptions, and/or service
disruptions of shorter duration. Backup power
supplies would allow an asset’s equipment to
operate during primary power failure, and would
allow first responders to communicate without
interruption, thereby providing better service
to the community. This action should provide a
reduction of risk to those living near the microgrid
project. The combined population of the area is
3,529.56
Timeframe of Implementation
Intermediate (two to five years)
Regulatory Requirements
The project may have several regulatory obstacles
including issues with permits or other approvals.
Regulatory approvals, from the Town of
Hempstead, NYS DEC and New York State Public
Service Commission (NYSDPS) may be necessary
Entity with Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead, Valley Stream District 30,
Private Property Owners, LIPA/PSEG

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Community Assistance Center at Forest Road School [Featured Project]
Despite a strong neighborhood communications
network through the Mill Brook Civic Association,
Superstorm Sandy illustrated the need for
improved communications regarding disasterresponse resources and a central location for
distribution of supplies. Given power outages
after Superstorm Sandy, the neighborhood,
and especially socially vulnerable populations,
would benefit from a safe location for residents
to go during extreme heat or cold weather.
The Forest Road School could serve as a
Community Assistance Center as well as a
warming / cooling location. After a storm event,
this would provide a place for members of the
community to receive assistance. Its function
may not be limited to storm events but also
during heat waves or power outages, with
the exception of events where evacuation is
mandated. Hardening measures for the School
may be necessary per the Nassau County
Office of Emergency Management (OEM).
Real property constraints include ability to use
the school, costs of operating the facility and
paying for utility bills, operations, and security
of the facility. Project success is conditional
on cooperation of the property owner and
coordination with the Town of Hempstead
and Nassau County’s Office of Emergency
Management

Cost Estimate
N/A (Advocacy)

Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would result in local, public benefits
in South Valley Stream.
Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project can be expected to benefit
residents of the block groups near the Forest Road
School, a population of 4,559. Approximately
20.7% of this population is considered
low-income and 16.4% are considered seniorcitizens.57 This project involves the Forest Road
School, which is identified as a health and
social services asset by the community. The
project would especially benefit all populations
that can access the school, especially socially
vulnerable populations that are at an increased
risk from heat-related illness.

Timeframe of Implementation
Immediate (< two years)
Regulatory Requirements
A warming and cooling center would need
to comply with Nassau County and FEMA
regulations for warming and cooling centers.
Entity with Jurisdiction
Nassau County, Valley Stream District 30

Cost-Benefit Analysis
As a Community Assistance Center would
be established in an existing facility, ideally
equipped with a backup power supply and
no necessary improvements, this featured
project would have no associated costs, but
would benefit socially vulnerable populations
by reducing their vulnerability in future storm
events.
Anticipated Reduction of Risk
The project would not decrease exposure or
vulnerability of assets; however it would reduce
the vulnerability of the local population during
severe weather. This project would benefit those
with access to the center. The area near the
project has a population of 4,559.58 Ideally, this
project could benefit others within South Valley
Stream as well.
Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

105

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

South Valley Stream Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) [Featured Project]
Nassau County has a CERT Team which was
very active during Superstorm Sandy, yet the
NYRCR Committee is looking for more local,
community driven emergency response in South
Valley Stream, especially to monitor socially
vulnerable populations. This project would
build stronger local lines of communication
and coordination with Nassau County Office of
Emergency Management (OEM) and Nassau
County CERT by establishing a local CERT
Team for South Valley Stream.
This project would assist with ongoing local,
county, and state disaster response planning
efforts to increase preparedness and disaster
response capability as well as provide local
education programs that can provide residents
of South Valley Stream with greater awareness
of evacuation procedures. CERT programs are
led by emergency management professionals
to train volunteers on basic disaster response
skills (such as first aid and search and rescue
procedures). After training, members of the
CERT can begin immediate response procedures
when a disaster strikes or assist emergency
management professionals when a disaster
overwhelms their capabilities. To start a CERT
program, funding is necessary for equipment
and materials. Nassau County’s CERT Program
is currently restructuring, therefore this project
would work closely with Nassau County CERT.

Cost Estimate
Approximately $2,500
Benefits or Co-Benefits
106

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

This project would result in local, public benefits
in South Valley Stream.

Economic Benefits
Although this project would not create any
significant employment, benefits may include
savings in life, property, and equipment as well
as reduced expenditures for disaster response
due to more efficient emergency response
operations facilitated by a local CERT Team.
Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project impacts the community of
South Valley Stream, with a total population of
6,025. Approximately 19.2% of this population
is considered low-income and 16.4% are
considered senior-citizens.59 This project aims
to protect multiple health and social services
assets within the community by providing
coordinated emergency response services
after storm events, which would be especially
beneficial to vulnerable populations and those
of low mobility.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
The South Valley Stream CERT Team would
expand from the operational capacity and
institutional knowledge of the Nassau County
CERT and OEM. Therefore, a minimal total
featured project cost of $2,500 would yield high
returns in emergency response coordination,
communication and services to aid socially
vulnerable populations, while enhancing the
already strong social infrastructure of the
Mill Brook Civic Association and South Valley
Stream community.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
The project would not decrease exposure
or vulnerability of assets, however it would
reduce the vulnerability of the local population
by improving disaster response. Establishing
a CERT should provide a reduction of risk to
all populations in the South Valley Stream
Community. The CERT would provide increased
manpower and expertise during a disaster
response. The combined population of the area
is 6,025.60 Trained CERT members may also
assist in events beyond the South Valley Stream
Community.
Timeframe of Implementation
Immediate (< two years)
Regulatory Requirements
The project is not likely to face regulatory
obstacles including issues with permits or other
approvals, or have real property constraints,
and is ready to begin. Coordination with the
Mill Brook Civic Association, Nassau County
OEM, Nassau County CERT, and FEMA is
recommended.
Entity with Jurisdiction
Nassau County

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Resilient Home Construction Incentive Program [Featured Project]
Some homes damaged during Superstorm
Sandy have built back as before, without
resilient design practices, leaving them
vulnerable to impacts of future storm events.
This project would establish an incentive
program to maintain neighborhood character
while strengthening the housing stock in South
Valley Stream against future extreme weather.
This program would provide a tax break
for homeowners who make resiliency home
improvements and retrofits, on an escalating
scale up to a designated maximum amount.
The Resilient Home Construction Incentive
Program would involve a review of existing
programs and information to develop the
program and to establish participation goals,
would identify resilient design and construction
standards for program participants; and would
provide a stipend for program participation.
The program would also serve to encourage
resilient design and construction practices for
new home construction. It is assumed that
funding for the tax incentives would be limited
per household with a maximum value allocated
to the program as a whole.

Cost Estimate
Approximately $850,000
Benefits or Co-Benefits
This project would generate primarily local,
private benefits for homeowners in South Valley
Stream.
Economic Benefits
It is anticipated that this project would create 9

full-time equivalent jobs.61 If enacted effectively,
this program could induce improvements
that would increase resiliency in residential
structures thereby lowering insurance premiums
and making homes more valuable. The value
could translate into higher taxes as the market
demand drives up the overall value of the
homes improved.

Health and Social Benefits
The proposed project impacts the community of
South Valley Stream, with a total population of
6,025. Approximately 19.2% of this population
is considered low-income and 16.4% are
considered senior-citizens.62 Project benefits are
directed towards homeowners, in the largely
residential South Valley Stream Community.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
While most, although not all, residential homes
in South Valley Stream have rebuilt following
Superstorm Sandy’s damage, this featured
project, at a total cost of $850,000 would
increase the resiliency of the housing stock
against future storms, reducing the costs of
potential property damage and avoiding the
loss of tax revenues that would result from
permanently damaged homes, as well as
preserve the residential character of Mill Brook
and North Woodmere.

to a reduction of risk to all populations in the
South Valley Stream Community. The combined
population of the area is 6,025.63

Timeframe of Implementation
Intermediate (two to five years)
Regulatory Requirements
The project is not likely to have program-wide
permitting requirements; however, it may have
some regulatory obstacles in relation to local
building permits and environmental review for
individual properties. While implementation
could begin immediately, the timeframe
could be delayed by the time necessary to
work through building codes and regulatory
obstacles.
Entity with Jurisdiction
Town of Hempstead, Private Property Owners

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
Implementation of program provisions would
reduce the vulnerability of residential assets
by making structures less susceptible to flood
damage. This program could provide access
Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

107

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

South Valley Stream: Proposed and Featured Projects
A. Manage Tidal Flow

C. Reinforce Powergrid

A1 Repair Bulkheads and Restore Shoreline at Brook Road Park

[Proposed]

C1 Implement Microgrid Network Pilot Project

[Featured]

A2 Restore Natural Shoreline along ‘The Path’

[Proposed]

C2 Establish Community Assistance at Forest Road School

[Featured]

A3 Corridor Restoration and Riverbank Stabilization

[Featured]

D. Strengthen Communication & Coordination

		Watts
Creek
A3a
		 A3b

D1 Establish A Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) [Proposed]

Valley Stream: North, Southeast, Southwest

A3c
		Clear
Stream

		 A3d

E. Maintain and Enhance Economic Viability

Fosters Brook Lower

E1 Resilient Home Construction Incentive Program

B. Retain Stormwater
Develop Community Information Regarding Green 		

B1 Infrastructure and Living Shorelines

Green Infrastructure Implementation Program on Residential

[Proposed]

B2 and Public Property

[Featured]

B3 Stormwater Infrastructure Upgrades

[Featured]

County-wide Stormwater Mitigation Plan with Community

[Featured]

Encourage implementation of Green Infrastructure and

[Featured]

B4 Education and Awareness

B5 Subsurface Stormwater Retention at Green Acres Mall,
Including Sunrise Multiplex Site

108

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

[Featured]

R. Regional
R1 South Shoreline Improvement Program Study

[Proposed]

R2 Coordinate with Hydrologic and Hydraulic study of the

[Featured]

Hook Creek / Head of Bay Watershed

South Valley Stream NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan

Rosedale Station
T

Sun

rise

en A

two

ntw

C2

te R

Pearl St

ok R

n

C
Sch abonar
ool
o

B2

A3d

ower

r

on D

Daws

Gibson Station T

l
Janet P

h
Oakleig

e
Longview Av

Hewlett Dr

Woodmere Dr

Cherry Ln

Og
Elem den
en
Sch tary
ool

Rd

ert W

kL
roo
sB

C1

Cedarhurst St

yS

ett

Rob

st
er

Ln

Vall e

Clu

A3b

tre

l Dr

Pa
rk

S

Valley Stream

Va
Sou lley Str
e
th H
igh am
Sch
ool
d
R
k
c
le Ro
Sadd

l Hil

Dr

d

Rd

re
Lau

rc
Ma

Furth R
Roseda

le Rd

Jewel Dr

Oak Ln

ty
s Coun
Queen County
Nassau

ok
Ho

ek
Cre

Bro

A1

A3b

ield

verf

Clo

A2

Fo

Rd

A3c

A3b

d

thga
Sou

Cr eek

C

ld
rfie
the am
Healear Stre

Rosedale

n

est
R
Sch oad
ool

n

Mill Rd

Ln

A3a

ts
at
W

od L

For

d

ood

am

Bre

ne L
n

d

tatio

ry L

er R

Eas

rber

N

am S

Rd

Elde

Flow

Stre
T

C1

B2

val

St

sO

land

ore

Forest Rd

Lotu

Woo
d

land
Ln

t

Rd

thor

cres

Valle
y

Pl

thm

th S

ney

Gar

en A

Sid

Mall

Str
a

255

Gre

cres

Fire

Gre

Hw y

Rd

Ke
arn
yD

n

dL

iel

inf

Pla

B2
r

NYRCR Planning Area

Woodmere

Figure 25:

South Valley Stream Projects

0

0.25

miles
0.5

Source: NYRCR Planning Area: US Census Bureau; Basemap: ESRI, Nassau GIS,
Tiger; Roads: Tiger/Line, US Census Bureau;

Section IV: Proposed and Featured Project Profiles

109

Section V: Additional Materials
Table 1: A: Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Strategy

Project Name

Project Description

Estimated Cost

Regional
Project (Y/N)

$920,000

Y

N/A (Advocacy)

Y

N/A
(Policy)

Y

$170,000

N

1: Manage Tidal
Flow

Rockaway Turnpike Floodgates and
Rockaway Turnpike/Nassau Expressway
Upgrades Study

Analyze construction of floodgates / flood protection alternatives at Hook Creek and Motts
Creek and elevation of Rockaway Tpke and Nassau Expy. Conduct traffic management study
to decrease congestion in evacuation routes. Study opportunities for economic
development in retail/commercial zones that would be protected by flood mitigation.

1: Manage Tidal
Flow

Coordination with solutions being developed
for Jamaica Bay, the Rockaway Inlet, and the
Barrier Island

Advocate for a regional solution for flood protection from Jamaica Bay that coordinates
with efforts by US Army Corps of Engineers and New York City.

2. Retain
Stormwater

Zoning changes for Stormwater
Management

Advocate for policy changes with the Town of Hempstead for greater stormwater
management controls over future development.

3. Reinforce Power
Grid

Renewable Energy Feasibility Study and
Action Plan

Identify and analyze potential sites for renewable energy production and microgrid nodes
that could be used to maintain power during emergency situations.

3. Reinforce Power
Grid

Expanding the natural gas network,
especially to critical facilities

Extend the natural gas network along key roadways in the community, and especially to
critical facilities (e.g., warming / cooling center, schools) that may use such natural gas
supply for generators or microgrids.

$5,000,000

N

3. Reinforce Power
Grid

Burying utility lines, especially to lines
supplying power to critical infrastructure

Move utility lines underground in forested areas, with higher priority for those connecting
to critical infrastructure.

$5,000,000

N

4. Strengthen
Identifying vulnerable populations for
Communication and
emergency response
Coordination

Capitalizing on the existing community network through the Mill Brook Civic Association
and NYRCR Planning Committee, community members would assist the County with
emergency response by identifying socially vulnerable populations.

$5,000,000

N

4. Strengthen
Community monitoring and oversight of
Communication and
project implementation
Coordination

Continue planning committee engagement after finalizing the Final NYRCR Plan, to provide
committee members with project status updates and fast track project completion.

$30,000

N

5. Maintain and
Enhance Economic
Viability

Maintaining economic viability of the
community’s key economic assets for
stormwater management

Support the long‐term economic viability of the community’s key economic assets while
encouraging implementation of green infrastructure to manage the stormwater volumes
associated with these assets.

N/A (Advocacy /
Policy )

N

1. Manage Tidal
Flow

Hempstead / Hewlett Bay Resilient Corridor
Study

Build upon the Rockaway Turnpike Floodgates and Rockaway Turnpike/Nassau Expressway
Upgrades study to analyze the creation of a continuous “Resiliency Corridor” that uses
existing roadway elevations in combination with floodgates at waterway crossings to
protect the entire Hempstead/Hewlett Bay area against coastal flooding and hardens
evacuation routes.

$2,500,000

Y

Section V: Additional Materials

110

Table 2: B: Master Table of Projects

Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Estimated Cost

Project Category

Regional (Y/N)

$50,000

Proposed

Y

1: Manage
Tidal Flow

South Shoreline
Improvement Program
Study

Study methods for facilitating coordinated shoreline improvements to
achieve a contiguous shoreline, including funding mechanisms,
streamlining permitting, and incentivizing bulkhead repairs and living
shoreline improvements.

1: Manage
Tidal Flow

Bulkhead Repair and
Shoreline Restoration at
Brook Road Park

Provide necessary repairs to Brook Road Park by replacing failing
bulkhead with a vegetated buffer and a rock edge, constructing a
sculpted mound tied into the higher elevation to protect against tidal
flooding, repairing outfalls, and constructing a fishing pier for waterfront
access.

$2,000,000

Proposed

N

1: Manage
Tidal Flow

Natural Shoreline
Restoration along “The
Path”

Restore the natural shoreline along “The Path” by constructing a living
shoreline to buffer tidal flow, planting trees and other vegetation,
repairing outfalls and installing green infrastructure measures with
educational signage to capture stormwater runoff.

$1,700,000

Proposed

N

1. Manage
Tidal Flow;
2. Retain
Stormwater

Community Education
regarding Green
Infrastructure and Living
Shorelines

Educate the community about living shoreline plantings and
improvements, tree pruning near power lines, and ways to reduce their
individual impact on the stormwater system through green
infrastructure, water conservation, and rain water harvesting.

$60,000

Proposed

N

Section V: Additional Materials

111

B: Master Table of Projects (continued)

1: Manage Tidal
Flow

Corridor restoration and riverbank stabilization: Valley Stream, Clear Stream, Watts Creek, Fosters
Brook Lower. This project has been separated into sub‐projects for cost purposes.

1: Manage Tidal
Flow

Sub‐project A: Watts
Creek

Living shoreline improvements would be made to both sides of Watts
Creek.

$1,520,000

Featured

N

1: Manage Tidal
Flow

Sub‐project B North:
Valley Stream

Living shoreline improvements would be made to the north side of
Valley Stream between Brook Road Park and “The Path.”

$1,100,000

Featured

N

1: Manage Tidal
Flow

Sub‐project B
Southwest: Valley
Stream Southwest

The Bulkheads would be repaired along the western portion of the
south side of Valley Stream.

$2,700,000

Featured

N

1: Manage Tidal
Flow

Sub‐project B
Southeast: Valley
Stream Southeast

Living shoreline improvements would be made to the eastern portion of
the south side of Valley Stream.

$1,300,000

Featured

N

1: Manage Tidal
Flow

Sub‐project C: Clear
Stream

Bulkheads would be repaired along both sides of Clear Stream.

$2,800,000

Featured

N

1: Manage Tidal
Flow

Sub‐project D: Fosters
Brook Lower

Living shoreline improvements would be made to both sides of Fosters
Brook Lower.

$1,000,000

Featured

N

2. Retain
Stormwater

Hydrologic and
Hydraulic Study of Hook
Creek – Head of Bay
Watershed

Advocate for an engineering study that would provide a regional,
watershed‐level understanding of the hydrology affecting South Valley
Stream, to better inform stormwater management projects.

$750,000

Featured

Y

2. Retain
Stormwater

Green Infrastructure
Implementation
Program on Residential
and Public Property

Install green infrastructure on public property and rights‐of‐way, and
incentivize green infrastructure installation on residential property.
Goal is to capture 5% of stormwater falling on impervious surfaces.

$2,300,000

Featured

N

Section V: Additional Materials

112

B: Master Table of Projects (continued)

2. Retain
Stormwater

Stormwater
Infrastructure Upgrades

Conduct a Hydrologic and hydraulic study on the stormwater system to
determine deficiencies; install check valves, upgrade stormwater pipes,
drains, and catch basins as recommended by the study.

2. Retain
Stormwater

County‐wide
Stormwater Mitigation
Plan with Community
Education and
Awareness

Coordinate with Nassau County to develop a stormwater system
maintenance and monitoring plan which would identify maintenance
needs to prevent system backups.

2. Retain
Stormwater

Green Infrastructure
and Subsurface
Stormwater Retention
at Green Acres Mall

Encourage utilization of green infrastructure at Green Acres Mall, as well
as redevelopment of Sunrise Multiplex that supports long‐term
economic stability while controlling stormwater through green
infrastructure and subsurface retention.

3. Reinforce
Power Grid

Microgrid Network Pilot
Project

Develop a microgrid storm resistance plan and implement micro‐grid
pilot project connecting to locally significant facilities.

3. Reinforce
Power Grid

Community Assistance
Center at Forest Road
School

4. Strengthen
Communicatio
n and
Coordination

South Valley Stream
Community Emergency
Response Team (CERT)

Section V: Additional Materials

$2,000,000

Featured

N

$500,000

Featured

Y

N/A (Advocacy)

Featured

N

$6,000,000

Featured

N

Establish Forest Road School as a Community Center Assistance Center
as well as a warming / cooling location for the community to obtain
resources after storm events.

N/A (Advocacy)

Featured

N

Coordinate with Nassau County OEM and CERT to establish a local CERT
Team that would assist with disaster response planning efforts, increase
preparedness and disaster response capability, and provide local
education programs.

$2,500

Featured

N

113

B: Master Table of Projects (continued)

5. Maintain and
Enhance
Economic
Viability

Resilient Home
Construction Incentive
Program

Establish a tax incentive program for homeowners who make resiliency
home improvements and retrofits to strengthen the existing housing
stock.

$850,000

Featured

N

1: Manage Tidal
Flow

Rockaway Turnpike
Floodgates and
Rockaway
Turnpike/Nassau
Expressway Upgrades
Study

Analyze construction of floodgates / flood protection alternatives at
Hook Creek and Motts Creek and elevation of Rockaway Tpke and
Nassau Expy. Conduct traffic management study to decrease congestion
in evacuation routes. Study opportunities for economic development in
retail/commercial zones that would be protected by flood mitigation.

$920,000

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

Y

1: Manage Tidal
Flow

Coordination with
solutions being
developed for Jamaica
Bay, the Rockaway Inlet,
and the Barrier Island

Advocate for a regional solution for flood protection from Jamaica Bay
that coordinates with efforts by US Army Corps of Engineers and New
York City.

N/A (Advocacy)

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

Y

2. Retain
Stormwater

Zoning changes for
Stormwater
Management

Advocate for policy changes with the Town of Hempstead for greater
stormwater management controls over future development.

N/A (Advocacy)

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

Y

3. Reinforce
Power Grid

Renewable Energy
Feasibility Study and
Action Plan

Identify and analyze potential sites for renewable energy production
and microgrid nodes that could be used to maintain power during
emergency situations.

$170,000

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

N

3. Reinforce
Power Grid

Expanding the natural
gas network, especially
to critical facilities

Extend the natural gas network along key roadways in the community,
and especially to critical facilities (e.g., warming / cooling center,
schools) that may use such natural gas supply for generators or
microgrids.

$5,000,000

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

N

3. Reinforce
Power Grid

Burying utility lines,
especially to lines
supplying power to
critical infrastructure

Move utility lines underground in forested areas, with higher priority for
those connecting to critical infrastructure.

$5,000,000

Additional Resiliency
Recommendation

N

Section V: Additional Materials

114

B: Master Table of Projects (continued)

4. Strengthen
Communicatio
n and
Coordination

Identifying Vulnerable
Populations for
Emergency Response

Capitalizing on the existing community network through the Mill Brook
Civic Association and NYRCR Planning Committee, community members
would assist the County with emergency response by identifying socially
vulnerable populations.

N/A (Advocacy)

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

N

4. Strengthen
Communicatio
n and
Coordination

Community monitoring
and oversight of project
implementation

Continue planning committee engagement after finalizing the Final
NYRCR Plan, to provide committee members with project status updates
and fast track project completion.

$10,000

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

N

5. Maintain and
Enhance
Economic
Viability

Maintaining economic
viability of the
community’s key
economic assets for
stormwater
management

Support the long‐term economic viability of the community’s key
economic assets while encouraging implementation of green
infrastructure to manage the stormwater volumes associated with these
assets.

N/A (Advocacy)

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

N

Hempstead / Hewlett
Bay Resilient Corridor
Study

Build upon the Rockaway Turnpike Floodgates and Rockaway
Turnpike/Nassau Expressway Upgrades study to analyze the creation of
a continuous “Resiliency Corridor” that uses existing roadway elevations
in combination with floodgates at waterway crossings to protect the
entire Hempstead/Hewlett Bay area against coastal flooding and
hardens evacuation routes.

$2,500,000

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

Y

1. Manage Tidal
Flow

Section V: Additional Materials

115

C: Public Engagement Process
The Public Engagement plan for the South Valley Stream NYRCR Community was structured to encourage broad community participation, including people from
both neighborhoods (Mill Brook and North Woodmere) and all sectors comprising the study area. The goal was to actively engage the community in the process
of creating a pragmatic program that envisions a resilient and sustainable future for the community.
The plan was effective in informing a wide spectrum of the community about the Committee’s efforts and the actions that should be taken in the future to
enhance the resiliency of the area. It provided multiple opportunities for public input and direction, and helped to identify a group of potential project
“champions” who can oversee and monitor projects as they proceed in the future.
NYRCR Planning Committee
The NYRCR Planning Committee was composed of 10 members, including long term residents, civic and institutional leaders, and business and municipal
representatives. The NYRCR Planning Committee was instrumental in providing input and information to shape the Plan and in assisting with the broader Public
Engagement Strategy through their constituent and social networks. A full list of NYRCR Planning Committee members can be found on the inside of the front
cover of this plan.
The Public Engagement Strategy included regular, monthly NYRCR Planning Committee meetings focused on the development of the Plan. At these meetings,
which were open to the public, the NYRCR Planning Committee provided input on:







The issues currently facing South Valley Stream as a result of Superstorm Sandy and other extreme events;
South Valley Stream’s existing assets and the opportunities they might provide for a more resilient future;
Preliminary ideas for projects in the area that can be initiated through the current planning process;
Discussions regarding the development of recommended actions and projects;
Input regarding the format and content for pubic engagement events; and
Major outreach efforts focused on “getting the word out” about the project, the planning process, and the public engagement meetings.

Public Meetings
There were three public meetings, held in October 2013, November 2013, and February 2014. A fourth public meeting will be held in April 2014, after
completion of the final plan.
Though each meeting focused on a different part of the planning process, the entire process, purpose, and timeline was explained during the presentation at
each of the three meetings. Representatives from the NY Rising Housing Recovery Program, FEMA, Project Hope, Catholic Charities, and the Family Service
League were available at the meetings to speak with residents about any individual or property‐related concerns.

Section V: Additional Materials

116

Meeting #1: The first Public Meeting was held on October 15, 2013. Approximately 40 members of the community attended. The meeting focused on gathering
the public’s knowledge, experience, and recommendations for the development of the NYRCR Conceptual Plan. The public was invited to provide input on the
NYRCR Planning Committee’s work to date, including the Community Vision and Identification of Community Assets, Needs, and Opportunities.
Meeting #2: The second Public Meeting was held on November 18, 2013. The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the draft NYRCR Conceptual Plan with
community residents. Approximately 11 members of the community attended the meeting. The format of the meeting was a short presentation followed by an
invitation for the attendees to walk around the room to various stations to view ideas and strategies from the Plan. Attendees gave their feedback by filling out a
comment sheet or speaking with the member of the consultant team who was standing near each station, and they were invited to make notes on the
information boards and respond to specific questions posted at each station. Attendees were invited to vote for their favorite projects by placing sticker dots on
the boards. There were several copies of the draft Conceptual Plan at the meeting, for the community to review, and attendees were also informed that the
draft Conceptual Plan was posted on the website for their review.
Meeting #3: The third Public Meeting was held on February 10, 2014. Approximately 21 members of the community attended. The purpose of this meeting – the
final meeting before the draft plan is sent to the State for review – was to discuss the list of specific projects that the NYRCR Planning Committee and the
consultant team proposed to address issues related to resilience and recovery in South Valley Stream. The format of the meeting was a presentation followed by
a question and answer session, during which residents gave their input and asked questions about the NYRCR Planning Committee’s preferred menu of projects.
Outreach about the Project and Meetings
The Consultant Team and the NYRCR Planning Committee actively pursued a variety of strategies to inform people about the project and the Public Meetings.
These techniques included:
Electronic notices sent to a broad range of individuals and organizations (including schools, businesses, and churches) in the South Valley Stream NYRCR area;
Large signs posted outdoors to advertise the meeting;
Flyers distributed locally to stores and other businesses by the NYRCR Planning Committee;
Door hangers distributed by high school and FEMA Corps volunteers to homes in Mill Brook and North Woodmere;
Postcards sent to all homes in South Valley Stream by Assemblywoman Solages’ office;
Media advertisements;
Posting on community calendars; and
Press releases to local newspapers.
Sharing Information
Public information (including the draft and final versions of the NYRCR Conceptual Plan, meeting notices, and presentations from meetings) was provided via a
project website established for the South Valley Stream Community (http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr/community/south‐valley‐stream). Information was also
posted on the NYRCR Facebook page.

D: Economic Profile
Green Acres Mall Tax Contribution
As per the Nassau County Assessor’s site, the Green Acres Mall property consists of two parcels. In 2013, these two parcels paid the following property taxes:
Section V: Additional Materials

117

$2,503,760.62 to Nassau County;
$1,435,484.89 to Town of Hempstead;
$789,757.96 to Sanitary District 1; and
$13,299,341.22 to Valley Stream Union Free School District 30 (note that some of these tax monies also feed into the Valley Stream Central High School District
budget).
Valley Stream Union Free School District 30 has a 2013‐14 proposed tax levy of $26,591,2331 while Valley Stream Central High School District has 2013‐2014
estimated local tax levy revenues of $80,873,777.
Median Household Income
South Valley Stream maintains a median household income of over $100,000, exceeding that of Nassau County and, to a greater extent, the Primary Market
Area (PMA), defined as the 20‐minute drive time contour from the Forest Road Elementary School). Through 2018, South Valley Stream is forecasted to
experience a nominal median household income increase of just over $11,000, slightly lower than the forecasted nominal increase of approximately $14,000 for
the PMA, and slightly higher than the forecasted nominal increase of approximately $10,300 for Nassau County.

Income Distribution
There is a considerable percentage of upper‐income households within South Valley Stream, with over six out of ten households earning more than $75,000 a
year. Through 2018, all income brackets earning greater than $75,000 are forecasted to grow, with the strongest growth occurring in the $150,000 to $199,999
category, at an annualized growth rate of just over four percent. Conversely, all income groups earning below $75,000 are forecasted to decline, with
households earning below $35,000 declining by 4.7 percent annually.

1

Valley Stream District 30 Budget Newsletter

Section V: Additional Materials

118

Unemployment
In 2013, the annual rate of unemployment in South Valley Stream is an estimated 8.0 percent, lower than the PMA (10.4%), but higher than Nassau County
(7.8%).
Industry Trends
Retail is the dominant industry in South Valley Stream, though transportation and warehousing as well as educational services are also important. Healthcare
and social assistance has seen a relatively high increase in jobs in South Valley Stream. In contrast, the primary industry in Nassau County is health care and
social assistance, with retail trade coming in second.
Figure 3: Top 10 Industries by Employment
South Valley Stream CDP

Percentage Change
2007

2009

2011

2007‐2009 2009‐2011

Total Primary Jobs

4,005 100.0%

3,868100.0%

4,747 100.0%

‐3.4%

22.7%

Retail Trade

2,690 67.2%

2,632 68.0%

3,354 70.7%

‐2.2%

27.4%

‐2.8%

4.0%

Transportation and Warehousing

360

9.0%

350

9.0%

364

7.7%

Educational Services

362

9.0%

Accommodation and Food Services

167

4.2%

354

9.2%

363

7.6%

‐2.2%

2.5%

89

2.3%

166

3.5%

‐46.7%

86.5%

Health Care and Social Assistance

45

1.1%

61

1.6%

160

3.4%

35.6%

162.3%

Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services

119

3.0%

116

3.0%

73

1.5%

‐2.5%

‐37.1%

Wholesale Trade

58

1.4%

83

2.1%

65

1.4%

43.1%

‐21.7%

Other Services (excluding Public Administration)

75

1.9%

47

1.2%

48

1.0%

‐37.3%

2.1%

Finance and Insurance

27

0.7%

38

1.0%

40

0.8%

40.7%

5.3%

Information

15

0.4%

16

0.4%

33

0.7%

6.7%

106.3%

Nassau County

Percentage Change
2007

2009

2011

2007‐2009 2009‐2011

Total Primary Jobs

543,043 100.0%

Health Care and Social Assistance

92,458 17.0%

538,821 100.0% 539,568 100.0%
101,345

Retail Trade

70,925 13.1%

67,636

12.6%

72,767 13.5%

‐4.6%

7.6%

Educational Services

65,233 12.0%

66,470

12.3%

63,397 11.7%

1.9%

‐4.6%

Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services

34,650

6.4%

34,177

6.3%

34,143

6.3%

‐1.4%

‐0.1%

Accommodation and Food Services

31,504

5.8%

30,595

5.7%

33,305

6.2%

‐2.9%

8.9%

Finance and Insurance

34,843

6.4%

30,909

5.7%

29,036

5.4%

‐11.3%

‐6.1%

18.8% 106,443 19.7%

‐0.8%

0.1%

9.6%

5.0%

Wholesale Trade

29,197

5.4%

28,177

5.2%

27,960

5.2%

‐3.5%

‐0.8%

Admin. & Support, Waste Manag. & Remediation

27,186

5.0%

28,270

5.2%

27,331

5.1%

4.0%

‐3.3%

Other Services (excluding Public Administration)

23,770

4.4%

24,773

4.6%

25,554

4.7%

4.2%

3.2%

Public Administration

23,804

4.4%

23,459

4.4%

25,458

4.7%

‐1.4%

8.5%

Source: US Census Bureau, OnTheMap; 4ward Planning Inc., 2013

Section V: Additional Materials

119

Commuting Patterns
Inflow/Outflow
The two figures below display commutation patterns of South Valley Stream workers and residents as well as where South Valley Stream residents work. A high
number of people employed in South Valley Stream reside in other locations. This inflow of workers has increased in both absolute and relative terms since
2007. In 2011, the majority (just over 50%) of South Valley Stream residents were employed in New York City, and 40.6 percent of workers were employed in
Nassau County. Of those living in South Valley Stream, 3.7% are employed within the Community.

Figure 4: Where South Valley Stream Residents are Employed ‐ Primary Jobs (by Cities and Places)
2011
Count

2009
Share

Count

2007
Share

Count

Share

TOTAL PRIMARY JOBS

2,157

100.00%

2,158

100.00%

2,205

100.00%

New York city, NY

1,111

51.50%

1,090

50.50%

1,088

49.30%

South Valley Stream CDP, NY

80

3.70%

64

3.00%

90

4.10%

Valley Stream village, NY

70

3.20%

60

2.80%

79

3.60%

Mineola village, NY

54

2.50%

45

2.10%

44

2.00%

East Garden City CDP, NY

53

2.50%

38

1.80%

50

2.30%

Manhasset CDP, NY

45

2.10%

43

2.00%

31

1.40%

Lynbrook village, NY

40

1.90%

41

1.90%

40

1.80%

Hewlett CDP, NY

29

1.30%

24

1.10%

24

1.10%

Hempstead village, NY

26

1.20%

18

0.80%

30

1.40%

Oceanside CDP, NY

25

1.20%

38

1.80%

26

1.20%

All Other Locations

624

28.90%

697

32.30%

703

31.90%

Source: US Census Bureau, OnTheMap; 4ward Planning Inc., 2013.

Section V: Additional Materials

120

Figure 5: Where South Valley Stream Residents Workers are Employed ‐ Primary Jobs (by Counties)

Total Primary Jobs

Nassau County, NY
New York County, NY
Queens County, NY
Kings County, NY
Suffolk County, NY
Bronx County, NY
Westchester County, NY
Hudson County, NJ
Richmond County, NY
Essex County, NJ
All Other Locations

2011
Count
Share
2,157
100.0%
2011
Count
Share
875
40.6%
443
20.5%
332
15.4%
278
12.9%
88
4.1%
46
2.1%
34
1.6%
17
0.8%
12
0.6%
8
0.4%
24
1.1%

2009
Count
Share
2,158
100.0%
2009
Count
Share
804
37.3%
473
21.9%
285
13.2%
289
13.4%
120
5.6%
28
1.3%
42
1.9%
7
0.3%
15
0.7%
3
0.1%
92
4.3%

2007
Count
Share
2,205
100.0%
2007
Count
Share
872
39.5%
503
22.8%
331
15.0%
210
9.5%
120
5.4%
33
1.5%
30
1.4%
10
0.5%
11
0.5%
10
0.5%
75
3.4%

Source: US Census Bureau, OnTheMap; 4ward Planning Inc., 2013.

Section V: Additional Materials

121

E: Housing Profile
Household Formation
The two figures below illustrate changes in household formation for all three study areas, including family and non‐family households. Consistent with flat
population growth, annualized changes in households are relatively weak. However, as a general pattern, family households within the study areas are forming
at a considerably lower or negative rate, relative to non‐family households and consistent with national and regional trends.
Both family and non‐family household growth rates are forecasted to be positive for all three study areas between 2013 and 2018, although family households
will be forming at a much lower rate than non‐family households.

Figure 6: Annualized Percentage Change of Households, 2010 – 2013

Source: US Census Bureau, ESRI Community Analyst; 4ward Planning Inc., 2013

Section V: Additional Materials

122

Figure 7: Annualized Percentage Change of Households, 2013 – 2018

Source: US Census Bureau, ESRI Community Analyst; 4ward Planning Inc., 2013

Household Size
The breakdown of households by size is provided in Figure Figure 8. Two‐person households are the most common in all of the study areas, although South
Valley Stream also shows a fairly even split among other household sizes.
Figure 8: Households by Size, 2010

Section V: Additional Materials

123

Source: US Census Bureau, ESRI Community Analyst; 4ward Planning Inc., 2013

Household Structure
Relative to the other study areas, South Valley Stream demonstrates the highest percentage of households with children, and the lowest percentage of single
parent households in 2010. The majority of households in South Valley Stream (just over 61%) do not have children, a demographic trend that influences the
type of housing that is demanded.
Figure 9: Household Types as a Percentage of Total Households, 2010
Household Type

South Valley Stream

PMA

Nassau County

Households with Children

38.8%

37.5%

36.8%

Single Parent Households

6.5%

13.2%

7.6%

Single Parent HHs as a % of HHs with Children

16.8%

35.2%

20.7%

Multigenerational Households

7.1%

8.5%

6.1%

Unmarried Partner Households

4.0%

4.9%

4.0%

Male‐Female

3.3%

4.2%

3.3%

Same‐sex

0.7%

0.7%

0.7%

Source: US Census Bureau, ESRI Community Analyst; 4ward Planning Inc., 2013

Housing Tenure
The figure below illustrates comparative trends in housing tenure for the three study geographies, indicating that South Valley Stream exhibits a fairly high rate
of home ownership, at about 75% of housing units, and 77.6% of occupied housing units. While the vacancy rate in the Primary Market Area is approximately
6%, the 2013 vacancy rate in South Valley Stream is forecasted to be only 3%, which indicates a tighter housing marking in South Valley Stream than in
surrounding areas.

Section V: Additional Materials

124

Figure 10: Housing Tenure Comparison, 2013

Source: US Census Bureau, ESRI Community Analyst; 4ward Planning Inc., 2013

Age and Housing Demand
Housing demand in South Valley Stream will likely come from within the demographic groups shown below. As their numbers increase, the young empty nesters
and older empty nesters will exert considerable influence on the type of housing developed, specifically smaller rental housing units, as these groups downsize
from larger single‐family homes. Young professionals, to a lesser extent, should also influence the housing choice as they seek small, affordable rental units with
convenient commutes to jobs or school.
Figure 11: Age Cohorts, South Valley Stream

Section V: Additional Materials

125

Source: US Census Bureau, ESRI Community Analyst; 4ward Planning Inc., 2013

Housing Condition and Affordability
In South Valley Stream, approximately 65.5% of renters pay 35% or more of their household incomes on gross rent (which is considered to be unaffordable). This
rate is much higher than in Nassau County. This statistic may indicate a need for more housing, and more affordable housing in particular. Additionally, the
housing stock in South Valley Stream is aging. The majority (78.8%) was built in 1959 or earlier, with 47.5% built between 1950 and 1959.

Section V: Additional Materials

126

F: Inventory of Assets
Erosion Rate: Assets located where the long‐term average erosion rate is one foot or more per year, or unknown. Storm impacts may increase on shorelines
with high erosion rates, as development on an eroding beach can heighten risk from wave impacts and storm surge. South Valley Stream is not identified as
Structural Hazard Areas on the Coastal Erosion Hazard Area (CEHA) maps or located on the Long Island Sound; therefore, according to New York State guidance,
the erosion rate for all assets (100% of asset inventory) is assumed to be less than one foot per year.
Beach Width: Assets located where the water line is frequently in contact with erosion control structures (e.g., bulkheads) or upland vegetation. Wide beaches
and shallow water can lessen waves and surge, however no beaches are present in South Valley Stream to serve this function. Therefore the water line is in
frequent contact with erosion control structures or upland vegetation for all assets (100% of asset inventory) throughout South Valley Stream.
Shore Defenses: Assets that are not protected by shore defenses, or where shore defenses are deteriorating or not constructed to anticipated storm or sea level
rise conditions. Shore defenses such as breakwaters and erosion control structures such as bulkheads, seawalls and revetments may reduce the effects of
incoming surge and wave energy on an asset, barring that the asset is above base flood elevation. Shore defenses in South Valley Stream are absent, and the
erosion control structures present are limited to bulkheads, which are deteriorating or not present in most areas. Existing erosion control structures are not
constructed to defend against anticipated storm events, nor should they be intended to. Therefore, according to New York State guidance, shore defenses are
assumed to be absent for the all assets (100% of asset inventory) in South Valley Stream.
Vegetation: Locations where protective vegetation (i.e., dense shrubbery or forested land cover at least 300 feet in depth), wetlands, or intervening structures
between asset and flood source are absent. Vegetation can reduce flood and erosion impacts, especially dense vegetation which can influence wind speeds and
water flow velocity. Intervening structures can intercept or reduce the velocity of tidal flow. Conversely, assets built on filled wetlands may experience increased
flooding and erosion. Assets in South Valley Stream located along the shoreline of Clear Stream, Watts Creek, Valley Stream and Fosters Brook Lower (59% of
asset inventory) do not have substantial vegetation, wetlands or intervening structures protecting them from the flood source; while those not immediately on
the shoreline (41% of asset inventory) are protected by intervening structures such as other homes.
Dunes or Bluffs: Assets that are not protected by dunes or bluffs because either dunes are absent, below base flood elevation, eroding, discontinuous, or have
little vegetation, and bluff slopes are unstable, partially vegetated. Dunes can absorb wave energy, with continuous vegetated dunes elevated above the base
flood elevation having the greatest benefit. No dunes or bluffs are present in South Valley Stream, therefore all assets (100% of asset inventory) are not
protected in this manner.
Soils: Assets that are located on a coastal barrier island or filled wetland. The assets within South Valley Stream (13% of asset inventory) are located in the
southwest area of the community.

Section V: Additional Materials

127

Figure 11: Risk of Economic Assets in Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool
NYS Risk
Area

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

High

3

2.50

3

23

Extreme

3

4.00

4

48

High

3

2.50

2

15

Hoffner’s Service Station

Extreme

3

4.00

4

48

Mill Road Shopping

Extreme

3

3.00

3

27

Economic Asset(s)
Auto Repair Shop
Chase Bank
Green Acres Mall

Figure 12: Risk of Health and Social Services Assets in Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool
NYS Risk Area

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

Audrey L. Gulian, Physical Therapy

High

3

3.00

3

27

Forbin, Francoise Daycare

High

3

3.00

3

27

Forest Road School

High

3

2.50

3

23

Forest Road School Athletic Fields

High

3

2.50

3

23

NCPD Booth I

High

3

2.50

2

15

Harbor Kidz Day Care

High

3

2.50

3

23

Ogden Elementary School

High

3

2.50

3

23

Ogden Elementary School Athletic Fields

High

3

2.50

3

23

Robert Carbonaro School

High

3

2.50

3

23

Shalhevet High School (at Temple Hillel)

High

3

3.00

3

27

Valley Stream South High School and Junior High School

High

3

3.00

3

27

Valley Stream South High School Athletic Fields

High

3

3.00

3

27

Valley Stream Junior High School Athletic Fields

High

3

2.50

3

23

Health and Social Services Asset(s)

Section V: Additional Materials

128

Figure 13: Risk of Housing Assets in Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool
NYS Risk
Area

Hazard
Score

Exposure Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

Condominiums on Vanderbilt Way

High

3

3.00

3

27

Eastern South Valley Stream Housing Assets

High

3

2.50

3

23

Northern South Valley Stream Housing Assets

High

3

2.50

3

23

Southern South Valley Stream Housing Assets

High

3

2.50

3

23

Housing Asset(s)

Figure 14: Risk of Infrastructure Systems Assets in Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool
NYS Risk
Area

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

High

3

2.50

2

20

Extreme

3

4.00

4

48

Jedwood Place Pedestrian Bridge

High

3

2.50

3

23

Mill Rd_High

High

3

3.00

3

27

Extreme

3

4.00

4

48

Roadway assets_High

High

3

3.00

4

36

Rosedale Rd_Extreme

Extreme

3

4.00

4

48

Rosedale Rd_High

High

3

3.00

4

36

Rosedale Road Bridge

High

3

2.50

3

23

Sewer Pipe_Extreme

Extreme

3

4.00

4

48

Sewer Pipe_High

High

3

3.00

4

36

STC Five LLC Antenna

High

3

3.00

4

36

Extreme

3

3.50

3

32

High

3

2.50

3

23

Infrastructure Systems Asset(s)
101 Green Acres Road Remediation Site
Gulf Gas Station

Roadway Assets_Extreme

Stormwater Outfall_Extreme
Stormwater Outfall_High

Section V: Additional Materials

129

Figure 15: Risk of Natural and Cultural Resources Assets in Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool
NYS Risk
Area

Hazard
Score

Exposure Score

Vulnerability Score

Risk Score

Brook Road Park

High

3

3.00

3

27

Congregation Ohr Torah

High

3

3.00

2

18

Clear Stream

Extreme

3

4.00

4

48

Watts Creek

High

3

3.00

3

27

Fosters Brook Lower

High

3

2.50

3

23

Temple Hillel

High

3

3.00

3

27

“The Path”

High

3

3.00

3

27

Valley Stream

High

3

3.00

3

27

Natural and Cultural Resources Asset(s)

Figure 16: Risk of Assets that serve Socially Vulnerable Populations in Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool
Asset(s) that serve

NYS Risk Area

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk Score

Forbin, Francoise Daycare

High

3

3.00

3

27

Forest Road School

High

3

2.50

3

23

Green Acres Senior Center

High

3

2.50

2

15

Harbor Kidz Day Care

High

3

2.50

3

23

Ogden Elementary School

High

3

2.50

3

23

Robert Carbonaro School

High

3

2.50

3

23

Shalhevet High School (at Temple Hillel)

High

3

3.00

3

27

Valley Stream South High School

High

3

3.00

3

27

Yale Academy

High

3

2.50

2

15

Socially Vulnerable Populations

Section V: Additional Materials

130

G: Cost Benefit Analysis
Adding up the Costs
The Committee worked with a team of cost estimators, engineers, architects, landscape architects, and planners to develop estimated costs for each potential
project. All costs are preliminary, based on available data, the Consultant Teams understanding of the issues as identified during site visits, Committee
knowledge and feedback, and input from the greater South Valley Stream Community. Construction costs were based upon similar projects that have been
constructed within the Greater Nassau County area. Where applicable, actual construction cost quotes from vendors or local agencies were used. Each phase
within a project (design, construction, construction management, and other direct labor costs) includes a contingency factor. Contingencies were based on the
level of detail available for each individual project at the time of the estimate.
Maximizing the Benefits
All Proposed Projects and Featured Projects underwent a qualitative analysis of anticipated costs and benefits, in accordance with New York State guidance. The
purpose of the cost‐benefit analysis was to assist the Committee in improving these projects and developing strategies and projects for inclusion in the NYRCR
Plan. The implementation schedule developed by the Committee utilizes cost benefit analysis and aims to identify a comprehensive set of projects that are best
able to achieve the greatest benefits to South Valley Stream at the least cost.
The following types of benefits were reviewed for the cost‐benefit analysis, in accordance with NY State Program Guidance (NYRCR Program Guidance to Firms
Project Evaluation, 12/30/2013):
Risk Reduction Benefits;
Economic Benefits;
Environmental Benefits; and
Health and Social Benefits.

For feasibility studies, action plans, or advocacy projects, the discussion of benefits relates to the potential benefits that would result from future
implementation of the selected alternative or recommendations developed through the course of study or advocacy. In addition, some projects are scalable; the
benefits of these projects are considered in their current state, and potential benefits that would result from development into regional or larger‐scale projects
are noted where appropriate.
Economic Benefits
Each of the projects listed in the NYRCR Plan has some type of economic impact on residents, the local governing entities, or businesses. This analysis does not
include the additional 1,500 projects totaling $378 million that is obligated by Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) funding sources. Economic
benefits considered for the purpose of the NYRCR Plan include estimated permanent and temporary jobs secured or added, contribution to a Regional Economic
Development Plan, estimated potential increase in economic activity (as applicable), and net effect on local government expenditures for disaster recovery (such
as reduced emergency and recovery costs).
In estimating the job‐years created by direct government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the simple rule provided by the Office of the President Council of
Economic Advisors that $92,000 creates one job‐year. This procedure does not take into account the obvious differences in wages and other costs across
different types of projects and across different parts of the country. It does, however, take into account the key difference between tax changes or state fiscal
Section V: Additional Materials

131

relief, and direct government investment spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism. Because it is derived to be consistent with the
macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes discrepancies between the aggregate jobs estimates across the various geographies.
Environmental Benefits
Environmental Benefits of potential NYRCR projects include the environmental assets secured by the potential project, the environmental remediation or
cleanup provided by the project, and open space created by the project. Each project was evaluated for its impacts on high‐priority habitat, threatened and
endangered species, migration, or habitat connectivity. Benefits to environmental quality were also noted, such as improving air or water quality.
Health and Social Benefits
Health and Social Benefits resulting from the proposed project were qualitatively evaluated using the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community
Analyst. Population data was gathered at the census tract or block group level depending on the size of the project. If the project was expected to have very
localized effects in an area that was much smaller than a block group, a polygon was drawn manually in ESRI to serve as the study area and the data
corresponding to that polygon was used. The size of the study area was determined based on the project description. The specific data set used was from the
Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010 Census data. Projects were evaluated for their health and
social services benefits to the community by considering the following benefit types:
“Overall population with improved access to health and social services facilities” was reported as the entire population of the area (census tract, block group, or
polygon/area) that would benefit from the proposed project. The population was reported regardless of whether the project actually involved a health and social
services asset because presumably all projects would improve access to facilities in one form or another.
“Type and population size of population group secured” was evaluated by :
Poverty/low income population (household income less than 35,000)
Elderly population (over age 65)
Minority population
“Population served by essential health and social services facilities that are secured to provide or continue service during acute events as a result of the action,” was
considered to be applicable only if the project itself proposed an action that directly affected/pertained to a health and social services facility. (Health and social
services facilities were previously identified/determined during the asset inventory.) If the project directly impacted a health and social services facility, that facility
(asset) was noted, and the population of the entire area (as reported under the previous criteria) can be considered to be the “population served.”

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
A qualitative analysis of reduction in risk to assets that results from implementation of each potential NYRCR project was prepared for each project. Three
factors contribute to risk: hazard, exposure, and vulnerability, as detailed in Section II: A. ii. Assessment of Risk to Assets and . The Coastal Hazard and Risk
Assessment Tool was utilized, where applicable, to quantify risk reduction benefits. The Tool was assumed to apply to implementation projects within the
strategy of ‘Coastal Protection,’ as it is intended to measure the risk for coastal communities and test whether various projects would reduce the risk to those
assets. In this case, a snapshot of reduction in risk score to assets is provided. Where the Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool does not apply, risk reduction
benefits were described in terms of the qualitative mitigation of hazard, exposure, and vulnerability.
As detailed in Section II: A. ii. Assessment of Risk to Assets and, the risk score for each group of assets is determined by multiplying its hazard, exposure, and
vulnerability. The Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool automatically generates this risk score, which represents the relative risk of the assets in the
community. According to New York State guidance, risk scores include some subjective analysis and should not be compared from one community to another.
Section V: Additional Materials

132

H: End Notes
Attributions: All photos are attributed to the Consultant Team
1

Mill Brook Civic Association. (Accessed on 9/2013 at http://www.millbrookcivic.com/history_of_millbrook).
U.S. Census Bureau. 2010 Census. (Accessed on 3/2014 at http://factfinder2.census.gov).
3
U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey, 2008‐2012. (Accessed on 3/2014 at http://factfinder2.census.gov).
4
U.S. Census Bureau. 2010 Census. (Accessed on 3/2014 at http://factfinder2.census.gov).
5
U.S. Census Bureau. 2013. OnTheMap Application. Longitudinal‐Employer Household Dynamics Program. (Accessed on 12/2013 at http://onthemap.ces.census.gov/)
6
U.S. Census Bureau. 2013. OnTheMap Application. Longitudinal‐Employer Household Dynamics Program. (Accessed on 12/2013 at http://onthemap.ces.census.gov/)
7
National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Report: Hurricane Sandy
(AL182012) 22 – 29 October 2012. (Accessed on 9/2013 at http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Superstorm Sandy.pdf)
8
National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Report: Hurricane Sandy
(AL182012) 22 – 29 October 2012. (Accessed on 9/2013 at http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Superstorm Sandy.pdf)
9
US Department of Commerce. Service Assessment Hurricane Irene, August 21–30, 2011. (Accessed 10/2013 at
http://www.nws.noaa.gov/os/assessments/pdfs/Irene2012.pdf)
10
National Hurricane Center. Tropical Cyclone Report: Hurricane Sandy
(AL182012) 22 – 29 October 2012. (Accessed on 9/2013 at http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/AL182012_Superstorm Sandy.pdf)
11
US Department of Commerce. Service Assessment Hurricane Irene, August 21–30, 2011. (Accessed 10/2013 at
http://www.nws.noaa.gov/os/assessments/pdfs/Irene2012.pdf)
12
NOAA Water Level and Meteorological Data Report. Hurricane Irene. (Accessed on 10/2013
http://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/publications/Hurricane_Irene_Water_Level_and_Meteorological_Data_Report.pdf)
13
US Department of Commerce. Service Assessment Hurricane Irene, August 21–30, 2011. (Accessed 10/2013 at
http://www.nws.noaa.gov/os/assessments/pdfs/Irene2012.pdf)
14
US Army Corps of Engineers. Jamaica Bay Ecosystem Restoration Project Feasibility Study. Summary of Water Level Data Report. March 2003.
15
Long Island Newsday. LIPA Outages. (Accessed on 9/2013 at http://data.newsday.com/long‐island/lipaOutages/)
16
Stanne, Steve. Perfect Storms – how Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee slammed NY. New York State Conservationist, August 2012. (Accessed on 9/2013
http://www.dec.ny.gov/docs/administration_pdf/0812perfectstorms.pdf)
17
Benkoe, Jeff. Long Island pounded by Irene but residents feel lucky. Reuters. (Accessed 9/2013 at http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/08/28/us‐storm‐irene‐longisland‐
idUSTRE77R2FG20110828).
18
U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey, 2007‐2011. (Accessed on 10/2013 at http://factfinder2.census.gov).
19
U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey, 2007‐2011. (Accessed on 10/2013 at http://factfinder2.census.gov).
20
The study uses a low income threshold of $35,000 per household. To actuate the analysis the American Community Survey was used to estimate the households making a
low percentage of the median income, typically used as standard thresholds for income definitions for federal assistance. Since the ACS uses tranches (for instance
between 0 and $10,000 Household Income) the analysis required to accept the first two thranches of $0‐$35,000 to define the household income. This then provides a
percentage estimation of the total household population making less than 36% of the Median Household Income. This figure is based on a percentage of the overall
Nassau County Median Household Income of $97,000. Various Federal organizations define income thresholds in terms of Household Median Income at the 20%, 50%,
and 80% thresholds. As this analysis wanted to identify households making below 50% this metric was assumed the most appropriate. U.S. Census Bureau. American
Community Survey, 2007‐2011. (Accessed on 10/2013 at http://factfinder2.census.gov).
21
U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey, 2007‐2011. (Accessed on 10/2013 at http://factfinder2.census.gov).
22
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Local Multi‐Hazard Mitigation Guidance, 2008. (Accessed on 9/2013 at http://www.fema.gov/multi‐hazard‐mitigation‐
planning)
2

Section V: Additional Materials

133

23

Nassau County. Hazard Mitigation General Information. (Accessed on 10/2013, http://www.nassaucountyny.gov/agencies/oem/hazmit/hazmitGI.html)
Directory of Major Malls. (Accessed on 12/2013 at http://shoppingcenters.com/).
25
The Urban Land Institute and PricewaterhouseCoopers noted that online retailers were continuing to siphon profits from bricks‐and‐mortar stores. The report
recommended significant retail real estate redevelopment, particularly for “fortress malls” that are older (30 years or more). Urban Land Institute. Emerging Trends in
Real Estate 2013. (Accessed on 12/2013 at http://uli.org/emerging‐trends/emerging‐trends‐in‐real‐estate‐2013/).
26
Valley Stream Central High School District Observer. (Accessed on 12/2013 at http://www.vschsd.org/).
27
American Planning Association – New York Metro Chapter. Getting Back to Business: Addressing the Needs of Rockaway Businesses Impacted by Superstorm Sandy, 2013.
(Accessed on 12/2013 at http://www.nyplanning.org/docs/APA‐NYM%20Business%20Recovery%20Report%20to%20RDRC.pdf).
28
Commercial Real Estate Listings and Research. Loopnet. (Accessed on 12/2013 at http://www.loopnet.com/).
29
In estimating the job‐years created by direct government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the simple rule provided by the Office of the President Council of Economic
Advisors that $92,000 creates one job‐year. This procedure does not take into account the obvious differences in wages and other costs across different types of projects
and across different parts of the country. It does, however, take into account the key difference between tax changes or state fiscal relief, and direct government
investment spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism. Because it is derived to be consistent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes
discrepancies between the aggregate jobs estimates across the various geographies. Executive Office of the President Council of Economic Advisors, American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009, May 2009. (Accessed on 1/2014 at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/Estimate‐of‐Job‐Creation.pdf).
30
Nassau County GIS. Parcel Data, 2013.
31
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
32
In estimating the job‐years created by direct government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the simple rule provided by the Office of the President Council of Economic
Advisors that $92,000 creates one job‐year. This procedure does not take into account the obvious differences in wages and other costs across different types of projects
and across different parts of the country. It does, however, take into account the key difference between tax changes or state fiscal relief, and direct government
investment spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism. Because it is derived to be consistent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes
discrepancies between the aggregate jobs estimates across the various geographies. Executive Office of the President Council of Economic Advisors, American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009, May 2009. (Accessed on 1/2014 at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/Estimate‐of‐Job‐Creation.pdf).
33
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
34
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
35
In estimating the job‐years created by direct government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the simple rule provided by the Office of the President Council of Economic
Advisors that $92,000 creates one job‐year. This procedure does not take into account the obvious differences in wages and other costs across different types of projects
and across different parts of the country. It does, however, take into account the key difference between tax changes or state fiscal relief, and direct government
investment spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism. Because it is derived to be consistent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes
discrepancies between the aggregate jobs estimates across the various geographies. Executive Office of the President Council of Economic Advisors, American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009, May 2009. (Accessed on 1/2014 at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/Estimate‐of‐Job‐Creation.pdf).
36
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
37
In estimating the job‐years created by direct government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the simple rule provided by the Office of the President Council of Economic
Advisors that $92,000 creates one job‐year. This procedure does not take into account the obvious differences in wages and other costs across different types of projects
and across different parts of the country. It does, however, take into account the key difference between tax changes or state fiscal relief, and direct government
investment spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism. Because it is derived to be consistent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes
discrepancies between the aggregate jobs estimates across the various geographies. Executive Office of the President Council of Economic Advisors, American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009, May 2009. (Accessed on 1/2014 at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/Estimate‐of‐Job‐Creation.pdf).
24

Section V: Additional Materials

134

38

Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
39
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
40
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
41
In estimating the job‐years created by direct government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the simple rule provided by the Office of the President Council of Economic
Advisors that $92,000 creates one job‐year. This procedure does not take into account the obvious differences in wages and other costs across different types of projects
and across different parts of the country. It does, however, take into account the key difference between tax changes or state fiscal relief, and direct government
investment spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism. Because it is derived to be consistent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes
discrepancies between the aggregate jobs estimates across the various geographies. Executive Office of the President Council of Economic Advisors, American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009, May 2009. (Accessed on 1/2014 at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/Estimate‐of‐Job‐Creation.pdf).
42
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
43
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
44
In estimating the job‐years created by direct government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the simple rule provided by the Office of the President Council of Economic
Advisors that $92,000 creates one job‐year. This procedure does not take into account the obvious differences in wages and other costs across different types of projects
and across different parts of the country. It does, however, take into account the key difference between tax changes or state fiscal relief, and direct government
investment spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism. Because it is derived to be consistent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes
discrepancies between the aggregate jobs estimates across the various geographies. Executive Office of the President Council of Economic Advisors, American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009, May 2009. (Accessed on 1/2014 at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/Estimate‐of‐Job‐Creation.pdf).
45
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
46
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
47
In estimating the job‐years created by direct government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the simple rule provided by the Office of the President Council of Economic
Advisors that $92,000 creates one job‐year. This procedure does not take into account the obvious differences in wages and other costs across different types of projects
and across different parts of the country. It does, however, take into account the key difference between tax changes or state fiscal relief, and direct government
investment spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism. Because it is derived to be consistent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes
discrepancies between the aggregate jobs estimates across the various geographies. Executive Office of the President Council of Economic Advisors, American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009, May 2009. (Accessed on 1/2014 at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/Estimate‐of‐Job‐Creation.pdf).
48
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
49
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
50
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
51
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
52
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.

Section V: Additional Materials

135

52

Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
53
In estimating the job‐years created by direct government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the simple rule provided by the Office of the President Council of Economic
Advisors that $92,000 creates one job‐year. This procedure does not take into account the obvious differences in wages and other costs across different types of projects
and across different parts of the country. It does, however, take into account the key difference between tax changes or state fiscal relief, and direct government
investment spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism. Because it is derived to be consistent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes
discrepancies between the aggregate jobs estimates across the various geographies. Executive Office of the President Council of Economic Advisors, American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009, May 2009. (Accessed on 1/2014 at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/Estimate‐of‐Job‐Creation.pdf).
54
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
55
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
56
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
57
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
58
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
59
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
60
In estimating the job‐years created by direct government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the simple rule provided by the Office of the President Council of Economic
Advisors that $92,000 creates one job‐year. This procedure does not take into account the obvious differences in wages and other costs across different types of projects
and across different parts of the country. It does, however, take into account the key difference between tax changes or state fiscal relief, and direct government
investment spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism. Because it is derived to be consistent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes
discrepancies between the aggregate jobs estimates across the various geographies. Executive Office of the President Council of Economic Advisors, American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009, May 2009. (Accessed on 1/2014 at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/Estimate‐of‐Job‐Creation.pdf).
61
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
62
Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) Community Analyst, Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013, based on U.S. Census Bureau 2010
Census data.
63
Valley Stream District 30. Budget Newsletter, 2013. (Accessed on 12/2013 at http://www.valleystream30.com/).
64
Nassau County. Nassau Hazard Mitigation Plan, 2007. (Accessed on 11/2013 at http://www.nassaucountyny.gov/agencies/OEM/hazmit/hazmitNHMP.html)
65
Google Earth. Aerial Photography, 2013.
66
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). HAZUS, 2013 (Accessed on 8/2013 at http://www.fema.gov/hazus).
Google Earth. Aerial Photography, 2013.
67
Nassau County GIS.
Google Earth. Aerial Photography, 2013.
68
Google Earth. Aerial Photography, 2013.
69
US Department of the Interior Geological Survey (USGS). Polyconic Projection. Hempstead, NY N4030‐W7330/15, edition of 1903, Reprinted 1945, Partial revision of
Shoreline 1923.
70
US Department of Commerce, US Coast and Geodetic Survey (USC & GS). Hempstead Bay, 1929.
Google Earth. Aerial Photography, 2013.

Section V: Additional Materials

136

71

Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Public Assistance Project Funding. (Accessed 1/2014 at http://www.fema.gov/public‐assistance‐local‐state‐tribal‐and‐
non‐profit).

72

Executive Office of the President Council of Economic Advisors, American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, May 2009. (Accessed on 1/2014 at
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/Estimate‐of‐Job‐Creation.pdf).

Section V: Additional Materials

137

I: Glossary
Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
Water surface elevation corresponding to a flood having a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in a given year (100‐year floodplain).
Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool (“Risk Assessment Tool”)
The Risk score for each group of assets is determined by multiplying its hazard, exposure and vulnerability values (Risk = Hazard x Exposure x Vulnerability). The
Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool automatically generates this risk score, which represents the relative risk of the community. Risk scores include some
subjective analysis and should not be compared from one community to another. Risk scores can range from 1.5, the lowest score reflecting negligible or
‘residual’ risk, to 75, the highest score reflecting severe risk. These ranges are broken down as follows:
Residual (Risk Score <6): Residual risk scores result from both low exposure and vulnerability, however if assets are critical or have a very high community value, actions may be
warranted to reduce their risk.
Moderate (Risk Score 6 ‐ 23): A moderate risk score represents that the assets may suffer moderate to serious storm impacts, but that adaptation may be of a lower priority
because either exposure or vulnerability are low
High (Risk Score 24 ‐ 53): Risk scores in the high range are indicative of conditions that could lead to significant negative impacts from a storm, and actions should be taken to
reduce the assets’ vulnerability and restore the assets’ coastal protections.
Severe (Risk Score >53): A severe risk score represents that the assets are in a dangerous situation and that both exposure and vulnerability should be reduced.

Risk scores help identify assets with increased potential for storm damage and serve as one of many factors that helped the Committee to determine the
potential projects to include and prioritize in the NYRCR Plan; see section IV for further discussion on Project Prioritization. In addition to the risk score, other
contributing factors in determining which assets should be addressed and how immediately they should be addressed include:
 The assets’ contribution to life safety,
 If the asset(s) are critical or locally significant,
 The assets’ community value,
 Environmental services provided by the assets,
 Economic contribution of the assets,
 Availability or alternative assets or facilities, and
 The capacity of the assets to adapt.
The Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool measures against a 100‐year storm, or a Hazard Score of 3. The Hazard score is based on the likelihood an event
would occur and the magnitude (destructive capacity) of the event. For the purpose of preparing a NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan, NY State
recommends that Bay Park/East Rockaway consider a 100‐year storm (1% annual chance). Because the magnitude of storm events increases as the likelihood
decreases (100‐year storms have higher magnitude than 10‐year storms), the Hazard score increases as the likelihood goes down. Therefore, the Coastal Hazard
and Risk Assessment Tool is calibrated to a 100‐year storm. Although the NYRCR Plan seeks to protect against a 100‐year storm, equally important is protecting

Section V: Additional Materials

138

against smaller, more frequent storm events such as the 10‐year storm, which has a 10% chance of occurrence each year. Several projects may not have risk
reduction benefits, measured by the Tool or qualitatively, for the 10‐year storm. These benefits are described qualitatively.
Community Assets
Identified assets are places or facilities where economic, environmental and social functions occur or are critical infrastructure required to support those
functions. These assets were identified by the NYRCR Committee and residents and are grouped into the following categories: Economic, Housing, Health and
Social Services, Infrastructure, Natural and Cultural Resources, and Socially Vulnerable Populations.
Community Development Block Grant‐Disaster Recovery (CDBG‐DR)
HUD provides flexible grants to help cities, counties, and States recover from Presidentially declared disasters, especially in low‐income areas, subject to
availability of supplemental appropriations. CDBG‐DR is a type of funding appropriated by congress to help rebuild and provide seed money for recovery
activities. Further information on CDBG‐DR funds and other disaster recovery grants is available at http://portal.hud.gov/.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
The official map of a community on which FEMA has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
NYRCR Committee
The NYRCR Planning Committee is composed of local civically minded residents and was established to help develop a plan that accurately reflects the
Community and its needs. The NYRCR Committee worked closely with the appropriate municipal, non‐profit and consultant representatives to identify a vision,
goals and objectives for the NYRCR Plan. The Committee actively advised on all aspects of the project and will help shape the overall direction of the NYRCR Plan
and the actions that flow from it. The members of the Committee were not paid, and were required to follow a detailed code of ethics provided by New York
State.
NYRCR Community
The NYRCR Community planning area follows the Census‐designated place boundary for Bay Park and the Village of East Rockaway. This boundary has been
reviewed and accepted by the NYRCR Committee.
NYRCR Project Categories
Proposed Projects: Projects proposed for funding through the NYRCR Community’s allocation of CDBG‐DR funding.
Featured Projects: Innovative projects where an initial study or discrete first phase of the project is proposed for CDBG‐DR funding or other identified funding;
and regulatory reforms and other programs that do not involve capital expenditures.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations: Resiliency projects and actions the NYRCR Committee would like to highlight for further consideration.
Recovery Support Functions
The Recovery Support Functions (RSFs) comprise the National Disaster Recovery Framework's (NDRF's) coordinating structure for key functional areas of
assistance. Their purpose is to support local governments by facilitating problem solving, improving access to resources and by fostering coordination among
State and Federal agencies, nongovernmental partners and stakeholders.
The six RSFs are: “Community Planning and Capacity Building,” “Economic Development,” “Health and Social Services,” “Housing,” “Infrastructure,” and
“Natural and Cultural Resources.”
Section V: Additional Materials

139

Risk Reduction Benefits
A qualitative analysis of reduction in risk to assets that results from implementation of each potential NYRCR project was prepared for each project. Three
factors contribute to risk: hazard, exposure and vulnerability. The Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool was utilized, where applicable, to quantify risk
reduction benefits. The Tool was assumed to apply to implementation projects within the theme ‘Coastal Protection,’ as it is intended to measure the risk for
coastal communities and test whether various projects would reduce the risk to those assets. In this case, a snapshot of reduction in the risk score to assets is
provided. Where the Coastal Hazard and Risk Assessment Tool do not apply, Risk Reduction benefits were described in terms of the qualitative mitigation of
hazard, exposure and vulnerability.
Risk reduction benefits consider the population positively impacted by the project, either directly or indirectly. This population can be local or regional, ranging
from a discrete street to the NYRCR Community or the entire community of Bay Park/East Rockaway. While this plan evaluates the potential risk reduction
benefits, actual benefits may vary depending on project design and circumstances arising during implementation; the Final NYRCR Plan does not provide a
guarantee of risk reduction, but rather a projected, and intended, benefit to minimizing risk for a given population.
Risk Reduction Benefits resulting from the proposed project were qualitatively evaluated using ESRI Community Analyst. Population data was gathered at the
census tract or block group level depending on the size of the project. If the project was expected to have very localized effects in an area that was much smaller
than a block group, a polygon was drawn manually in ESRI to serve as the study area and the data corresponding to that polygon was used instead. The size of
the study area was determined based on the project description. The specific data set used was from the Demographic and Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI
Forecasts for 2013 based on US Census Bureau 2010 Census data.
Some projects, such as select capacity building or economic development projects, may not directly reduce risk, however they provide other significant benefits
to the Bay Park/East Rockaway Community in the categories below.
Economic Benefits: Economic benefits considered for the purpose of the NYRCR Plan include estimated permanent and temporary jobs secured or added,
contribution to a Regional Economic Development Plan, estimated potential increase in economic activity (as applicable), and net effect on local government
expenditures for disaster recovery (such as reduced emergency and recovery costs).
In estimating the job‐years created by direct government spending, the NYRCR Plan utilizes the simple rule provided by the Office of the President Council of
Economic Advisors2 that $92,000 creates one job‐year. This procedure is somewhat crude and does not take into account the obvious differences in wages and
other costs across different types of projects and across different parts of the country. It does; however, take into account the key difference between tax
changes or state fiscal relief, and direct government investment spending. The rule’s key virtue is its simplicity and conservatism. Because it is derived to be
consistent with the macroeconomic jobs estimates, it minimizes discrepancies between the aggregate jobs estimates across the various geographies.
Environmental Benefits: Environmental Benefits of potential NYRCR projects include the environmental assets secured by the potential project, as well as the
environmental remediation or cleanup provided by the project and open space created by the project. Each project was evaluated for its impacts on high‐
priority habitat defined as a habitat type with unique or significant value to one or more species, threatened and endangered species, migration or habitat
connectivity. Benefits to environmental quality were also noted, such as improving air, surface and ground water quality.
Health and Social Benefits: Health and Social Benefits resulting from the proposed project were qualitatively evaluated using ESRI Community Analyst.
Population data was gathered at the census tract or block group level depending on the size of the project. If the project was expected to have very localized

Section V: Additional Materials

140

effects in an area that was much smaller than a block group, a polygon was drawn manually in ESRI to serve as the study area and the data corresponding to that
polygon was used instead. The size of the study area was determined based on the project description. The specific data set used was from the Demographic and
Income Profile (DANDI) ESRI Forecasts for 2013 based on US Census Bureau 2010 Census data.

Projects were evaluated for their health and social services benefits to the community by considering the following benefit types:
1. “Overall population with improved access to health and social services facilities” was reported as the entire population of the area (census
tract, block group or polygon) that would benefit from the proposed project. The population was reported regardless of whether the project
actually involves a health and social services asset because presumably all projects would improve access to facilities in one form or another.
2. “Type and population size of socially vulnerable population secured” was evaluated across four categories of socially vulnerable populations:
 poverty/low income (annual household income less than $35,000)
 elderly population (over age 65 years)
 minority population
3. “Population served by essential health and social services facilities that are secured to provide or continue service during acute events as a
result of the action”, was considered to be applicable only if the project itself proposed an action that directly affected/pertained to a health
and social services facility. (Health and social services facilities were previously identified/determined during the asset inventory). If the project
directly impacted a health and social services facility, that facility (asset) was noted, and the population of the entire area (as reported under
the previous criteria) can be considered to be the “population served”.
Risk Assessment Map Risk Areas (NYS DOS)
Extreme Risk Areas: Areas currently at risk of frequent inundation, vulnerable to erosion in the next 40 years, or likely to be inundated in the future due to sea
level rise. Extreme Risk Areas include:
 FEMA V zone.
 Shallow Coastal Flooding per National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) National Weather Service’s (NWS) advisory
threshold.
 Natural protective feature areas susceptible to erosion.
 Sea level rise - Added three feet to the mean higher high water (MHHW) level shoreline and extended this elevation inland to point of
intersection with ground surface.
High Risk Areas: Areas outside the Extreme Risk Area that are currently at infrequent risk of inundation or at future risk from sea level rise. High Risk Areas
include:



Area bounded by the 1% annual flood risk zone (FEMA V and A zones). Often referred to as base flood or 100-year flood, this is the area that
has a 1% chance of inundation from a flood event in any given year.
Sea level rise - Added three feet to NOAA NWS coastal flooding advisory threshold and extended this elevation inland to point of intersection
with ground surface.

Moderate Risk Areas: Areas outside the Extreme and High Risk Areas but currently at moderate risk of inundation from infrequent events or at risk in the future
from sea level rise. Moderate Risk Areas include:
Section V: Additional Materials

141






Area bounded by the 0.2% annual risk (500 year) flood zone, where available.
Sea level rise - Added 3 feet to the Base Flood Elevation for the current 1%
Annual risk flood event and extended this elevation inland to point of intersection with ground surface.
Area bounded by the Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from Hurricanes (SLOSH) category 3 hurricane inundation zone (NOAA NWS).

Socially Vulnerable Populations
The NYRCR Program Guidance notes that “Socially vulnerable populations” may be defined by the following criteria: poverty/low income, immigrant status,
education level, institutionalization, renter‐occupied household status, single senior‐citizen household status” (NYRCR Program Guidance to Firms Project
Evaluation, 12/30/2013).

Section V: Additional Materials

142

