NYRCR STONY POINT

NY RISING COMMUNIT Y
R EC O N S T R U C T I O N PL A N
March 2014

NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Program

Cover Page: Stony Point from the Air (Patrick Magee)

Members of the NYRCR Planning Committee
Gurran Kane, Co-Chair
Steven Scurti, Co-Chair
Steve Beckerle
Robert Burns
Rebecca Casscles
Wellington Casscles
Susan Filgueras
Supervisor Geoff Finn*
Luanne Konopko
Kevin Maher
Jim McDonnell
Steve Porath
Dominick Posillipo
William Sheehan
Rick Struck
*(non-voting member)

Prepared By
This document was developed by the NYRCR Stony Point Planning Committee
as part of the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) program within
the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is supported

by NYS Homes and Community Renewal, NYS Department of State, and NYS
Department of Transportation. The document was prepared by the following
consulting firms: AKRF, Inc.; CDM Smith, Inc.; and Sasaki Associates, Inc.

i

This Page Intentionally Blank

Foreword

Introduction
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in
August 2011, the State of New York experienced three
extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene, Tropical
Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on
the lives of New Yorkers and their communities. These
tragic disasters signaled that New Yorkers are living in
a new reality defined by rising sea levels and extreme
weather events that will occur with increased frequency and power. They also signaled that we need to
rebuild our communities in a way that will mitigate
against future risks and build increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M.
Cuomo led the charge to develop an innovative,
community-driven planning program on a scale
unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The
NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Program empowers the State’s most impacted communities with the technical expertise needed to
develop thorough and implementable reconstruction
plans to build physically, socially, and economically
resilient and sustainable communities.

Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor
Cuomo in April of 2013, is a more than $650 million
planning and implementation process established to
provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities severely damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy. Drawing on
lessons learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR
Program is a unique combination of bottom-up community participation and State-provided technical
expertise. This powerful combination recognizes not
only that community members are best positioned to
assess the needs and opportunities of the places

where they live and work, but also that decisions are
best made when they are grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by the latest innovative solutions.
One hundred and two storm-affected localities across
the State were originally designated to participate in
the NYRCR Program. The State has allocated each
locality between $3 million and $25 million to implement eligible projects identified in the NYRCR Plan.
The funding for these projects is provided through the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program1.
Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising one
or more of the 102 localities, were created and led by
a NYRCR Planning Committee composed of local
residents, business owners, and civic leaders.
Members of the Planning Committees were identified
in consultation with established local leaders, community organizations, and in some cases municipalities. The NYRCR Program sets a new standard for
community participation in recovery and resiliency
planning, with community members leading the planning process. Across the State, more than 500 New
Yorkers represent their communities by serving on
Planning Committees. More than 400 Planning Committee Meetings have been held, during which Planning Committee members worked with the State’s
NYRCR Program team to develop community reconstruction plans and identify opportunities to make
their communities more resilient. All meetings were
open to the public. An additional 125-plus Public
Engagement Events attracted thousands of community members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR
planning process and proposals. The NYRCR Program’s outreach has included communities that are
1. Five of the 102 localities in the program—Niagara, Herkimer,
Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery Counties—are not funded
through the CDBG-DR program.

Foreword

iii

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

traditionally underrepresented, such as immigrant
populations and students. All planning materials are
posted on the NYRCR Program’s website (www.
stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several ways
for community members and the public to submit
feedback on materials in progress.
Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were supported by staff from the Governor’s
Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR), planners from New
York State (NYS) Department of State (DOS) and NYS
Department of Transportation (DOT), and consultants
from world-class planning firms that specialize in
engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green infrastructure, and more.
With the January 2014 announcement of the NYRCR
Program’s expansion to include 22 new localities, the
program comprises over 2.7 million New Yorkers and
covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent
to 14% of the overall State population and 12% of the
State’s overall geography.
The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR
Plan. Governor Cuomo has allocated over $650 million
of funding to the program for implementing projects
identified in the NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Communities
are also eligible for additional funds through the program’s NY Rising to the Top Competition, which evaluates NYRCR Communities across eight categories,
including best use of technology in the planning
process, best approach to resilient economic growth,
and best use of green infrastructure to bolster resilience. The winning NYRCR Community in each category will be allocated an additional $3 million of implementation funding. The NYRCR Program is also
working with both private and public institutions to
identify existing funding sources and create new
funding opportunities where none existed before.
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated
with State and Federal agencies to help guide the
development of feasible projects. The program has
leveraged the Regional Economic Development
Council’s State Agency Review Teams (SARTs),

iv

Foreword

comprised of representatives from dozens of State
agencies and authorities, for feedback on projects
proposed by NYRCR Communities. The SARTs review
projects with an eye toward regulatory and permitting
needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency
funding sources. The NYRCR Program is continuing
to work with the SARTs to streamline the permitting
process and ensure shovels are in the ground as
quickly as possible.
On the pages that follow, you will see the results of
months of thoughtful, diligent work by NYRCR Planning Committees, passionately committed to realizing
brighter, more resilient futures for their communities.

The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more resilient community. Each NYRCR Planning Committee began the planning process by defining the scope of its planning area, assessing storm
damage, and identifying critical issues. Next, the
Planning Committee inventoried critical assets in the
community and assessed the assets’ exposure to
risk. On the basis of this work, the Planning Committee described recovery and resiliency needs and identified opportunities. The Planning Committee then
developed a series of comprehensive reconstruction
and resiliency strategies, and identified projects and
implementation actions to help fulfill those strategies.
The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan
are divided into three categories. The order in which
the projects and actions are listed in this NYRCR Plan
does not necessarily indicate the NYRCR Community’s prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding
through a NYRCR Community’s allocation of
CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are projects
and actions that the Planning Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and has
analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding
through the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are projects and actions that the

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Planning Committee would like to highlight and that
are not categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured
Projects. The Proposed Projects and Featured Projects found in this NYRCR Plan were voted for inclusion by official voting members of the Planning Committee. Those voting members with conflicts of interest
recused themselves from voting on any affected projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics Handbook and
Code of Conduct.

be implemented. The Governor’s Office of Storm
Recovery will actively seek to match projects with
funding sources.
In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions outlined in this NYRCR Plan will
become a reality helping New York not only to rebuild,
but also to build back better.

NYRCR Stony Point is eligible for up to $3.0 million in
CDBG-DR implementation funds.
While developing projects for inclusion in this NYRCR
Plan, Planning Committees took into account cost
estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the effectiveness of
each project in reducing risk to populations and critical assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees also considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be eligible for
CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented
with this source of Federal funding must fall into a
Federally-designated eligible activity category, fulfill a
national objective (meeting an urgent need, removing
slums and blight, or benefiting low to moderate
income individuals), and have a tie to the natural
disaster to which the funding is linked. These are
among the factors that the Governor’s Office of Storm
Recovery will consider, in consultation with local
municipalities and nonprofit organizations, when
determining which projects and actions are best positioned for implementation.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR
Plan exceeds the NYRCR Community’s CDBG-DR
allocation to allow for flexibility if some Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental
review, HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other
factors. Implementation of the projects and actions
found in this NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan does
not guarantee that a particular project or action will be
eligible for CDBG‐DR funding or that it will

Foreword

v

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Note: map includes those NYRCR Communities funded through the CDBG-DR program, including the NYRCR
Communities announced in January 2014.

vi

Foreword

Table of Contents

Section I.

Community Overview..................................................................... I-1
A. Introduction to Stony Point............................................................. I-1
B. Geographic Scope of NYRCR Plan................................................ I-3
C. Description of Storm Damage........................................................ I-5
D. Critical Issues................................................................................ I-12
E. Community Vision......................................................................... I-15
F. Relationship to Regional Plans...................................................... I-16

Section II:

Assessment of Risk and Needs..................................................... II-1
A. Description of Community Assets and Assessment of Risk.......... II-1
i. Description of Community Assets..................................................II-1
ii. Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems..................................II-6
B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities.................................... II-16

Section III:

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies................................... III-1

Table of Contents

vii

Section IV:

Implementation - Project Profiles................................................ IV-1
Proposed Project: Letchworth Village Disaster Recovery
and Communications Center ........................................................... IV-4
Proposed Project: Stony Point Center Retrofit ................................ IV-5
Proposed Project: Shoreline Protection Against Erosion and
Wave Action (Beach Road)................................................................ IV-6
Proposed Project: Shoreline Protection Against Erosion and
Wave Action (River Road) . ............................................................... IV-7
Proposed Project: Rehabilitation of Wastewater Interceptors
along Beach Road and the Ba Mar Sewer Line................................ IV-8
Proposed Project: Hardening of Wastewater Treatment Plant.......... IV-9
Proposed Project: Grassy Point Development / Redevelopment... IV-10
Featured Project: Cedar Pond Brook Interceptor
Sewer Line Rehabilitation................................................................ IV-11
Featured Project: Demolition of Damaged and
Abandoned Structures.................................................................... IV-12

Section V:

Additional Materials...................................................................... V-1
A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations....................................... V-1
B. Master Table of Projects................................................................ V-5
C. Public Engagement Process........................................................ V-10
D. Community Asset Inventory......................................................... V-16
E. End Notes..................................................................................... V-40
F. Glossary........................................................................................ V-41

viii

Table of Contents

Executive Summary

I. Overview
The New York Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Program was established by Governor
Andrew M. Cuomo to provide additional rebuilding
and revitalization assistance to communities damaged
by Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical
Storm Lee. This program empowers communities to
prepare locally-driven recovery plans to identify innovative reconstruction and resiliency projects and other
actions to allow each community not only to survive,
but also to thrive in an era when natural risks will
become increasingly common.
This Stony Point NYRCR Plan presents proposed programs, policies and construction initiatives developed
by the Stony Point NYRCR Community and the Stony
Point NYRCR Planning Committee, comprised of
Stony Point residents chosen to represent the
community.

Community Location and Allocation
Amount
The Town of Stony Point is located in the Hudson
Valley of New York State in Rockland County, approximately 30 miles north of New York City. Stony Point
measures approximately 28 square miles and has a
population of just over 15,000. The Town sits at the
southernmost edge of the Hudson Highlands, on the
west shore of the Hudson River. Stony Point is bordered to the south by the Town of Haverstraw and the
Village of West Haverstraw; to the north and west by
the Orange County towns of Highlands, Woodbury,
and Tuxedo; and to the east by the Hudson River.

The Town of Stony Point is eligible for up to $3 million
in CDBG-DR funding through the NYRCR program.

Scope of Planning Area
The scope of the planning area includes all areas of
the Town of Stony Point outside of Bear Mountain and
Harriman State Parks. Some areas within the geographic scope were not directly damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, or Superstorm Sandy,
but include potential locations for resilient redevelopment, providing the Town the ability to relocate critical
facilities out of flood-prone areas.

Summary of Storm Impacts
Hurricane Irene (August 28, 2011), Tropical Storm Lee
(September 7, 2011), and Superstorm Sandy (October
29, 2012) hit Stony Point with full force. The storms
brought heavy rains and/or significant storm surge
with them, leading to record flooding along the Hudson
River waterfront and in inland areas along the Cedar
Pond Brook and other streams that run through the
Town.
During Superstorm Sandy, storm surge and waves up
to twelve feet in height struck Stony Point’s Hudson
River shoreline. Waterfront homes and businesses
were damaged, in some cases severely. The Ba Mar
mobile home park was hit especially hard, with many
homes lifted off their footings, flooded, or otherwise
damaged. At the many marinas along the river, buildings were damaged or destroyed; docks, some with
boats still attached, were torn from their pilings and
set afloat while moorings were pulled from the bed of
the Hudson. Other businesses along the River experienced comparable levels of damage; some have not
reopened. The wastewater treatment plant was partly
flooded and some machinery was lost, although the
sewage tanks narrowly avoided being inundated.
During Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and
Superstorm Sandy, the Cedar Pond Brook and other

Executive Summary

1

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

streams overflowed their banks, flooding homes and
roadways and leading to severe erosion and infrastructure damage. Erosion of streambeds and banks
exposed the Cedar Pond Brook interceptor sewer
line, a major feeder line for the wastewater treatment
plant. Although not damaged in the storm, this critical
piece of infrastructure is still in imminent danger of
experiencing a critical failure. Charles S. Eccher
Lowland Park, an important recreational resource
near the heart of the Town, was also flooded and suffered significant damage.
The physical damage to roads, bridges, homes, and
other essential infrastructure compounded short and
long term economic impacts that rippled throughout
Stony Point and the region. Some storm victims lived
for months in a temporary shelter facility, while others
were forced to live elsewhere or reside in homes that
remain damaged. Irreparable losses to waterfront
homes and businesses and major damages to infrastructure complicated and delayed recovery efforts.
Today, Stony Point is still recovering from the damage
caused by Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and
Tropical Storm Lee.

Summary of Critical Issues
In the aftermath of Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane
Irene, and Tropical Storm Lee, the key critical issues
facing Stony Point include:

1. Lack of Emergency Preparedness
The recent storm events highlighted the need for
better community awareness, education, and dissemination of information about how to prepare for,
what to do, and where to go during storm events.
Major gaps include bilingual materials on preparedness; access to real-time data during storms; signage
and information on evacuation routes and locations of
shelters and emergency services; information on
recovery resources available to local residents; and
improved communication between residents and government/emergency services providers.

2

Executive Summary

2. Incomplete Recovery of the Hudson River
Waterfront
Economic losses have slowed the waterfront’s revitalization efforts and interrupted economic growth
throughout Stony Point. Making these businesses
more resistant to flooding and improving the resilience
of Stony Point’s waterfront economic assets through
the implementation of best practices would improve
the Town’s ability to recover economically from future
storm events. Additionally, many homes that were
damaged by Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and
Tropical Storm Lee remain unrepaired since the
storms; walls are missing, roofs have collapsed, yards
are overgrown, windows and doors are boarded up
and some are surrounded by hurricane fencing to
protect residents. The result is that certain areas along
the Hudson River waterfront have a blighted
appearance.

3. Critical Assets Vulnerable to Flooding
Protecting residences, businesses, parks, natural
resources, infrastructure, and energy resources from
flooding, storm surge and wave action is critical to
creating a resilient Stony Point. All of these resources
have been affected during past storms. Additionally,
the infrastructure in place to protect waterfront properties, including jetties, bulkheads, and seawalls, was
damaged.

4. Uncertainty Surrounding Regional Energy
and Infrastructure Projects
The community indicated that several regional infrastructure projects are proposed within the Town. Critical to the community and to the implementation of the
NYRCR Plan is a better understanding of these projects, their location/route, and their potential short and
long term effects.

5. Synergy Between Local and Regional
Natural and Cultural Resources
Stony Point and the surrounding region are rich in
natural and cultural resources that draw visitors from
around the globe. The protection and promotion of

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

these resources would increase tourism in the Town.
This would improve the local and regional economy
while emphasizing the need for protection of these
resources and ultimately afford the Town the ability to
promote resilient reconstruction and development.

II. Community-Driven Process
Community Vision/Goals
Stony Point NYRCR Community Vision for
the Future:
Stony Point is a vibrant and connected riverfront and hillside community. Our Vision is to
preserve our town’s history and protect our
people and our natural resources while making
the community more resilient in the face of
future hazards and attracting visitors to ensure
an ecologically sound and economically strong
future for the people of Stony Point.
Goals and objectives:
Plan for better mobility and connectivity for
people in cars, on foot, and with transit.
Cooperate with other regional entities.
Improve waterfront access and
infrastructure.
Protect the watershed and strengthen
stormwater management practices.
Redevelop historic assets while maintaining
neighborhood fabric.

Summary of Public Outreach
The NYRCR Program is fundamentally a grass-roots
initiative. Initial project recommendations were generated by the Stony Point NYRCR Planning Committee,
which was comprised of local business owners,
elected officials, civic leaders, and storm-impacted
residents. The Committee met approximately every
other week from September 2013 through March
2014. Materials were circulated to the Committee
before and after each meeting and also posted to the
NYRCR website. Committee members also created
Facebook pages, posted relevant materials to their
municipal websites, held additional meetings among
themselves, and attended municipal meetings to
report on their NYRCR Plan progress. Members of the
Committee were instrumental in reaching out to vulnerable populations, particularly residents of the Ba
Mar mobile home park, to include them in the NYRCR
dialogue.
Three public engagement meetings were held
throughout the eight month planning process, with a
fourth to be conducted after the final plans are complete. These meetings provided the opportunity for
Stony Point residents to learn about the NYRCR planning process, assets and projects, and provide input
to help develop community-driven plans for a more
resilient future. The format of the Public Engagement
Meetings varied throughout the process, but generally
included power point presentations, display boards
and mapping, workgroups with maps and markers,
survey sheets and comment boxes. A summary of the
content for each public engagement meeting is provided on the next page.

Foster emergency readiness.
Revitalize downtown businesses.
Develop design and construction standards
for resilience.
Enhance historical, natural, and cultural
attractions for tourists.
Retain and attract residents with a range of
housing options.
Executive Summary

3

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Public Engagement Meeting #1
Introduction to the NYRCR Program, project
timeline, and progress-to-date; and
Gather input on draft community vision, geographic scope, list of community assets, list
of needs and opportunities, and local and
regional project ideas.
Public Engagement Meeting #2
Review Draft Conceptual Plan; and
Gather feedback on Reconstruction Strategies and Projects.
Public Engagement Meeting #3
Review the Risk Assessment process and results;
Assess community support for and gather
feedback on projects.
Public Engagement Meeting #4: Final Plan
Present the Final Plans
Review the selected projects, and the process and timeline for implementation.

4

Executive Summary

III. Final Plan as a Blueprint for
Implementation
The risks to, and vulnerability of, assets within the
Town of Stony Point were exposed by Superstorm
Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical Storm Lee.
Through the NYRCR planning process, the community changed its focus from repair to resiliency. This
change of purpose revealed significant opportunities
to help Stony Point build back better.
The Committee first identified where the Town is vulnerable, where its critical assets are located and the
risks those assets face. To address these specific
vulnerabilities, a comprehensive needs and opportunities analysis was prepared through a combination of
research, analysis, and feedback from the Committee
and the community.
The NYRCR Plan provides an overview of Stony Point
and its risks, vulnerabilities, needs and opportunities.
Strategies for reconstruction and resilience were
developed as an approach to meet the identified
needs and a way to put the related opportunities into
action. To address the risks and respond to the needs,
projects were developed to execute the reconstruction and resiliency strategies. These projects include
short-term actions (Proposed and Featured Projects)
that most effectively implement identified opportunities. Other actions (Additional Resiliency Recommendations) that could further the Town’s goals of reconstruction and resilience were also identified. All
projects are included in this plan.

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Proposed Projects are proposed for funding
through a community’s allocation of CDBG-DR
funding.
Featured Projects are projects and actions that
the Planning Committee has identified as
important resiliency recommendations and has
analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for
funding through the NYRCR Program.
dditional Resiliency Recommendations are
A
resiliency projects and actions that the Stony
Point NYRCR Planning Committee would like to
highlight, but are not categorized as Proposed
or Featured Projects.

Proposed and Featured Projects
The strategies presented in the table below, and the
Proposed or Featured Projects that implement them,
specifically address the stated needs and transform
opportunities into action items. The strategies were
developed to concentrate resiliency planning efforts
toward resolving critical issues identified throughout
the planning process. The Proposed and Featured
Projects are presented in conjunction with the strategy that they fulfill; they are not presented in any particular order of priority.

Strategy

Project Name

Strategy 1: Strengthen current short- and long-term emergency shelters
and develop new sheltering opportunities

Letchworth Village Disaster Recovery and Communications Center

Strategy 2: Encourage economic development and support existing
businesses

Grassy Point Development/Redevelopment

Strategy 3: Improve on existing emergency preparedness, response and
communications

Letchworth Village Disaster Recovery and Communications Center

Strategy 4: Provide information and assistance to homeowners with
pre-storm flood-proofing and post-storm repair, buyouts and demolition

Demolition of Damaged and Abandoned Structures

Strategy 5: Promote sustainability and resilience through local land use
planning and regulation

Grassy Point Development/Redevelopment

Stony Point Center Retrofit

Hardening of Wastewater Treatment Plant
Strategy 6: Repair, rehabilitate, upgrade and fortify critical infrastructure
and transportation

Rehabilitation of Wastewater Interceptors along Beach Road and the Ba
Mar Sewer Line
Shoreline Protection Against Erosion and Wave Action (Beach Road)
Shoreline Protection Against Erosion and Wave Action (River Road)
Cedar Pond Brook Interceptor Sewer Line Rehabilitation

Strategy 7: Harness resiliency potential of natural resources

[No Proposed or Featured Projects affiliated with this strategy]

Executive Summary

5

This Page Intentionally Blank

2014
NY RISING COMMUNITY
RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
NYRCR STONY POINT

Section I

Community Overview

I

Community Overview

A. Introduction to Stony Point
The Town of Stony Point is located in the Hudson
Valley of New York State in Rockland County, approximately 30 miles north of New York City. Sitting at the
southernmost edge of the Hudson Highlands, and
with 10 miles of scenic Hudson River waterfront,
Stony Point has always been defined by its landscape
of river and mountains, which has drawn people here
for hundreds of years.

American Revolution. The rocky promontory for which
the town is named was the location of a British fortification that was captured by General “Mad” Anthony
Wayne’s forces in the Battle of Stony Point in 1779, a
major victory for the Americans. The following year,
Major John André of the British Army met with American general Benedict Arnold in what is now Stony
Point to discuss Arnold’s plans to defect to the British
and turn West Point over to the British Army. Fortunately for the Americans, André was captured shortly
afterward and the plot was exposed. Then, in 1781,
American and French forces on their way to the Battle
of Yorktown passed through Stony Point after crossing the Hudson at the King’s Ferry. This Revolutionary
War history is commemorated at the Stony Point
Battlefield State Historic Site, a major tourist attraction for the town.

Fall colors in Stony Point (Alice Brown)

During Colonial times, the area that is now Stony Point
was a crossroads between New England and the
southern colonies because of the King’s Ferry, a critical ferry crossing over the Hudson river. The plaque at
the site of the landing indicates the King’s Ferry was
“…a vital communication link between New England
and the Colonies to the South” and that it was used by
George Washington and the French Army during the
Revolutionary War.
Beyond anchoring one end of this important ferry
route, the town played an important role in the

King’s Ferry Landing Plaque (Steve Beckerle)

After the revolution, rural settlements continued to
grow and the Town of Stony Point was officially

Section I: Community Overview

I–1

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

founded in 1865. The young township was home to a
number of industries. At first the local economy relied
on harvesting raw materials such as oysters and sturgeon from the Hudson, but soon, clay deposits were
discovered and Stony Point became an important
center of brickmaking in the region. In the twentieth
century, this industrial heritage was built on and continued with the establishment of the Kay Fries industrial park in downtown Stony Point, the Lovett Power
Plant and Tilcon quarry in Tomkins Cove, and the U.S.
Gypsum plant in Grassy Point.

combined with the construction of the Bear Mountain
Inn and Zoo, solidified Stony Point’s reputation as a
hiker’s paradise and natural getaway close to New
York City and continue to bring tourism to the town
today. Over time, as the heavy industry and manufacturing facilities that long formed the backbone of
Stony Point’s economy began to close their doors, the
economy shifted, with tourism claiming a larger
portion of the town’s economy. Today many waterfront
businesses, such as marinas and a boat works, have
added another layer to the tourism and recreation
industry in Stony Point, building on the historical sites
and State Parks previously mentioned.

Stony Point Battlefield State Historic Site (Chris Robbins)

In addition to its important role in industry, the Town
has long been a rural haven for city dwellers. In the
1800s, Iona Island was particularly popular as a resort
and weekend picnicking spot for people from the
more urbanized areas downriver. However, in 1899
this recreational activity ended when the island was
bought by the U.S. Navy for use as a naval ammunition depot, which remained in service until 1947. The
state currently uses some of the remaining buildings
for storing archives. Today the island is a bird sanctuary and bald eagle nesting ground, with special permission needed from the Palisades Interstate Park
Commission to enter the main portion of the island. In
the early decades of the twentieth century, the fledging environmentalist movement led to the founding of
Harriman and Bear Mountain State Parks, both
located partly in Stony Point. These resources,

I–2

Section I: Community Overview

Sunrise on the Stony Point Waterfront (Thomas McGuire)

Today, Stony Point has a population of just over
15,000 residents as of the 2010 Census, spread over
approximately 28 square miles. Two thirds of this land
area is contained within Bear Mountain and Harriman
State Parks, which lie in the northern and western
areas of the Town along the ridge and slopes of the
Hudson Highlands. The remaining third of the Town’s
landmass, in the southeastern portion of Stony Point,
is developed at a generally suburban to rural scale,
with higher-density neighborhoods and commercial
and industrial areas clustered along NYS Route 9W (at
the very southeast corner of the Town), in the Stony
Point Town Center and the Grassy Point neighborhood, which is where much of the Town’s Hudson
River waterfront activity is located. The Town is

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

bordered to the south by the Town of Haverstraw and
the Village of West Haverstraw; to the north and west
by the Orange County towns of Highlands, Woodbury,
and Tuxedo; and to the east by the Hudson River.
Stony Point is vulnerable to flooding from both storm
surges along the Hudson River and riverine flooding
on the streams that run down from the Hudson Highlands, including Cedar Pond Brook, Minisceongo
Creek, and several unnamed streams and tributaries.
The confluence of several streams is located adjacent
to Grassy Point and as a result this area has seen
some of the worst flooding the Town has experienced.
However, areas throughout the Town have suffered
impacts from storms through the years. Stony Point is
somewhat unique among the NY Rising Communities
in that it sustained damage both in upland areas,
where creeks flooded their banks during Hurricane
Irene and Tropical Storm Lee, and along the waterfront, where storm surge and wave action were the
main factors during Superstorm Sandy.

B. Geographic Scope of
NYRCR Plan
Defining the physical extent of the area that the
NYRCR planning process would address was the key
first step taken by the Stony Point NYRCR Planning
Committee. This planning area, called the Geographic
Scope, was intended to encompass areas within the
Town that contain resources critical for the community’s response to storm events, the Town’s economic
drivers, and other important assets. The Geographic
Scope also needed to include those locations that
have a history of flooding. In developing the Geographic Scope, the Committee considered locations
that are most vulnerable and where assets are most at
risk; areas where future development or redevelopment will be discouraged and encouraged; and areas
where additional economic investment will help the
communities’ financial resilience.

“Assets are likely to be most at risk due to future
storms in the extreme, high and moderate risk
areas of the community. But reviewing current and
previous storm damage may indicate that other
areas should be included [in the Geographic Scope].”
Guidance for New York Rising Community
Reconstruction Plans, A Planning Toolkit for CR
Planning Committees (2013)
The Geographic Scope of this NYRCR Plan includes
all areas of the Town that are outside of Bear Mountain
and Harriman State Parks. Some areas within this
Geographic Scope are areas that were not directly
damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, or
Superstorm Sandy, but which include locations for
redevelopment, providing the Town the ability to move
various facilities out of the path of future damage. This
geographic study area forms the basis for all subsequent steps of the NYRCR planning process, including the analyses that led to the asset inventory, needs
and opportunities, risk assessment, strategies, and
projects. The final Geographic Scope is depicted in
Figure I-1.

Members of the Public review the Geographic Scope, Public
Engagement Meeting #1 (Alice Brown)

Discussion on how to determine the Geographic
Scope began at the first Committee meeting. Initial
conversations revolved around several options. A

Section I: Community Overview

I–3

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-1

Geographic Scope

Figure I-1
Geographic Scope
Town Boundary

Grassy Point
Beach Road
Town of
Woodbury
P
Cedar

Geographic Scope

Town of
Highlands

Jones Point

BEAR MOUNTAIN STATE PARK

City of Peekskill

rook
ond B

Town of Stony Point

Min

ng
eo
isc

Ba Mar Mobile
Home Park

o

ek
C re

West Shore Drive
River Road
Sources: Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ,
USGS, Intermap, iPC, NRCAN, Esri
Japan, METI, Esri China (Hong Kong),
Esri (Thailand), TomTom, 2013

Town of Cortlandt

Tomkins Cove

Town of Tuxedo

Stony Point Battlefield
State Historic Site

Data Sources
Municipal Boundaries:
NYS

Route 9W/
Liberty Drive

HARRIMAN STATE PARK

Cedar P
on

Base Map:
ESRI

d Brook
March 20, 2014

Palisades Interstate Parkway

Putnam

Hudson River

Minisceongo Creek

Town of Haverstraw

±

0

I–4

0.5

Miles
1

Section I: Community Overview

Sources: Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, USGS, Intermap, iPC, NRCAN, Esri Japan, METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), Esri (Thailand), TomTom,
2013

Orange

Rockland

Westchester

Bronx

Nassau

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Geographic Scope that included the entire Town was
rejected because the State Parks do not contain any
populated areas, critical assets or areas where flood
damage was identified. A smaller Scope covering only
the areas that were directly inundated was deemed
too narrow, as it would not have included key locations such as storm shelters, major public buildings,
and the majority of the Town’s neighborhoods. In the
end it was determined that since the entire population
of the Town had been affected by Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy, and
because even those areas not directly impacted by
flooding contained important recovery and resilience
assets, the Geographic Scope should include all
populated areas of the Town.

Ba Mar mobile home park. Homes and businesses
were flooded by the Hudson River as the storm
pushed water shoreward, filling basements and
destroying possessions as well as the mechanical
equipment typically located below grade. One resident, who was tending to an issue in his basement,
had to be pulled to safety when the foundation of his
home collapsed.

The Geographic Scope developed by the Committee
was endorsed by the broader Stony Point community
during the first of four Public Engagement Meetings
held throughout the NYRCR process. More information about public outreach can be found in Section
V.C. “Public Engagement Process.”
Hurricane Irene knocked oil tanks off their foundations at Wayne
Cort’s Marina (Kevin Maher)

C. Description of Storm
Damage
Hurricane Irene and Tropical Storm Lee
On August 27-28, 2011, Hurricane Irene struck the
Hudson Valley, bringing with it heavy rains and significant storm surge to Stony Point. A County emergency
was declared in advance of the storm, and evacuations were recommended for low-lying areas including
Grassy Point, Beach Road, the Ba Mar mobile home
park, West Shore Drive in Tomkins Cove, and Jones
Point. As the storm moved closer, the evacuation was
made mandatory and was enforced by local police.
The North Rockland High School and Rockland Community Field House were designated as storm
shelters.
The storm surge inundated nearly the full length of
Beach and River Roads, as well as all but the very
center of Grassy Point and approximately half of the

Oil slick from fuel tanks after Hurricane Irene (Kevin Maher)

People returning to their homes found mud-filled
basements, debris strewn about their yards, and
damage both in and outside of their homes.

Section I: Community Overview

I–5

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

In the upland areas of the Town, soils that were already
saturated in advance of the storm could hold no more
water, and heavy rains led Cedar Pond Brook and its
tributaries to overflow their banks and flood roads
near the Palisades Interstate Parkway, blocking
access to all, including emergency vehicles.

Other roads across the Town were flooded or washed
out, especially in areas where they ran parallel to an
existing stream, where a culvert conveyed a stream
under the pavement, or where they were located in
low-lying areas. During the storm, culverts that had
just been cleared became clogged with debris carried
out of the highlands by the raging flood waters. In one
such location, at the intersection of Sullivan and Lewis
Drives, the water filled yards, covered the roads and
seeped into homes resulting in the need to rescue a
pregnant woman trapped on her porch.
Flood waters from the Cedar Pond Brook destroyed
the parking lot at the Pyngyp School, a historic building listed on the State and National Registers of Historic Places, as well as a portion of a single-family
home located on the banks of the Brook.

Flooding from the Cedar Pond Brook during Hurricane Irene
undermined foundations of nearby homes (Kevin Maher)

Stream bank erosion on the Cedar Pond Brook
exposed an eight-inch gas line, flooded many of the
homes in the Cedar Flats Mobile Home Park and
washed away a portion of Cedar Flats Road. Residents north of the washed-out road had to travel many
miles out of their way to get to and from their homes.

As for economic impacts, the marinas and other
marine services business along with Gilligan’s on the
Hudson, a waterfront restaurant, were flooded and
had to be closed for varying lengths of time. Patriot
Hills Golf Club was flooded as well. Sand traps were
washed away and the course was closed for two and
a half days. Tropical Storm Lee, which followed on the
heels of Hurricane Irene, resulted in additional business impacts including the closure of the Golf Club for
another day and a half.
Scars of the raging floodwaters are still visible along
the watercourses that flow through Town. This is
especially so for certain reaches of the Cedar Pond
Brook whose banks were undermined and severely
eroded, leaving nothing but bare soil and fallen trees
in its wake.

Tree uprooted by Hurricane Irene floodwaters on Cedar Pond Brook
(Kevin Maher)

I–6

Section I: Community Overview

Possibly the worst effects of Hurricane Irene and the
flood waters conveyed by the Cedar Pond Brook were
felt by the residents of Stony Point in the loss of
Charles S. Eccher Lowland Park. This recreational
resource included horseshoe pits, a pavilion, picnic
tables, a playground, grills, a walking track, basketball
courts and a kiddie pool; many of these amenities
were washed away or suffered significant damage.
Cedar Pond Brook runs directly through this park and

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

while the park has been rebuilt, the erosive force of
the water is still evident on the banks of the creek.

approximately 35 people along Beach Road and many
more in the other sections of the evacuation zone. A
shelter for the evacuees was set up in the Stony Point
Ambulance Building nearby.
Damages sustained during the storm, the result of
flooding from storm surge (over 4 feet) and substantial
wave action, were especially significant due to a concurrence of the high tide and full moon. Unlike Hurricane Irene, when water was pushed up on land due to
tidal fluctuations in the Hudson River and the tributary
streams, the floodwaters caused by Superstorm
Sandy were fueled by a combination of unusually high
tides resulting from lunar cycles and hurricane force
winds that pushed water up the Hudson River.

Erosion of Cedar Pond Brook Stream Bank after Hurricane Irene
(Kevin Maher)

Flooding at Charles S. Eccher Lowland Park after Hurricane Irene
(Luanne Konopko)

Superstorm Sandy
As Superstorm Sandy approached the Hudson Valley
on October 29, 2012, states of emergency were again
declared by the County and Town, and notices were
sent to Stony Point residents urging prudence and
caution during the storm. Areas of the Town adjacent
to the Hudson River waterfront were evacuated,
including all of Grassy Point and the Ba Mar mobile
home park. The evacuation order affected

Superstorm Sandy did not follow a traditional storm
track to the northeast along the shoreline of Long
Island and New England, as Hurricane Irene did.
Instead, Superstorm Sandy made a left-hand turn and
made landfall near the midpoint of the New Jersey
coast, subjecting the lower Hudson Valley and the
New York City metropolitan area to the worst part of
the hurricane, the northeast quadrant, where the
maximum winds were prevalent. Despite the natural
flow of water down the Hudson River, these winds
churned up the waters and sent huge waves rolling up
towards Stony Point’s shoreline. Unlike Hurricane
Irene, where floodwaters were a combination of high
tides and heavy runoff (the NOAA station at nearby
Yorktown Heights, NY recorded 6.65 inches of rainfall
from Hurricane Irene), Superstorm Sandy’s winds
roaring out of the southeast slammed massive waves
up to 12 feet in height against the shoreline, decimating buildings and damaging infrastructure located in
these areas. The waves turned boats, docks, tree
limbs, timber and other debris into battering rams,
driving them into homes, outbuildings, and businesses
on the shorefront. A fishing shanty and a gazebo, both
along the river, were ripped from their foundations,
never to be seen again. Some of the residents who
stayed behind hoping to weather the storm banded
together in an attempt to prevent floating debris from
striking their homes.

Section I: Community Overview

I–7

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

living rooms to the fury of the storm. Where the structure of the houses withstood the punishment, doors
and windows facing the river were blown out, inviting
the rushing waters in. One resident, who had prepared
for Superstorm Sandy as he had for Hurricane Irene—
by sandbagging and boarding up the front of his
home—stayed behind. When the storm breached the
front of his house and waist-deep water rushed though
and out the back, he found himself trapped on the
second floor with water all around and rising.

Storm damage to boat docks, Superstorm Sandy (Jim McDonnell)

In another waterfront home on Beach Road, several
people who decided to wait out the storm had to be
evacuated after waves crashed through the front of
the house, leaving them no means of escape. The
Police and Fire Departments secured their safety
through a second-story window at the back of the
home; this was the only safe means of access, as the
emergency workers were able to position their vehicles on high ground behind the home and away from
the flood waters. One resident lost his life helping to
secure a marina facility.

Storm surge on Beach Road during Superstorm Sandy (Luanne
Konopko)

Many older properties along the waterfront, which had
not been raised to the FEMA-recommended flood
elevation of eight feet above the river, experienced
serious damage; some are still not habitable. Nine
homes and one garage, used to store old fire trucks,
along Beach Road were damaged. The same was the
fate for a total of thirteen homes along River Road as
well as all of the residences located on First, Fourth
and Fifth Streets in Grassy Point and a majority of
those sited on Grassy Point Road. Damage sustained
included flooding of basements and first floors; in
some cases, porches, decks and even the fronts of
houses were ripped away, exposing kitchens and

I–8

Section I: Community Overview

Damaged housing in Ba Mar after Superstorm Sandy
(Luanne Konopko)

The Ba Mar mobile home park experienced flooding
and wave damage similar to what was seen in other
areas of the waterfront. This neighborhood is very
vulnerable due to its location in a low-lying waterfront
area, and as a result of the nature of the homes and
their construction. Many of the homes in Ba Mar were

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

lifted off their footings, flooded, or otherwise damaged.
Possessions were destroyed and automobiles,
outdoor furnishings, and unsecured structures were
washed away or lost due to water damage. Approximately 70 homes in this community were heavily
damaged (loss of 50% of their value or greater).
Numerous marinas and boating service businesses
were severely impacted. Buildings were damaged or
destroyed; docks, some with boats still attached,
were torn from their pilings and set afloat while pilings
and moorings were pulled from the bed of the Hudson.
At one of the marinas, workers put up a barrier in a
last ditch effort to prevent boats from causing destruction to the homes located just across the road. Despite
these efforts and others like them up and down the
Hudson River, boats were deposited in people’s yards,
crashed into the fronts of their homes, and were
stranded on tops of fences. Some were from local
marinas, while others were conveyed from the opposite shore or far upriver. While docks and buildings
within the marinas have been rebuilt, six structures
remain damaged and two have been torn down.

Boats piled up at the Stony Point Bay Marina after Superstorm Sandy
(Luanne Konopko)

At the PANCO Petroleum site, empty tanks were
floated off their foundations, their connections broken.
The restrooms and pier at River Front Park were
washed away leaving not a trace.

At the wastewater treatment facility, as storm surge
advanced toward the plant, the worker who was
attempting to keep the plant operational received
instructions to shut off power and disable the emergency generators so that they would not start up when
the building was flooded. After securing the building,
he had to be plucked from its roof by two Town
employees, at risk of their own lives, in the Highway
Department’s front end bucket loader. The plant itself
experienced flooding in the basement of the main
control building and several pump motors and other
miscellaneous electrical items were lost, although the
sewage tanks narrowly avoided being inundated.
Businesses along the Hudson were also damaged,
including all of the marinas and two restaurants: Gilligan’s on the Hudson and Out of the Blue. Gilligan’s
has reopened, but Out of the Blue will not.
During Superstorm Sandy, the Cedar Pond Brook and
its tributaries flooded, as they had during Hurricane
Irene. As a result of the unusually high tide and significant storm surge, erosion of streambeds and banks
exposed additional sections of the Cedar Pond Brook
interceptor sewer line, adding to sections that had
been uncovered during previous storms. While the
sewer line itself fortunately did not suffer any immediate damage, it was discovered a short time later that a
siphon which carried the sewer flow under the Cedar
Pond Brook immediately downstream of this line had
in fact been damaged by rocks that had slipped off
the embankment and cracked the top of the pipe. The
siphon had obviously been exposed due to the erosive
water flows from Hurricane Irene and Superstorm
Sandy. Had this sewer line been breached, it would
have discharged raw sewage directly into the Cedar
Pond Brook less than a mile upstream from public
parks, fishing and bathing areas, and critical habitat
areas of the Hudson River.
In the aftermath of the storm, New York Governor
Andrew M. Cuomo declared a disaster in Rockland
County. Some storm victims lived for months in a
long-term shelter that was set up at the Stony Point
Center in the days after the storm. Aside from the
shelter, Town recovery efforts included conducting a

Section I: Community Overview

I–9

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

survey of damaged properties and distributing dry ice
to residents so they could keep their food supplies
fresh until electricity was restored.

Motorcyclist rally on River Road (Dominick Posillipo)

Out of the Blue, a waterfront restaurant damaged by Superstorm
Sandy, has not reopened (Chris Robbins)

The effects of the storm are evident to this day. Residents of the Ba Mar community continue to live elsewhere or reside in homes that remain damaged.
Debris, including the roof of the gazebo that was
washed away and a blanket knitted by one of the displaced residents, still litter the front lawn of one abandoned home. There are many homes that are unsafe
for habitation and remain partially boarded up. Some
of these you can look into or straight through as doors,
windows and walls are missing. Recently, the roof of
one home collapsed, and two others have been
demolished by the owners. At this time only one home
has been raised above the recently issued Federal
Emergency Management Agency advisory base flood
elevations.
In response, the community has rallied around and
supported those who have experienced significant
loss as a result of Superstorm Sandy. Over the past
two years a large group of motorcyclists periodically
ride out to River Road and gather around one of the
homes that remains boarded up. A sermon is given
from the front porch of the home to remind all that the
recovery is ongoing.

I – 10

Section I: Community Overview

Affected residents of Stony Point were also supported
by the Stony Point Seals, a nonprofit group that organizes an annual swim in the Hudson River on Super
Bowl Sunday. The Seals contributed money raised at
the 2013 “Polar Plunge” to local victims of the storm.

Other Storms
While these storms are among the most significant
disasters that have occurred in Stony Point in recent
memory, they are hardly alone. Stony Point is regularly
affected by lesser storms and flooding events. Along
Beach Road, flooding occurs at least once every
Spring Tide with or without storm surge or precipitation. River Road and the Ba Mar neighborhood are
also regularly affected by these smaller storms and
floods.
In the Northeast, particularly in the New York metropolitan region, rainfall events have become more frequent and more intense as a result of climate change.
Due in part to the surrounding topography, inland
flooding is triggered by heavy rainfalls and results in
the inundation of low-lying areas and the erosion of
stream banks and creek beds. The existing storm
drainage network, consisting of pipes buried beneath
existing streets and culverts under roads and bridges,
is frequently overwhelmed by this runoff. In some
cases, this infrastructure is deteriorating due to aging
and environmental factors. Like other Hudson River

STON Y POIN T N Y R IS IN G Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure I-2.

FEMA Flood Areas

Figure I-2
FEMA Flood Areas
Geographic Scope
! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

ATT Trunk Line
! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

Flood Zone

! !

V - 100 Year Plus Waves
100 year
500 year

Hudson River

m
Pu
To

pS

Po
Cedar

ion
tat

o
nd Br

ok
Hudson River
Data Sources

INE
SL
PAS
BY

oC
ng
ceo

Municipal Boundaries:
NYS

k
ree
Ced ar P
o

is
MinSources: Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, USGS, Intermap, iPC,

! !

nd Broo

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

Flood Zones:
FEMA & NYS

ATT Trunk Line

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

k

Base Map:
ESRI

NRCAN, Esri Japan, METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), Esri
(Thailand), TomTom, 2013

m
Pu
To

pS

ion
tat

March 20, 2014
Putnam
Orange

±

0

0.5

Miles
1

INE
SL
PAS
BY

Minisceongo Creek

Westchester

Rockland

Sources: Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, USGS, Intermap, iPC, NRCAN, Esri Japan, METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), Esri (Thailand), TomTom,
2013

Bronx

Section I: Community Overview

Nassau

I – 11

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

communities, the drainage systems in the Town of
Stony Point were designed and built at a time when
less intense rainfall events occurred. New rainfall patterns expose these systems to greater volumes of
runoff on a regular basis, leading to flooding, erosion
and property damage.

Superstorm Sandy Aftermath (Jim McDonnell)

Another factor that has led to recent flooding events is
the intensity of development within the watershed.
This development occurred mainly before modern
stormwater management guidelines were established
in Stony Point. Replacement of undeveloped areas,
including floodplains, and wetlands with impervious
development has removed important natural runoff
control normally seen in undisturbed natural areas
such as Harriman and Bear Mountain State Parks.
Stony Point has been and will continue to be susceptible to both coastal surges and flooding from inland
precipitation.
Figure I-2 presents FEMA flood areas for Stony Point
and provides geographical context to the devastation
caused by water overflowing the banks of the Hudson
River, the Cedar Pond Brook, tidal wetlands and other
unnamed watercourses.

D. Critical Issues
The Committee and members of the community communicated, in sobering detail, the impacts brought to
bear on their Town by Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane
Irene and Tropical Storm Lee. The picture painted was
one of struggle, loss, tragedy and heroics during the
storm events followed by an outpouring of support,
outreach, and kindness provided by many in the
immediate aftermath and beyond. Some of the critical
issues facing the community and region related to
these unprecedented storm events were immediately
evident to all. Others were only fully formulated and
accurately described during the NYRCR process.
Critical issues were also identified by residents during
public engagement events where attendees openly
discussed concerns that arose from their own experiences with these storms. This input was used to build
on the critical issues developed by the Committee.
The critical issues identified by the community affect
the Town’s resilience and overall ability to withstand
and recover from significant storm events. The critical
issues facing Stony Point include:

1. Lack of Emergency Preparedness
The recent storm events highlighted the need for
better community awareness, education, and dissemination of information about how to prepare for,
what to do, and where to go during storm events,
including:
Bilingual materials explaining how residents should
prepare their homes, properties, persons, and businesses in advance of a storm event are lacking.
The paucity of information and inability to access
critical, real-time data on road closures, power outages, flooding, evacuation routes, and ways to receive or provide assistance hindered the community’s response.
Improved signage and materials providing residents with instructions on safe evacuation routes,
emergency shelter sites, locations of food and

I – 12

Section I: Community Overview

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

medical services promoting a more orderly and efficient response are needed.
Residents were concerned with the lack of access
to information providing direction on where to go
and the options for assistance with temporary shelter, replacement of lost property, and funding for
the repair, rebuilding or buy-out of damaged or lost
property.
Improving the means and methods of communication and linking residents to critical information disseminated by the government and emergency service providers was identified as an ongoing issue.
The residents evacuated and rescued during the
storm events were taken to the basement of the police
station which also houses the Town’s emergency
response center. As a result, the police station was
overcrowded and there was insufficient room and
services for the all of the displaced residents needing
assistance and accommodations. Further, the presence of residents in areas where emergency response
was being coordinated created additional challenges
for emergency services providers. During Superstorm
Sandy, displaced residents were then moved to the

storms, temporarily limiting its ability to provide
needed services. Critical to the Town’s ability to
provide adequate recovery services is the development of adequate and accessible emergency shelters
for safe haven during storm events.

2. Incomplete Recovery of the Hudson
River Waterfront
As described earlier, the storms resulted in damage to
critical economic resources, such as local businesses,
marinas, restaurants and more. These impacts negatively affected tourism to the waterfront and the lost
economic activity further hampered the businesses’
ability to recover quickly. The cumulative effects of all
these losses have slowed the waterfront’s revitalization efforts and interrupted economic growth throughout Stony Point. Making these businesses more resistant to flooding and improving the resilience of Stony
Point’s waterfront economic assets through the implementation of best practices would improve the ability
of Stony Point to recover economically from future
storm events.

Superstorm Sandy Storm Surge (Jim McDonnell)
Houses along the Waterfront (Chris Robbins)

Stony Point Center, which provided food and temporary shelter for many families, some for up to three
months. The Stony Point Center itself experienced
flooding
and
power
outages
during
the

Additionally, many single-family residences along the
Hudson River waterfront were damaged or destroyed
during Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy. These
homes were built in flood-prone areas and/or areas
susceptible to wave action, increasing their

Section I: Community Overview

I – 13

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

vulnerability to storm damage. Housing stock that
was damaged included mobile homes, apartments,
and historic homes dating back to the 1800s. The
common factor among all of these homes was a lack
of resilient design and construction. Many of these
homes remain unprepared since the storms; walls are
missing, roofs have collapsed, yards are overgrown,
windows and doors are boarded up and some are surrounded by hurricane fencing to protect residents.
The result is that certain areas along the Hudson River
waterfront have a blighted appearance.

3. Critical Assets Vulnerable to Flooding
Protecting residences, businesses, parks, natural
resources, infrastructure, and energy resources from
flooding, storm surge and wave action is critical to
creating a resilient Stony Point. All of these resources
have been affected during past storms. Houses and
businesses were damaged and destroyed; natural
and cultural resources including waterfront and creekside parks were temporarily closed and/or suffered
loss of facilities due to flooding; wastewater conveyance and treatment systems were inundated and had
to be shut down; the supply of electricity was interrupted due to the exposure of transmission lines when
stream banks were eroded; and access to certain
areas of the town was cut off as a result of roads being
flooded or washed away. The Cedar Pond Brook

sewer line is at serious risk of collapse, largely due to
the overwhelming amount of stormwater runoff which
has eroded the sewer line’s protective berm and
exposed its support structure to the elements. Additionally, the infrastructure in place to protect waterfront properties, including jetties, bulkheads, and
seawalls, has been repeatedly damaged.

4. Uncertainty Surrounding Regional Energy
and Infrastructure Projects
The community indicated that several regional infrastructure projects are proposed within the Town. Critical to the community and to the implementation of the
NYRCR Plan is a better understanding of these projects, their location/route, and their potential shortand long-term effects. For example, the Committee is
concerned about the proposed Champlain Hudson
Power Express (CHPE) project, which may be constructed along the waterfront and could affect local
land uses including the Waldron Revolutionary War
Cemetery and the Ba Mar mobile home park, a lowincome community.

Damaged Boat Dock after Superstorm Sandy (Jim McDonnell)

Stony Point Ambulance Corps (Alice Brown)

I – 14

Section I: Community Overview

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

5. Synergy Between Local and Regional
Natural and Cultural Resources

preparedness, resilience, partnerships, and natural
resource protection.

Stony Point and the surrounding region are rich in
natural and cultural resources that draw visitors from
around the globe. These include the Stony Point Battlefield State Historic Site, Bear Mountain and Harriman State Parks, West Point, Iona Island, nesting and
wintering bald eagles and other wildlife, and the
Hudson River. The community stated that a critical
issue is the protection and promotion of these
resources to increase tourism in the Town and encourage those who visit to stay for longer periods of time.
This would improve the local and regional economy
while emphasizing the need for protection of these
resources, and would ultimately afford the Town the
ability to promote resilient development of the waterfront and beyond.

Extra care was taken in crafting language about
“making the community more resilient in the face of
future hazards.” Preliminary drafts of the vision statement had included the statement “preparing for flooding,” but there was Committee concern that this was
too negative and too limiting. By broadening the
statement to include a range of possible hazard conditions and a focus on resilience rather than disaster
preparedness, the vision makes a much more positive
statement about Stony Point’s future. Other topics
that came up in the Committee’s vision discussion
included the importance of the waterfront as an
“engine of opportunity” for the community and the
value of historic and natural resources as attractions
for tourists.

E. Community Vision
The Vision Statement for the Stony Point NY Rising
Community was developed by the Committee with
input from the community. The Vision Statement relies
heavily on Committee members’ familiarity with Stony
Point, the needs of the community relative to the
NYRCR study area boundary, and previous planning
efforts. A draft of the Vision Statement was shared
with the public at the first Public Engagement Meeting;
feedback from that meeting was extremely important
in finalizing the Vision Statement. More information
about public outreach can be found in Section V.C.
“Public Engagement Process.”
Through the visioning process, the Committee and the
Public worked to identify, assess, and conceptualize
local and regional opportunities for Stony Point. There
was general agreement that the vision statement
needed to not only describe the Stony Point of the
future, but also needed to identify specific ways to
attain that vision. Hence, the Committee and the
Public outlined short, medium, and long range goals
to help Stony Point build back better. These goals
were developed to address education, emergency

Boats in the Stony Point Harbor at Dusk (Chris Robbins)

Residents who provided feedback on the draft Vision
Statement at the public engagement meeting also
emphasized the importance of having the Statement
focus on the people of Stony Point, rather than just
the Town’s economy and natural resources. Resident
comments also included the importance of improved
mobility and transit and the duality of Stony Point’s
identity as both a mountainside and riverside
community.

Section I: Community Overview

I – 15

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

The final Vision Statement and goals are as follows:

Stony Point is a vibrant and connected riverfront
and hillside community. Our Vision is to preserve
our town’s history and protect our people and our
natural resources while making the community
more resilient in the face of future hazards and
attracting visitors to ensure an ecologically sound
and economically strong future for the people of
Stony Point.
Goals and objectives
Plan for better mobility and connectivity for people
in cars, on foot, and with transit
Cooperate with other regional entities
Improve waterfront access and infrastructure
Protect the watershed and strengthen stormwater
management practices
Redevelop historic assets while maintaining neighborhood fabric
Foster emergency readiness
Revitalize downtown businesses
Develop design and construction standards for resilience
Enhance historical, natural, and cultural attractions
for tourists
Retain and attract residents with a range of housing
options

F. Relationship to Regional
Plans
The storms and resulting damage from Hurricane
Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy
highlighted the need for coordinated planning initiatives and policies that can significantly contribute to
long-term regional resilience. Many regional planning

I – 16

Section I: Community Overview

efforts have been undertaken both before and after
the storms in the Mid-Hudson Region and in Rockland
County. In 2013, the Mid-Hudson Regional Sustainability Plan was released, laying out short-, mid-, and
long-term goals and strategic priorities for the region’s
development. The Mid-Hudson Regional Economic
Development Council also released a 5-Year Strategic
Plan in 2011, which presented specific goals for the
regional economy. In addition, Rockland County
developed a Comprehensive Plan in 2011 and a
Hazard Mitigation Plan in 2010.
These pre-existing regional planning efforts served as
the genesis for many projects that were identified
though the NYRCR process. Although Committee
members were tasked with representing the interests
of Stony Point, they became increasingly aware of the
importance of planning in a regional context. Community members worked together to create strategies
that were consistent with and supportive of regional
goals, including planning for the effects of severe
storms and flooding. Many of the regional planning
documents, including the “Rockland Tomorrow”
Master Plan and the Mid-Hudson Regional Sustainability Plan, identified the need for focused coordination and cooperation among communities to achieve
their goals. This sentiment is echoed by the Committee and their willingness to work toward the common
goal of mitigating future flood damage and creating a
more stable and climate resilient local and regional
economy.

The key for the Stony Point NYRCR Planning
Committee was to identify initiatives that would
not duplicate previously completed plans, and
to extract the initiatives, policies, projects, and
programs that had not yet been implemented,
addressed critical needs, and were critical to longterm resilience.
Table I-1 presents a list of available local and regional
planning documents and resources considered. These
documents were reviewed for information and data

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

A selection of regional plans reviewed by the
Committee: Rockland Tomorrow (2011), Revitalizing
Hudson Riverfronts (2010), and the Mid-Hudson
Regional Sustainability Plan (2013)

Section I: Community Overview

I – 17

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table I-1
Regional Plans

Plan Name

Shared Regional Plan Goal(s)

Relation to the NYRCR Stony Point Plan

Recommends actively promoting the Hudson River
as a vital regional resource, and conserving its
environmental and scenic quality as well as
maintaining physical and scenic access to the
greatest extent practicable

• Promotes access to the waterfront for both tourists and
residents

Rockland County Plans
Rockland Tomorrow: County
Comprehensive Plan (2011)

• Promotes water dependent uses along the Hudson
River
•Encourages creation of waterfront open space
• Promotes pedestrian access and public transportation
connection to the waterfront.

Rockland County Hazard
Mitigation Plan (2010)

•Promote disaster-resistant development

• Promotes resilience in development and redevelopment

•Build and support local capacity to enable the
public to prepare for, respond to, and recover from
disasters

•Promotes the development and enhancement of
evacuation centers and storm shelters

•Reduce the possibility of damage and losses due
to flooding caused by floods, hurricanes and
nor’easters, and storm surge

•Promotes storm preparedness and awareness through
public outreach and education
•Promotes the rehabilitation and retrofitting of at risk
infrastructure

• Reduce the possibility of damages to emergency
and critical facilities from damage due to flooding,
wildfires, and extreme winds
Mid-Hudson Region Plans
Cleaner, Greener Communities
Mid-Hudson Regional
Sustainability Plan (2013)

 ecommends planning for the effects of climate
R
change including severe storms and flooding, to
avoid costly damage to infrastructure, life, and
health

• Encourages the revision to the LWRP and Master Plan
to support and incorporate sustainability, energy
efficiency, resilience, and sea level rise

•Encourage Water-Dependent & Water-Enhanced
Uses in or Adjacent to Municipal Centers

•Recommends linking cultural and natural resources of
the Town and Region to create a tourist destination

•Connect People to the River

•Promotes the development of a Master Plan
incorporating Water-Dependent & Water-Enhanced Uses
that are connected to downtown Stony Point

•Recommend development of a waterfront area master
plan

Hudson River
Revitalizing Hudson Riverfronts
— Illustrated Conservation &
Development Strategies for
Creating Healthy, Prosperous
Communities (2010)

•Protect, Restore, & Rehabilitate Fish & Wildlife
Habitat

•Promotes access to the waterfront for both tourists and
residents

•Protect & Restore the Quality & Ecological
Function of Water Resources

•Considers mussel/oyster bed restoration feasibility
•Promotes rehabilitation of wastewater conveyance
to prevent overflow into Cedar Pond Brook and the
Hudson River
DRAFT Hudson River Estuary
Habitat Restoration Plan (July
2013)

• Restore side channels, including tidal wetlands,
vegetated shallow waters, back waters and
intertidal habitats

pertaining to the NYRCR planning process and to
assist in the identification of potential projects and
strategies that could be implemented to help Stony
Point build back better. Regional goals from the plans

I – 18

Section I: Community Overview

• Considers tidal wetland restoration north of Stony Point
Bay Marina and South of Stony Point Battlefield
• Considers Oyster reef / mussels reef restoration
feasibility

that have been incorporated into the NYRCR Plan are
listed along with a brief description of how the NYRCR
Plan relates to or builds upon the regional plans. The
findings are summarized in Table I-1.

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

The goal of this comprehensive document review was
to avoid duplication of existing planning studies and
projects, recognize gaps, and assess the potential
synergies between local and regional needs and
opportunities while considering how the NYRCR Plan
might support and incorporate regional goals and
perspectives.

increase resilience;
Conversion of underutilized waterfront land to open
space and appropriate water-dependent uses designed for resilience and to accommodate sea level
rise reduces risk, vulnerability, and cost of reconstruction in the event of natural disasters;

Key shared local and regional challenges identified by
the existing plan review included:

Upgrade and repair of infrastructure to address
areas of chronic flooding reduces roadway and culvert repair costs and limits road closures;

Planning for the effects of climate change, including severe storms and flooding, to avoid costly
damage to infrastructure, life, and health is a critical
step toward long term resilience;

Providing Hudson River waterfront access and additional funding for linking downtown areas with the
Hudson River waterfront provides economic benefits in increased tourism spending.

County, State, and Federal agencies responsible
for infrastructure maintenance, repair, and reconstruction have well considered long-term plans, but
are restricted by the lack of available funding;

Throughout the planning process, the Committee
reviewed many ideas for regional projects, all of which
supported goals set forth in the various previously
completed regional plans. Additional information on
these initiatives can be found in Section IV. “Implementation – Project Profiles.”

Additional coordination and cooperation between
municipalities and various local, state, and federal
agencies is required to decrease vulnerability and

Section I: Community Overview

I – 19

This Page Intentionally Blank

2014
NY RISING COMMUNITY
RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
NYRCR STONY POINT

Section II

Assessment of Risk and Needs

II

Assessment of Risks and Needs

A. Description of Community
Assets and Assessment of Risk

impacted in the future, or provide essential recovery
functions for residents and businesses in areas prone
to flooding.

i. Description of Community Assets
Purpose of Asset Inventory
Increasing resiliency in Stony Point begins with identifying various components of the community that can
be better protected. Assets are features valued by the
community that were impacted by Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy; are vulnerable to storm events; or are vital to the continued
operation of the community before, during, and after
storm events and therefore require additional attention in the future.
Review of Stony Point Community Asset Map, Public Engagement
Meeting #1 (Jason Hellendrung)

The Stony Point NYRCR Planning Committee identified assets include individual homes and residential
neighborhoods, businesses, schools, infrastructure,
emergency service and municipal buildings, natural
habitats and parks, and other cultural resources that
face future exposure. Many of these assets are highly
valued by community members, who expressed particular interest in protecting them.

Using existing GIS data, augmented by other State,
County, and local databases and maps, the list of
assets were assigned to one of the six following
classes: (1) economic; (2) health & social services; (3)
housing; (4) natural & cultural resources; (5) infrastructure; and (6) socially vulnerable populations.

The purpose of the Asset Inventory is to identify and
map these critical Community facilities and services
so that better protective measures may be developed
and implemented.

Infrastructure Systems: roads, bridges, culverts,
wastewater conveyance and treatment facilities, gas
stations, stormwater, and shoreline protection
systems.

Definition of Community Assets and
Systems
The Town of Stony Point identified assets that were
impacted by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and
Superstorm Sandy. These assets have either been
impacted by these storms, are at great risk of being

Natural and Cultural Resources: the Cedar Pond
Brook and other named and unnamed streams, the
Hudson River, various ponds, Iona Island, wetlands
and marshes, parks, recreation areas and open
spaces, historic landmarks, and arts and entertainment venues.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 1

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Economic Assets: the central business district Route
9W/Liberty Drive where assets in the downtown core
are grouped as a single-asset, supermarkets and
other commercial uses, seasonal or tourist destinations, and marinas, restaurants and industrial facilities
along and in close proximity to the Hudson River.
Heath and Social Services: pharmacies, hospitals,
health and social service providers, government and
administrative services, and critical emergency and
utility services such as police, fire, ambulance (EMS),
and public works facilities and providers.
Housing: residential neighborhoods (including singlefamily and multi-family dwellings and apartments
where buildings in the same neighborhood may be
grouped as a single asset), group homes, mobile
home parks, and senior housing developments.
Socially Vulnerable Populations: assets that serve
people with disabilities (i.e., Camp Venture), lowincome populations, the elderly and young children,
and people at risk of becoming or are currently homeless including shelters (i.e., Stony Point Center) and
Rockland Food Pantry.
Throughout the public engagement process, the
Committee augmented and refined the asset mapping
and list to represent a comprehensive inventory of
assets that are most critical to the town.

Methodology
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program
developed a standardized methodology for NYRCR
Communities to complete the asset inventory and
undertake the risk assessment. The methodology
included identifying, mapping, and categorizing
assets and evaluating the risk to those assets posed
by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy.
The key components of the Asset Inventory and Risk
Assessment process conducted for Stony Point are
as follows:

II – 2

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Collect preliminary mapping data;
Identify and address potential data gaps with the
state and town;
Present and review mapping data;
Create inventory of the Town’s assets, with information on important attributes;
Present and review asset inventory mapping;
Refine asset inventory with the Committee; and
Use the Risk Assessment Tool to evaluate risk to
assets (for more information about the tool, see
“Risk Assessment Tool” in Section II.A.ii., below).

Understanding Risk Areas
Understanding risk to assets with high community
value is particularly critical to identifying measures of
protection to mitigate impacts and increase asset and
community resiliency in the event of future storms.
To accomplish this goal, the Committee worked to
identify areas of extreme risk that have been repeatedly exposed to flood hazards. Any assets identified
by the Committee as subject to repeat flooding and
located within the 100-year floodplain were considered to be subject to extreme risk. Those that may
have been affected by past flooding and/or are located
within the 500-year floodplain were identified as being
located in a High Risk Area. Additionally, there were a
number of assets identified by the Committee as
subject to repeat flooding that were not located in a
mapped floodplain but were still included in the
Extreme or High Risk Area in order to reflect community input and observations. Assets not located in a
risk area or reported as repeat flood hazards were not
considered for exposure evaluation, as assets located
outside of risk areas automatically have risk scores of
zero in the Risk Assessment Tool. Assets that are
themselves surface water resources (i.e., streams,
brooks, ponds, falls, and wetlands) were also not
subject to the risk assessment process.

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

inventory lists at four additional Committee meetings.
In between these meetings, a group of Committee
members met to refine the asset inventory and refine
the asset data analysis and mapping. The Committee
organized a tour of the Town to further define their
asset list, refine the asset mapping and provide
context to the Planning Team.

Attendees Review the Asset Inventory, Public Engagement Meeting
#2 (Jason Hellendrung)

Public Engagement (Identifying Assets and
Determining Community Value)
The Committee identified assets key to the functioning of their community that were impacted by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm
Sandy from the start of this process.
The asset inventory began with informal group discussions at the first Committee meeting focusing on key
assets that were damaged by Superstorm Sandy,
Hurricane Irene, and/or Tropical Storm Lee. Group
discussion focused on better understanding the asset
inventory and risk analysis process and how assets,
including roads and waterways, emergency service
facilities and communications, impact assets in Town
and throughout the region. As the Town of Stony Point
has assets that were impacted by Superstorm Sandy
and/or the combined Lee and Irene storms, the Committee decided to divide their assets into two categories, coastal and riverine. With the assets divided into
these two groups, the Risk Assessment Tool could be
applied in a more tailored way to each of the two
groups of assets to reflect the specific types of
impacts that affected each group.
Following the preliminary discussion, the Committee
reviewed and revised the asset mapping and

Once the asset list was established, a separate survey
of the assets was carried out to provide more details
on these important Town resources. In addition to
preparing an inventory of critical assets, the Committee assigned a community value to each asset
expressed as high, medium, or low. The Committee
decided that valuation (high, medium, low) of the
assets would be left to each individual Committee
member’s interpretation.
Tables of riverine and coastal assets, including all of
the information needed to conduct the risk assessments, were developed and presented to the Committee. The Committee provided input on the asset location, asset class, asset subcategory, socially vulnerable
populations and—to a lesser extent—whether or not it
is a critical facility as defined by FEMA as well as
associated landscape attributes. The Committee was
also instrumental in identifying assets that were
outside of the mapped risk areas, which were then
added to the asset inventory.
To gain understanding of the impacts of historic
storms to a community’s identified assets, the committee was asked to complete a questionnaire outlining the performance of each asset during recent
storms. Furthermore, the committee was asked to
provide information as to whether or not, to the best of
their knowledge, the asset’s critical features, including
electrical and mechanical equipment, are located in a
vulnerable area.
The asset inventory and mapping were presented at
Public Engagement Meeting #1, held on October 16,
2013. Attendees were asked to review the inventory
and mapping, comment on those assets already identified, provide input on additional assets for

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 3

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

consideration in the planning process, and value the
assets. The key result of community input at Public
Engagement Meeting #1 was that all assets that were
mapped were high- and medium-priority. Any asset
that was damaged in the storm or in danger of potential future damage should be the focus of the NYRCR
planning process.

Chris Robbins Presents the NYRCR Program, Public Engagement
Meeting #2 (Jason Hellendrung)

Additional assets identified at the Public Engagement
Meeting were added to the inventory and the asset
maps. These revised materials were presented to the
Committee at subsequent meetings. As before,
members endeavored, at and outside of meetings, to
provide all needed details on each asset for inclusion
in the final inventory and to assist with the assessment of risk. Other information needed to complete
the vulnerability scoring was obtained from site visits,
aerial imagery, and/or national and regional mapping
data.
The final asset inventory and mapping is provided in
Figure II-1.

II – 4

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Community Assets
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53

Patsy’s Bay Marina I and II
Stony Point Bay Marina
Vincent A. Clark Riverview Park & Kayak Access
Minisceongo Yacht Club/Marina
Access to Grassy Point Road Bridge (Penny Bridge)
River Front Park
Gilligan’s on the Hudson
Ba Mar Mobile Home Park
Stony Point Center
Charles S. Eccher/Lowland Park
Four houses on Lighthouse Court
Kings Ferry Landing/State-owned houses
Letchworth Village
Beach Road Sewage Pump Station
Letchworth Village/RHO Emergency Services
Wastewater Treatment Plant
PANCO site
Boy Scout Camp Bullowa
Camp Addison Boyce - Girl Scout
Stony Point Ambulance
North Rockland soccer fields
US Gypsum Manufacturing facility
Rockland Food Pantry
Central Dr (Rte 210)/Gate Hill Rd and Bridges
Willow Grove Road near entrance to PIP
US Gypsum Water Tower
Stony Point Police Department
Grassy Point Road
River Road
Jones Point
770 N. Liberty Drive RT & other RT9W houses
Seaweed Yacht Club
CSX
TZ Marine Services
WH Kassner
River Road (Housing)
Grassy Point Road (Housing)
Beach Road (Housing)
Cedar Flats Mobile Home Park
Kay Fries Sanitary By-Pass Pump Station
Cedar Flats Road
Reservoir Road and Bridge
Beach Road
Lowland Hill Road and Bridge
Town Hall
Beach Road Interceptor Sewer
Surfside 3 at Penny Bridge Marina
Laurel Drive Park
Library
Wayne Hose Fire Station
Stony Point Town Garage
Kayak access point - Haverstraw
Cedar Pond Brook Interceptor Sewer

STON Y POIN T N Y R IS IN G Community Reconstruction Plan

FIGURE II-1 Community Assets
Figure II-1
Community Assets

! !

!
(

! !

2

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

!
(

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

!
(
1

!
(
50

!
(!
(
!
(
!
(

!
(
Hudson River

!
(

!
(
!
(
!
(!
(
!
(
14

m
Pu
To

!
(

!
(

pS

ion
tat

5

4

47

28

17

26

!
(
53

Brook
Pond
Cedar

6
37 7

16

36

!
(

22

18

29

!
(

!
(

INE
SL
PAS
BY

k
ree

!
(
52

! !

9

42

27

!
(
(
!
( !
15

48

13

50
49
45
10
44
20

51

2

! !

25

! !

! !

! !

! !

Flood Zones:
FEMA & NYS

ATT Trunk Line

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

! !

1
34
32
38

46
43 n
3atio
23
St
p 14
5
um
P
8
To

53

40

4 47
17
28 16
37
76
26 22 36
29

Base Map:
ESRI
March 20, 2014
Putnam
Orange

52

INE
SL
PAS
BY

Minisceongo Creek

Miles
1

Municipal Boundaries:
NYS

33

24
Ced ar P
ond Bro
ok

is
MinSources: Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, USGS, Intermap, iPC,

Data Sources

!
(
!
!
(
(
(
!
( !
!
(
!
!
( !
(
!
(
(
!
(
!
( !
(
(!
(
(
(!
! !
(
!
!
(
(!
!
(!
(
!
(!
!
!
(
(
!
(
(
!
(
!
(
!
(!
!
(
!
(
!
(
!
( !
(
!
(
( !
(

41

NRCAN, Esri Japan, METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), Esri
(Thailand), TomTom, 2013

0.5

12
12

39

oC
ng
ceo

Hudson River

!
(
!
(

11

!
(
!
(

40

0

Natural & Cultural Resources

35

!
( (
!
( !(
!!
!
(
((
!
!
( !
( !
(
!
( !
(

8

20

Infrastructure

500 year

!
(

19

3

23

Housing

100 year

43

44

Health & Social Services

V - 100 Year Plus Waves

46

10

Economic

Flood Zone

38

49
45

±

!
(
!
(
!
(
!
(
!
(

32

51

!
(!
(
!
(
!
(

Asset Class

31

34

!
(

Geographic Scope

30

ATT Trunk Line

Westchester

Rockland

!
(
21

Sources: Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, USGS, Intermap, iPC, NRCAN, Esri Japan, METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), Esri (Thailand), TomTom,
2013

Bronx

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Nassau

II – 5

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

ii. Assessment of Risk to Assets and
Systems
The fundamental goal of the NYRCR program is to
support the recovery and increase the resilience of the
Stony Point community. To accomplish this, the community needs to better understand the risk to, and
vulnerability of, its assets to the impact of storms.
Often, communities do not even realize that certain
areas, roads, buildings, or other vital facilities are at
risk until it is too late and the damage is already done.

It is only when we all better understand the risk to
our key community features that we are better able
to protect them in the future. This assessment of
risk attempts to accomplish that goal.
We take precautions to protect ourselves from routine
storm events: cleaning out gutters, trimming tree
branches, and making sure catch-basins are cleared
of debris. We are accustomed to performing regular
maintenance because we understand that nature is
powerful, but generally predictable. Sometimes, during
average-scale wind, rain, or snow storms, trees fall on
roadways, taking with them power lines and parts of
structures. People often view this as a by-product of
creating a built environment within a natural
environment. But the damage caused by Superstorm

The Aftermath of Superstorm Sandy (Thomas McGuire)

II – 6

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical Storm Lee far
surpassed the levels of impact and damage that could
be expected from one storm. The results were catastrophic, reminding everyone how vulnerable we are.
The Stony Point NYRCR Community went through a
lengthy process of identifying not only the assets that
were damaged in the storm events, but also the assets
that were in danger of damage by future storms and
those that are otherwise important to the community.
This process was fundamentally assessing their risk.
Throughout October and November 2013, the Committee reviewed base maps for Stony Point marking
specific asset locations for risk assessment. Over the
course of 10 meetings, the Committee reviewed the
risk assessment process and provided input on the
overall risk evaluation methodology, which is described
in further detail below. The Committee participated in
the development of hazard, exposure, and vulnerability scoring for each community asset. Further discussions dealt with grouping community assets located in
close proximity to one another in order to increase the
efficiency of the assessment, and understanding how
asset grouping would affect overall risk to the asset.
This process resulted in a list of Stony Point’s assets,
the risk scores, and a map of the assets with color
coding for those risk scores.

Overview of Risk Assessment
Methodology
The Risk Assessment process was performed using
the Risk Assessment Tool provided by the New York
State Department of State (NYS DOS). The risk assessment process involved using this tool to first identify
“unmitigated” risk scores for assets or asset groups
without proposed projects in place. Developing unmitigated risk scores required determining the exposure
and vulnerability of assets through a process of
mapping, gathering informational inputs from the
Committee, and following consistent methodologies
to determine landscape attributes and vulnerability
scores for each asset. Figure II-2 provides an overview
of the general risk assessment process, which is
further described in the sections that follow.

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk Assessment Tool

Determining Hazard Score

Using the asset inventory developed by the Committee and the community, the risk assessment process
was performed using the Risk Assessment Tool.
Unpopulated versions of the Risk Assessment Tool for
coastal and riverine assets are presented in Figures
II-3 and II-4. The tool, developed by the NYS DOS,
synthesizes information from the asset inventory,
hazard maps, and qualitative exposure assessments
into hazard, exposure, and vulnerability scores. These
are combined into one quantitative risk score. Other
information, including the asset class, whether the
asset serves socially vulnerable populations, whether
the asset is a critical facility, or the asset’s community
value, can help inform a community about the benefits
or priority of potential projects, but does not contribute to the asset’s quantitative risk score.

The hazard score in the Risk Assessment Tool is
based on the likelihood that a flooding event will occur
and the magnitude, or destructive capacity, of the
event. Likelihood is derived from the storm recurrence
interval within the selected time frame. For the purposes of this evaluation, the hazard score corresponding to a 100-year storm event (the storm with a 1%
chance of occurring in any given year) was used for all
assets.

Determining Exposure Score
Exposure in the Risk Assessment Tool is based on
both the risk area within which an asset or asset group
is located and the local topographic and geographic
conditions of its surroundings, or its landscape attributes. Once both the risk area and landscape attributes are determined, an exposure score is calculated.

Figure II-2: Overview of Risk Assessment Process

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 7

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure II-3: Risk Assessment Tool – Coastal Assets

Figure II-4: Risk Assessment Tool – Riverine Assets

Both risk area and landscape attribute determination
are further described below.

Risk Area
Stony Point is subject to both coastal and riverine
flooding hazards. Coastal areas are delineated as
areas at risk of flooding from bodies of water subject
to tidal influence, while riverine areas are those that
are at risk of flooding from non-tidal rivers and streams.
In general, coastal areas in Stony Point are those
along the Hudson River shoreline. Given these dual
flooding risks, multiple sources of information for flood
risk identification were used. Maps of the 100- and
500-year Rockland County Flood Zones, obtained as
part of the FEMA Q3 Flood Zone Data, were used to
identify areas of high and moderate risk, respectively.
An asset’s risk area was then determined by overlaying assets with the flood risk areas. Areas of extreme
risk were identified as those either within the coastal
area subject to waves during storms, called the
V-zone, or identified by the Committee to have been
repeatedly affected by historic floods.
Assets not located in a risk area or reported as repeat
flood hazards were not considered for exposure evaluation, as assets located outside of risk areas automatically
have risk scores of zero in the Risk Assessment Tool.

II – 8

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Flooding along Beach Road, an Extreme Risk Area
(Dominick Posillipo)

Landscape Attribute Determination
The two types of flood risk present in Stony Point,
coastal and riverine, reflect the two types of landscapes surrounding assets in the area. Each landscape type has unique attributes considered in the
risk assessment.
As shown in Figures II-3 and II-4, there are six unique
landscape attributes considered separately for coastal
and riverine assets when evaluating exposure. Cumulatively, the nature, condition, and presence or

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

absence of these attributes defines the degree of
exposure of a geographic location.
Assets within risk areas of similar landscape characteristics were grouped to evaluate multiple assets at
once. Assets whose landscape characteristics did not
conform to those of others nearby were considered
individually.
Data sources used for landscape attribute determinations include national and state mapping resources,
aerial imagery, site visits, and input from local residents and authorities. For example, the most recent
FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), showing
the water level elevations of the 100-year flood, were
compared to elevation data for each asset location.
This comparison was used to evaluate whether the
asset is below the likely flood level, which increases
risk. The National Hydrography Dataset was used to
investigate whether a point of confluence of two
streams was present in the immediate vicinity of the
asset location, thus also increasing flood risk.

Coastal landscape areas are susceptible to storm surge and wave
action, such as these marinas along Beach Road. (Chris Robbins)

A completed example of a landscape attribute determination worksheet is provided in Section V.D, Figure V-1.
By completing the landscape attribute determination
worksheets for each asset or asset area, all of the
answers needed to create a landscape attribute score
in the Risk Assessment Tool were determined. With
the combination of the landscape attribute score and
the particular risk area of the asset determined, the
exposure score for the asset or asset area was calculated in the Risk Assessment Tool.

Determining Vulnerability Score
The vulnerability of an asset is defined as an expression of the capacity of an asset to return to service
after a storm, taking into account its material strength
relative to the flood hazard as well its regenerative
capacity. To effectively evaluate this metric, several
asset characteristics were considered, including the
impacts to the asset during historic storm events, the
construction materials of the asset, the physical

Riverine landscape areas are at risk of flooding from creeks and
streams overtopping their banks. Here, the Cedar Pond Brook at
Liberty Drive. (Alice Brown)

condition of the asset, the presence of any critical
features such as utilities or important equipment in
flood-prone locations, occupation by vulnerable populations, and the elevation of the asset relative to the
FEMA-tabulated flood elevation. All of these factors
contribute, to varying degrees, to an asset’s ability to
withstand and recover from storm events.
The qualitative characteristics listed above were
entered into a matrix in order to obtain a quantitative
vulnerability score that could be used in the Risk
Assessment Tool. The vulnerability score is a numeric
value from 1 through 5, with 5 representing the most

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 9

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

vulnerable condition, and 1 representing the least vulnerable. A completed example of a vulnerability score
determination worksheet is provided in Section V.D,
Figure V-2.
The vulnerability scoring process and the resultant
scores were presented to and reviewed by the Committee to ensure acceptance and understanding of
both methodology and results.

Risk Scoring
Once all of the required information was entered into
the risk tool, risk scores were calculated within the
tool for each asset by multiplying the hazard score,
exposure score, and vulnerability score (i.e., Hazard x
Exposure x Vulnerability = Risk). The risk scores
provide a quantitative comparison of the risk to different assets within a community. Risk scores range from
0 to 75, with the following ranges signifying the following degrees of risk:
<6: Residual risk;
6-23: Moderate risk;
24-53: High risk; and
>53: Severe risk.
Asset groups and individual assets were then drawn
on risk area maps to visually depict asset risk as well
as identify the areas of a community with the highest
concentration of assets at risk. These maps, in conjunction with the completed Risk Assessment Tool,
were then presented to the Committee for the purpose
of assessing completeness and alignment with
expectations.

Unmitigated Risk Scoring Results
Following the process discussed above, the risk
scores of the identified assets without any projects in
place, deemed “unmitigated” risk scores, were compiled for the assets and systems identified by the
Committee. The resulting risk assessment scoring
spreadsheets are presented in Section V.D. The unmitigated risk scores are presented graphically in Figures

II – 10

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II-5 and II-6 providing a visual representation of the four
risk categories: residual, moderate, high and severe.
From the unmitigated risk scoring maps (Figures II-5
and II-6), it is clear that the areas of Stony Point along
the Hudson River, in particular the approximately onemile stretch of shoreline from Stony Point Battlefield
State Historic Site to Grassy Point Road and the
entirety of Grassy Point, represent the highest concentration of high and severe risk scores. This is consistent with expectations, given the low topography of
the areas along the river and the reportedly severe
impacts to these areas during historic storm events.
In particular, housing assets in low-lying areas along
the Hudson River, listed on the risk score map as
Beach Road Housing and Coastal Housing – South,
were identified as subject to severe risk. The severe
risk scores are driven largely by the significant impacts
to these assets during historic storms reported by the
Committee. In addition to effects of historic storms,
the geographic features between these assets and the
flood source do not offer means of protection to the
assets, resulting in a high exposure score. The economic assets in these areas along Beach Road and on
Grassy Point are identified as being at severe risk as
well, similarly driven by their exposed geographic
location and critical impacts of historic storms.
The groups of assets of similar type and risk category
reflect the risk to critical systems within the community.
In particular, the network of coastal roads and bridges,
the coastal wastewater infrastructure system, and the
CSX train track system were identified as subject to
high risk. All of these systems are in areas of low elevation and in close proximity to flood sources.
The Wastewater Treatment Plant, located on Grassy
Point, is in a highly exposed location, without any
geographic features in place to buffer it from the
effects of a storm. Accordingly, the plant was subject
to flooding during Superstorm Sandy. However, the
duration of the effects of the flood on the plant was
limited, which resulted in a low vulnerability score for
the asset. Similar risk scoring results can be observed

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

for the variety of natural and cultural resources located
along the Hudson River shoreline, including Vincent A.
Clark Riverview Park & Kayak Access, Riverfront Park,
and the kayak access point in Haverstraw, ultimately
leading to placement in the high risk category rather
than the severe risk category.
There are also twelve assets at moderate or high risk in
inland areas due to riverine flooding hazards, five of
which are sections of road crossing streams, creeks,
and other flood sources. Charles S. Eccher Lowland
Park and Lowland Hill Road are, as their names suggest,
at a low elevation relative to the Base Flood Elevation
(BFE), and thus have high exposure scores. Accordingly,
they are in the high risk score category. The Cedar Pond
Brook Interceptor Sewer, which runs along the shoreline
of Cedar Pond Brook, is also in a highly exposed location. Though it did not experience interruptions in service
during historic storms, it is reported as currently in precarious condition as a result of those storms, and thus
has the highest risk score of all the identified riverine
assets. Some of the identified inland assets are not

necessarily in highly exposed locations, but were
affected, either directly or indirectly, by historic storm
events. For example, the Stony Point Center has a low
exposure score, and the asset itself was not adversely
affected by historic storms, but access to the facility was
inhibited for a period of time after Superstorm Sandy,
resulting in a moderate risk score.
Though the risk scores of Stony Point assets vary
widely, some overall trends can be interpreted from
these results. In general, assets along the Hudson
River shoreline are highly exposed to flood hazards,
resulting in high and severe risk scores. Housing and
economic assets and infrastructure systems along
Beach Road and on Grassy Point are all at significant
risk. Risk to all of these assets will likely only be exacerbated by sea level rise anticipated to occur over the
next century. Additionally, assets located inland from
the Hudson River are subject to moderate and high
risks due to riverine flooding, though the risk scores of
these assets are generally lower than those located
along the Hudson River.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 11

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

FIGURE II-5 Risk Area Map – Extents
Figure II-5
Flood Risk to Assets - Extent
Geographic Scope

Coastal Housing - North

Risk Score Categories

!
!
!
!

Jones Point
770 N. Liberty Drive & Other
Rte. 9W Homes

Girl Scout Camp Addison Boyce

WH Kassner

Residual
Moderate
High
Severe

Flood Zone
V - 100 Year Plus Waves

!

!
Cedar Flats Road &
Mobile Home Park

II – 12

0.5

King's Ferry Landing

!

Data Sources
Municipal Boundaries:
NYS

Stony Point Center

Reservoir Road
& Bridge

Miles
1

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

ok

!

Base Map:
ESRI

!

!

Flood Zones:
FEMA & NYS

See Figure II-6 for Inset

! !

North Rockland
Soccer Fields

Minisceongo Creek

0

Lighthouse Court

!

!

Laurel Drive Park

±

Asset Name

Boy Scout Camp Bullowa

Cedar P
o nd Br o
Willow Grove Road

500 year

CSX Rail Lines

!
Central Drive (Rt. 210) /
Gate Hill Rd and Bridges

100 year

!

March 20, 2014

!!
!!
!

Hudson River

Sources: Esri, DeLorme, HERE, USGS, Intermap, increment P Corp., NRCAN, Esri Japan, METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), Esri (Thailand),
TomTom

Putnam
Orange

Rockland

Westchester

STON Y POIN T N Y R IS IN G Community Reconstruction Plan

FIGURE II-6 Risk Area Map – Inset
Figure II-6
Flood Risk to Assets - Inset
Geographic Scope

Beach Road Housing

Coastal Road & Bridges

!
!
!
!

Grassy Point Road
River Road
Beach Road
Penny Bridge

Beach Road Economic Assets
Patsy's Bay Marina I and II
Stony Point Bay Marina
Seaweed Yacht Club
TZ Marine Services

Grassy Point Economic Assets
Surfside 3 at Penny Bridge Marina
Gilligan's on the Hudson
PANCO Site
Minisceongo Yacht Club/Marina

Lowland Hill Road
and Bridge

!

Risk Score Categories

Moderate
High
Severe

Flood Zone
V - 100 Year Plus Waves
100 year
500 year

Asset Name

!

Vincent Clark
River View Park

River Front Park

Lowland Park

!
Cedar Pond Brook
Interceptor Sewer

Residual

P
Cedar

r ook
o nd B

!

US Gypsum
Water Tower

Stony Point Wastewater
Treatment Plant

Data Sources
Municipal Boundaries:
NYS

!
!

Coastal Housing South

Flood Zones:
FEMA & NYS

River Road Housing
Grassy Point Housing

Base Map:
ESRI
March 20, 2014

Coastal Infrastructure
Beach Road Sewage Pump Station
Beach Road Interceptor Sewer Line
Kay Fries Sanitary Bypass Pump Station

±

00

0.5 1,000

Miles
1

Feet
2,000

eo
isc
n
i
M

ng

o

ek
Cr e

!

US Gypsum
Manufacturing
Facility

Haverstraw Kayak Access

Putnam
Orange

Rockland

Westchester

Sources: Esri, DeLorme, HERE, USGS, Intermap, increment P Corp., NRCAN, Esri Japan, METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), Esri
(Thailand), TomTom

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 13

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table II-1
Flood Risk to Assets Located in Risk Areas
Map
Asset
#

Asset Name

Asset
Class

Asset
Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Flood
Risk
Area

Risk
Score

1

Patsy’s Bay Marina I
and II

Economic

Marina/Water
Based Business

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Severe

2

Stony Point Bay
Marina

Economic

Marina/Water
Based Business

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Severe

3

Vincent A. Clark
Riverview Park &
Kayak Access

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and
Recreation

Yes

No

High

Extreme

High

4

Minisceongo Yacht
Club/Marina

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Severe

5

Access to Grassy
Point Road Bridge
(Penny Bridge)

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Extreme

High

6

River Front Park

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and
Recreation

Yes

No

High

Extreme

High

7

Gilligan's on the
Hudson

Economic

Restaurants

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Severe

8

Ba Mar Mobile Home
Park

Housing

Single-Family
Residence

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Severe

9

Stony Point Center

Health and
Social
Services

Emergency
Operations/
Response

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

High

Moderate

10

Charles S. Eccher/
Lowland Park

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and
Recreation

Yes

No

High

Extreme

High

11

Four houses on
Lighthouse Court

Housing

Single-Family
Residence

Yes

No

Medium

Moderate

Moderate

12

King’s Ferry Landing

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Historic
Landmarks and
Facilities

No

No

High

Extreme

Moderate

14

Beach Road Sewage
Pump Station

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Extreme

High

16

Wastewater Treatment
Plant

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Extreme

High

17

PANCO Site

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Severe

18

Boy Scout Camp
Bullowa

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and
Recreation

Yes

No

High

Extreme

High

19

Camp Addison Boyce
- Girl Scout

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Natural Habitats

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Moderate

21

North Rockland
soccer fields

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and
Recreation

No

No

Medium

Extreme

Moderate

22

US Gypsum
Manufacturing facility

Economic

Large Business

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Moderate

24

Central Dr (Rte 210)/
Gate Hill Rd and
Bridges

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

High

High

Moderate

II – 14

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table II-1
Flood Risk to Assets Located in Risk Areas (Cont’d)
Map
Asset
#

Asset Name

Asset
Class

Asset
Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Flood
Risk
Area

Risk
Score

25

Willow Grove Road
near entrance to PIP

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

High

Extreme

High

26

US Gypsum Water
Tower

Infrastructure
Systems

Large Business

No

No

Medium

High

Moderate

28

Grassy Point Road

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Extreme

High

29

River Road

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Extreme

High

30

Jones Point

Housing

Multi-Family
Residence

Yes

No

High

Extreme

High

31

770 N. Liberty Drive
RT & other RT9W
houses

Housing

Single-Family
Residence

Yes

No

High

Extreme

High

32

Seaweed Yacht Club

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Severe

33

CSX

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No

High

Extreme

High

34

TZ Marine Services

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Extreme

Severe

35

WH Kassner

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Medium

Extreme

High

36

River Road (Housing)

Housing

Single-Family
Residence

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Severe

37

Grassy Point Road
(Housing)

Housing

Single-Family
Residence

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Severe

38

Beach Road (Housing)

Housing

Single-Family
Residence

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Severe

39

Cedar Flats Mobile
Home Park

Housing

Affordable
Housing

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Moderate

40

Kay Fries Sanitary
By-Pass Pump Station

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Extreme

High

41

Cedar Flats Road

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Moderate

42

Reservoir Road and
Bridge

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No

High

Extreme

High

43

Beach Road

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Extreme

High

44

Lowland Hill Road and
Bridge

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Extreme

High

46

Beach Road
Interceptor Sewer

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Extreme

High

47

Surfside 3 at Penny
Bridge Marina

Economic

Marina/Water
Based Business

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Severe

48

Laurel Drive Park

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and
Recreation

No

No

Medium

Moderate

Residual

52

Kayak access point
- Haverstraw

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and
Recreation

No

No

Low

Extreme

High

53

Cedar Pond Brook
Interceptor Sewer

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Extreme

High

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 15

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Assessment of Needs and
Opportunities
The assessment of needs and opportunities was
undertaken to identify which issues need to be
addressed in Stony Point in the aftermath of Hurricane
Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy, and
identify the opportunities that are available to address
these needs. Stony Point suffered significant impacts
during these storm events, forcing the Town to reexamine its current emergency preparedness, response,
and recovery systems. Systems that had once
appeared resilient now seemed exposed in the face of
unparalleled natural disasters. Firsthand experience
of these events helped highlight the inadequacies of
the existing systems of flood mitigation in the Town,
revealing vulnerabilities but providing opportunities to
identify and strengthen the key systems that support
a community’s recovery. NYRCR funding will enable
Stony Point to address these vulnerabilities while
taking full advantage of the identified opportunities.
After the asset inventory and mapping were completed, the Committee was able to understand community assets as being part of systems that protect
the community. The Committee evaluated where gaps
existed in current protective measures and identified
the elements that needed to be addressed to make
the community safer, all the while pinpointing opportunities to maximize the use of existing resources.
Identifying vulnerable and exposed systems enabled
the Committee to extract specific short- and longterm needs. Focusing on these challenges and how
they may be addressed helped reveal the numerous
opportunities that exist to develop more resilient community networks in Stony Point. Needs and opportunities can relate to direct damage caused by the
storms, lost opportunities resulting from the storms,
efforts to make existing assets more resilient, or issues
that predated the storms entirely.
The Committee’s analysis of needs and opportunities
was enhanced by input from the public at two Public
Engagement Meetings, where members of the Stony
Point community were able to weigh in on draft lists
II – 16

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

that the Committee had compiled. This process was
critical to developing a better understanding of the
broad array of needs the community faces as a result of
significant storms, and the opportunities present in the
Town. Once completed, the list of needs and opportunities was instrumental in developing the many projects
the Committee has put forward in this Plan.

Community Planning and
Capacity Building
Community Planning and Capacity Building incorporates Stony Point’s ability to implement storm recovery programs and activities and to plan for resiliency
and recovery for future events. It encompasses laws,
regulations, and planning activities, as well as civic
engagement and public education. In the wake of
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, prior work on
Community Planning and Capacity Building activities
in Stony Point proved its worth – homes that had been
raised stood firm, evacuations along the Hudson River
moved people out of harm’s way, and shelter facilities
were put to good use. However, a great deal of work
remains to be done as is evidenced by the damage
Stony Point incurred.

Education and Access to Information
The community has identified a need for improved
awareness of emergency preparedness, response,
and recovery procedures and best practices, which is
partly based on a lack of access to the information
that exists. The recent storms shed light on the difficulty of accessing this information. Evacuation routes
are unmarked and residents have expressed uncertainty regarding access routes out of the flood zone
during storm events. Emergency evacuation outreach
in advance of the storms would have benefited from a
more thorough understanding on the part of residents
of their options and responsibilities in advance of a
disaster. Emergency communications were lacking
during and after the storm despite the existence of a
town radio station that could have been used to communicate with residents. Since the storm, home and
business owners have been frustrated by problems

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

The six key NYRCR Recovery Support Functions (RSFs) were established by President Barack Obama
in 2011 through the National Disaster Recovery Framework. The RSFs were designed to “support local
governments by facilitating problem solving, improving access to resources, and fostering coordination
among State and Federal agencies, nongovernmental partners and stakeholders” (http://www.fema.
gov/recovery-support-functions). The following sections summarize these RSFs and their relevance to
Stony Point.

Community Planning and Capacity Building

Health and Social Services

Planning activities will enable Stony Point to
implement storm recovery activities and mitigate
the effects of future storms. Building and zoning
regulations and land use plans form the basis for
responding to the damage that may result from
future storm events. Public outreach and education make information available to the public and
are critical to implementing plans.

During Superstorm Sandy, the initial evacuation
center at the police station was overcrowded
within hours. Without the Stony Point Center,
families would have had to find temporary housing
elsewhere, likely outside of the Town. Providing
adequate shelters and ensuring that residents are
aware of these facilities are critical to the Town’s
resilience.

Economic Development

Infrastructure Systems

Stony Point’s business activities were interrupted
during and after the recent storms. Providing
businesses with the means to quickly reopen
after natural disasters is critical to ensuring the
Town’s economic future, as is diversifying the
Town’s economy through enhanced waterfront
businesses, tourism, and industry.

Stony Point experienced damage to critical infrastructure during Hurricane Irene and Superstorm
Sandy, including flooding and undermining of
sewer lines and facilities, and flooding and
damage to roads and transportation routes
throughout the Town. Protecting this infrastructure is essential, especially along the Hudson
River where damages have been most severe.

Housing
Housing located in risk areas across the Town,
and especially along the Hudson River, has been
damaged by flooding, storm surge, and wave
action. This housing remains vulnerable without
new resilience practices including elevation and
floodproofing. Additionally, assessing alternate
housing locations for the most vulnerable populations outside of risk areas is an important goal for
the Town.

Natural and Cultural Resources
Capitalizing on the resiliency potential of the
Town’s natural resources is a primary goal for
Stony Point. Restoring stream channels, tidal
wetlands, and other natural infrastructure would
protect the waterfront and upland areas against
further damage, while providing habitat and
making the Town a more beautiful place to live
and visit.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 17

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

obtaining information on recovery programs, available
funding, and other recovery resources. This lack of
access to information has been especially difficult for
socially disadvantaged groups, including the residents
of Ba Mar mobile home park, who experienced severe
losses during Superstorm Sandy. Emergency evacuation and response information and procedures are not
widely understood, and some of these documents are
only provided in English, despite the presence of a nonEnglish-speaking community in town. Hazard mitigation planning documents may be in need of updates.
The community has identified several opportunities
for improvements in this area. Fuller use of the existing radio station can serve as a basis for enhancing
communication before, during and after storm events;
such communication could be further expanded using
the Town website and email listserv/mailing list. Additional evacuation and response materials could be
developed in collaboration with existing organizations
in the town, such as the local Chamber of Commerce.
Another existing resource is Stony Point’s Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP), a planning
document for the waterfront area that could be used
as the basis of storm-related enhancements to the
waterfront. An opportunity exists to involve the nonEnglish-speaking community in developing informational and educational materials in Spanish, among
other languages, and disseminating that information
to those who need it. The existing evacuation plan for
Indian Point could be used as a starting point for
developing evacuation routes and procedures for
severe weather events.

Economic Development
Economic Development in the wake of disaster is
concerned with returning economic activity back to
good health as quickly as possible, as well as enhancing the local economy by creating new economic
opportunities. In Stony Point, Hurricane Irene, Tropical
Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy were major setbacks for the Town’s economy, particularly along the

II – 18

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

waterfront, where businesses sustained damage and
some have yet to reopen.

Stronger Economic Base
Past storm events, and in particular Hurricane Irene,
Tropical Storm Lee and Superstorm Sandy, have
caused severe damage to economic assets in the
town and have disrupted commerce and tourism. The
community has identified rebuilding the Town’s economic base as an important need. There are two
centers for the town’s economy: the downtown area
and the waterfront. The Committee expressed that the
downtown is stagnant and could be improved through
developing a more attractive, vibrant “town center.”
This can be achieved in part through better pedestrian
facilities and public transportation options, which
would bring more people to the downtown and give
the area a walkable, downtown feel. The waterfront
has also been identified as needing further investment
to increase tourism. While the town has several tourist
attractions including the Stony Point Battlefield and
Bear Mountain and Harriman State Parks, the Appalachian Trail, and the planned Washington Rochambeau
Revolutionary Route National Historic Trail, these
facilities are distant from the town center and waterfront and tourists generally do not stay in town after
visiting these attractions. A better-developed town
center and waterfront could capture more of this
tourism potential. The community has also expressed
that improved communication between the town and
the business community could facilitate improved
economic conditions.
Several opportunities have been identified for revitalizing Stony Point’s economy. Stony Point’s LWRP
contains recommendations for improving the economy
of the Town’s waterfront. Another plan exists for redevelopment of the Liberty Drive corridor into more of a
“Town Center”; development could be encouraged to
take place in line with these planning documents. A
number of underutilized sites exist in the Town and
that may present the opportunity for redevelopment,
including the U.S. Gypsum plant, former Lovett site,
PANCO Petroleum facility, and Letchworth Village.
The waterfront, including the marina district, is

STON Y POIN T N Y R IS IN G Community Reconstruction Plan

FIGURE II-7 Community Assets

Figure II-7
Potential Redevelopment Areas

Town Boundary

Geographic Scope

Town
Lovett Site
Data Sources
Municipal Boundaries:
NYS

AN STATE PARK

Hudson River
Cedar P
o

Letchworth Village

nd Broo
k

Base Map:
ESRI

PANCO Site
March 20, 2014

US Gypsum Site

Putnam
Orange

Minisceongo Creek

Rockland

±

0

0.5

Miles
1

Westchester

Town of Haverstraw
Sources: Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, USGS, Intermap, iPC, NRCAN, Esri Japan,
METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), Esri (Thailand), TomTom, 2013

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 19

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

particularly well-suited for economic redevelopment
as a tourist destination. In fact, many tourists already
pass through the Town, but an effective tourist infrastructure is not in place to take advantage of their
presence. This is due in part to the fact that many
tourists spend their time in the State Parks and other
areas that are distant from the economic center of
Stony Point. An opportunity exists to capitalize on this
opportunity by creating a network connecting the
various tourist attractions and events in and around
the Town to give tourists an incentive to stay longer in
Stony Point. Additional public transportation and
pedestrian options, including the expansion on the
sidewalk network, bus/trolley service between Route
9W, the battlefield and the waterfront, ferry service
and passenger rail on the existing freight rail lines, would
reinforce such a network. These improvements would
also tie together all of the existing tourist attractions in
Town and bring more visitors to Stony Point. These new
connections would support a future expansion of tourist
facilities in the heart of Town. An additional opportunity
exists to create business incentives, support a business
alliance, and build the Town’s brand.
There is an opportunity to build on the 2-day workshop on planning for economic and fiscal health
hosted by the Town of Stony Point in June of 2012.
The workshop gave community members a better

Route 9W/Liberty Drive is Stony Point’s main commercial
district (Jason Hellendrung)

II – 20

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

understanding of the benefits of “smart growth” and
its implementation strategies, and encouraged them
to participate in an open discussion on the Town’s
past, present and future. The workshop was funded
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s
(USEPA) Building Blocks for Sustainable Communities
program through a nationwide competition. Stony
Point was one of 56 communities selected for the
technical assistance program titled, “Using Smart
Growth to Produce Fiscal and Economic Health.” The
program resulted in a “Next Steps” summary that provided the community with a blueprint for expanding
economic opportunities and improving the quality of
life overall, including resiliency strategies such as
environmentally-sensitive planning in commercial
areas that coincide with flood zones along the Hudson
River, greenways and recreational trails as flood
buffers, and wetland restoration to protect economic
assets. Sections of the summary, EPA Technical
Assistance for Sustainable Communities: Stony Point
(2012), were incorporated into the most recent update
of the Town’s Comprehensive Master Plan, approved
in 2013.

Affordable Flood Insurance
Due to the devastation caused by Superstorm Sandy,
flood insurance rates have increased significantly in
Stony Point. Residents have expressed the need to
access more affordable flood insurance. The community is concerned that if not addressed, this issue
would limit affordability of housing in the town, thereby
making it less attractive to new and existing residents.
An opportunity exists to initiate the Town’s participation in the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) National Flood Insurance Program’s (NFIP)
Community Rating System (CRS) a voluntary incentive program that recognizes and encourages community floodplain management activities that exceed
the minimum NFIP requirements to lower residents’
flood insurance rates.

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Housing
Housing needs include ensuring adequate housing for
all residents, providing a range of housing types to
fulfill the needs of a diverse population, and protecting
housing that is most at risk. Stony Point’s housing
stock was heavily affected by the recent storms. A
large amount of housing along the Hudson River
waterfront was severely damaged, some of it rendered
uninhabitable. The Ba Mar mobile home park, a community that provides affordable housing, was devastated by flooding during Superstorm Sandy; approximately 70 homes were over 50% damaged. Many Ba
Mar residents are still searching for the resources to
rebuild, while others have left for good. Cedar Flats
Mobile home park, which also offers reasonably priced
housing options, sustained damage from flooding.
Residents of the waterfront still struggle with housing
issues, and some have moved out of Town entirely as
a result of the damage to their homes. Additionally,
many Stony Point residents, including a large number
of the residents in Ba Mar, do not speak English as
their native language and face added difficulty in
resolving post-Sandy housing issues because of a
language barrier.
When housing was discussed by the Committee, they
determined that a comprehensive review of the overall
availability of housing was not a pressing need that
should be addressed as part of this program. Rather,
the Committee was more interested in addressing the
damaged Hudson River waterfront housing, outreach
to those whose homes were lost or damaged and how
to limit impacts from future storms. Specifically, needs
that included the identification of vulnerable housing
for elevation, clean-up/demolition of abandoned and/
or foreclosed properties, assurance that new and
redeveloped housing stock is code-compliant / more
resilient, and provision of emergency housing and
preservation of mixed housing stock were the focus of
the housing needs discussion. These are expanded
on below.

Understanding that the goal of the needs assessment
for the NYRCR program requires communities to take
a hard look at their most pressing needs and identify
projects that meet those needs, the Committee
asserted that their housing need required: identifying
and allocating funding for rehabilitation and repair to
homes damaged during the storms; revisions of local
zoning regulations to restrict development from floodplains and flood prone areas; and better education
and financing for elevating and flood proofing homes
that were vulnerable to future flooding.

More Resilient Housing Stock
The Committee identified a need to address vulnerable
housing in the Town, particularly in areas along the
Hudson River. As discussed above, housing was
damaged or destroyed by Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy. Restrictions on residential development
and/or redevelopment as well as compliance with and
enforcement of the existing building code in identified
risk areas is needed, including for older housing units
that are not legally required to meet the code. There is
also a need to deal with abandoned, foreclosed, and
damaged properties which have not been kept up
since the storms. These properties are a safety hazard
and an economic blight on the surrounding areas. The
roof on one of these houses recently collapsed. There
is also a need to revisit the Town’s zoning code to

A garage along River Road is buffeted by waves during Superstorm
Sandy (Dominick Posillipo)

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 21

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

ensure that resilient rebuilding can take place in the
waterfront and other flood-prone areas. It is important
to note that the Town recently adopted the FEMA
advisory base flood elevations established after the
recent storms into its local Flood Damage Prevention
Law (Chapter 112 of the Town Code).
A number of opportunities exist to improve resiliency
of Stony Point’s housing. The large number of vacant
and abandoned properties in flooded areas, as well as
other redevelopment sites along the waterfront, such
as the Corts Marina site, provides an opportunity for
redevelopment with the latest resiliency technologies.
Open areas in other parts of Town that are far outside
the flood zones, such as Letchworth Village, provide
another opportunity for new housing that will not be
vulnerable to flooding. Housing built in compliance
with the Flood Damage Prevention Law suffered far
less damage than older, pre-code units, and an opportunity exists to reduce future storm damages by
strengthening compliance with the existing code.

More Inclusive Housing Stock
A need exists to ensure the continued diversity of the
Town’s population by preserving the mixed income
and multi-generational options that currently define
Stony Point. Low-income residents experienced
severe housing damages during Superstorm Sandy,
particularly in the Ba Mar mobile home park, and
many of these residents did not return to the Town
after the storm.
Providing resources for tenants of multi-family homes,
both in terms of sheltering displaced residents after a
disaster, and returning them to safe and resilient
housing, is another essential part of ensuring this
diversity. Additionally, security in times of upheaval
such as storm and other disaster events is essential to
ensure the safety of these vulnerable populations as
well as their homes and possessions. An opportunity
exists to work with residents of Ba Mar and other
lower-income or multi-generational housing areas to
address their needs and ensure their continuity in
Stony Point.

II – 22

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Health and Social Services
Identifying Health and Social Services needs are
among the most essential concerns following a catastrophic storm. Ensuring that public health, health
care facilities and essential social services needs are
restored straightaway is critical to community recovery. These services include healthcare facilities and
emergency services as well as schools, eldercare
facilities, childcare, and similar services. Stony Point
was fortunate in that these services, located for the
most part away from areas of flooding, were not
heavily impacted by Hurricane Irene and Superstorm
Sandy. Police and emergency services played their
part in ensuring that the immediate recovery after
these storms was as rapid and as safe as possible.

Emergency Response Centers/Shelters
A need exists to enhance the existing emergency
response and evacuation centers in the Town. During
Superstorm Sandy, the emergency evacuation center
at the Police Station was overwhelmed due to the
large number of displaced residents. In the months
after the storm, displaced residents sheltered at the
Stony Point Center, which served the community well
but has limitations including flooding, a lack of emergency power supply, and a location disconnected
from basic services such as supermarkets and medical
facilities. Those who lost or do not own a vehicle
experienced difficulty because of the lack of pedestrian access and public transportation options. The
emergency operations center, also at the Police
Station in the same room as the storm response
center, served well but is in need of capacity improvements including a Central Communications Center to
coordinate emergency response efforts.
Opportunities exist to improve existing facilities and
create new ones to fulfill these needs. The Stony Point
Center has successfully served as a long-term shelter
and should continue to do so with certain improvements. The community also identified several locations at which existing facilities could be improved to

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

accommodate a resiliency center, storm shelter or
emergency operations/control center. These include
the RHO Building at Letchworth Village, the Stony
Point Ambulance Station, the Immaculate Conception
Church and School, the Stony Point Elementary
School, and Farley Middle School. To facilitate the use
of these facilities in a resiliency function, transportation enhancements would be needed throughout the
Town including public transportation routes serving
these locations. Publicly owned vehicles such as
school buses could be used to assist with evacuation.
Coordination of evacuation activities by first responders and emergency personnel would be enhanced by
the establishment of an emergency operations
command center.

Infrastructure Systems
Infrastructure repairs and enhancements are often
one of the largest investments a community will make
after a disaster. Rebuilding infrastructure in a way that
is more resilient is a key to ensuring community-wide
resiliency to future storms. In Stony Point, several
major infrastructure components were affected by
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, including the
wastewater treatment plant, which was partially
flooded, and the Cedar Pond Brook interceptor sewer

line, which was heavily undermined by floodwaters.
Roadways, bulkheads and other infrastructure along
the waterfront were damaged during the storms and
are also in need of repair.
The community identified infrastructure that was
damaged during the storms, components and facilities that have been patched up until permanent repair
and replacement can occur, facilities that have been
replaced, and those that remain untouched since the
storm events still requiring significant attention.

The NYRCR program looks at measures to rebuild
community infrastructure with increased resiliency.
That is, specifically, to build back better. This is
critical for improving the ability for the community
to better withstand impact from future storms.
Strong Shoreline Defenses
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy revealed a
need for stronger defenses along the Hudson River
shoreline. The waterfront was the most heavily
damaged area of Stony Point during these storms,
with homes, marinas, and other assets suffering heavy
damages. A number of opportunities exist to improve
shoreline defenses. One opportunity is to strengthen
existing defensive infrastructure, including jetties,
bulkheads, and seawalls. Another opportunity exists
to use newer technologies including floating breakwaters, and natural infrastructure such as oyster and
mussel shoals, seagrass beds, or tidal wetlands.

Resilient Sewage Network

The seawall along the Hudson River is in need of repair
(Chris Robbins)

A need for resiliency improvements to the Town’s
sewage infrastructure has been identified by the Committee. The Stony Point wastewater conveyance and
treatment network suffered severe damage during
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, and remains
highly vulnerable to damage in future storms. The
North Street sewage plant on Grassy Point was partially flooded during Superstorm Sandy; the Cedar
Pond Brook interceptor sewer line is in danger of catastrophic failure due to an undermined support

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 23

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

structure; and Hudson River water infiltrated the Beach
Road interceptor sewer. Opportunities exist to strengthen
this infrastructure, bring it to a state of good repair, and
harden it against future flooding through waterproofing,
raising critical components above flood elevation,
armoring facilities to prevent water intrusion as well other
measures.

Resilient Roads and Bridges
The Committee identified a need for resiliency improvements to Stony Point’s road and bridge network. Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy caused flooding
and damage to a number of roadways and bridges in
Stony Point. Along the waterfront, a number of roadways were flooded and vehicular access was blocked
for all, including emergency vehicles across the Grassy
Point Bridge, forcing evacuations from Grassy Point to
take place by boat. Particular needs exist for improved
drainage on Beach Road, Grassy Point Road, and
River Road. Roadways along Cedar Pond Brook and
other creeks experienced washouts, and access ramps
to the Palisades Interstate Parkway were blocked by
creek flooding. Similarly, narrow bridge culverts over
streams caused flooding when water flow surpassed
the culverts’ capacity. There is an opportunity to
improve the resiliency of the roadway and bridge
network in Stony Point by using flood modeling to
reconfigure roadways and bridge culverts in a way that
gives sufficient space to waterways.

Resilient Fuel System
Superstorm Sandy revealed the need to increase the
resiliency of Stony Point’s fuel system, which failed
when power went out during the storm and gas station
pumps could not operate. As a largely suburban and
rural community, Stony Point residents require uninterrupted access to fuel during and after disaster
events. An opportunity exists to retrofit strategic fuel
stations with generators that will ensure continued
service during power outages. Additionally, a need
exists to secure the PANCO Petroleum tanks on
Grassy Point, which were nearly carried away during
Superstorm Sandy. As the PANCO tanks are located
on private property, the Committee did not create a
project to address this need directly. The Grassy Point
Development/Redevelopment project could also
address this issue indirectly by encouraging redevelopment or retrofit of the site.

Natural and Cultural Resources
Natural and Cultural Resources are part of what
defines a community for its residents, and they can
also form an essential component of community resiliency. Natural systems such as wetlands and reefs
help control floodwaters, and they cleanse pollutants
from the water once the storm has passed. Floodplains provide additional storage space for stormwater overflow, and allow for gradual reabsorption of
flood waters. They also contribute to residents’ quality
of life and bolster the local economy.
When natural systems are unnaturally altered or compromised, the systemic impact can be irreversible and
irreparable, underscoring the need for considerable
long-term support and protection.

Roadway flooding during storm events has blocked access to
emergency vehicles (Dominick Posillipo)

II – 24

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Some of Stony Point’s natural and cultural resources
were spared damage during Hurricane Irene and
Superstorm Sandy while others—including Lowland
Hills Park, the parks along the Hudson River, King’s
Ferry Landing and Cedar Pond Brook—were all
severely affected. Issues related to upland flooding

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

along Cedar Pond Brook were discussed by the Committee. The heavy precipitation that accompanied
these storms resulted in flooding of and damage to
local roadways, limiting access by emergency service
providers to certain areas of the town. Damage to the
parks has been addressed, including the installation
of a new town pier and the replacement of a mobile
bathhouse that can be moved in advance of a storm.
Cedar Pond Brook and the old King’s Ferry Landing
still show scars from the damage sustained.

Leveraging Natural and Cultural Resources to
Achieve Other Goals
An opportunity exists in Stony Point to leverage the
town’s natural and cultural resources to address
several needs expressed by the Committee and
public, including economic development and

shoreline protection. The potential of Stony Point’s
natural and cultural resources to further these goals is
largely untapped. Expanding access to these
resources and linking them to the downtown area, by
extending hiking or kayak trails to connect with the
waterfront or improved shuttle or public transportation options, would be a boon for Stony Point’s economic development. More aggressive, coordinated
promotion of the State Parks, Stony Point Battlefield,
and other local resources as tourist destinations
would likewise be a great benefit for the town’s
economy. Similarly, nurturing Stony Point’s natural
resources along the waterfront would improve these
aesthetic, ecological and economic resources while
also strengthening the resiliency of the shoreline
against storm surge and wave action.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 25

This Page Intentionally Blank

2014
NY RISING COMMUNITY
RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
NYRCR STONY POINT

Section III

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

III

Reconstruction and Resiliency
Strategies

As a waterfront community with historic and ongoing
ties to the Hudson River, Stony Point is poised to
reconsider its flood-prone areas in a manner that revitalizes the Town’s waterfront and economic base.
In order to guide the process of selecting projects and
actions, the Stony Point NYRCR Planning Committee
developed a list of strategies to achieve rebuilding,
resilience, and economic growth. The foundations for
this list are the Vision and Goals, Needs, and Opportunities identified and refined by the Committee with
input from the larger Stony Point community. This list
was also based on the inventory of community assets
and known areas of vulnerability, as well as flood,
wind, and other damage resulting from the storms.
Strategies will be implemented through projects that
may include management measures, policies, and
programs that the community carries out and the
actions it takes to restore and protect assets.
The strategies proposed in this Stony Point NYRCR
Plan consider emergency, disaster recovery, and longterm resilience, as well as those economic development needs that remain unmet by existing planning
and rebuilding initiatives.
The strategies are statements of action that address
how to best fortify community assets, capitalize on
opportunities, resolve critical issues, and meet short-,
medium-, and long-term goals identified during the
planning process. These goals and initiatives formed

the foundation of the reconstruction and resiliency
strategies, which were developed to help the communities devastated by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm
Lee, and Superstorm Sandy move forward and identify mitigation measures that will prevent future
damages and avoid the negative impacts of future
flood events.

Strategy 1: Strengthen current short- and
long-term emergency shelters and develop
new sheltering opportunities.
With the increasing frequency of major storm events
in New York State, the Committee expects that the
number of residents requiring access to emergency
shelters will only increase in the coming decades.
With this in mind, increasing the capacity and resilience of the Town’s existing storm shelters while
building more shelter capacity is an important priority
for Stony Point. The Stony Point Center, the main
existing shelter facility in Town, is in need of electrical
generation capacity and lacks smooth pedestrian
connections to important services that displaced
populations require. During heavy rains, roadway
access can be cut off by flooding, necessitating
stormwater management improvements on the property. The Committee is also interested in pursuing a
short-term shelter and recovery processing center,
which could be located at another location, such as
the municipal complex at Letchworth Village.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

III – 1

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-1
Strategy 1: Strengthen current short- and long-term emergency shelters and develop new sheltering opportunities

Project Name Description

Estimated Cost

Category

Regional
Project

Letchworth Village
Disaster Recovery
and
Communications
Center

Set up a short-term emergency/disaster recovery center, a cooling
center, and an Emergency Operations Command Center (EOCC).
The RHO Building would serve as the emergency/disaster
recovery center and be a central processing location for all
residents in need of assistance during and after disaster events.
The Police Station would serve as a flexible communications
command center to accommodate a variety of emergencies, and
to coordinate the activities of all emergency responders mainly
through radio communications, and internet connections, in real
time.

$805,000

Proposed
Project

No

Stony Point Center
Retrofit

The Stony Point Center is a FEMA-approved Emergency Lodging
Assistance Program site, and housed displaced residents for up to
three months after Superstorm Sandy. However, the facility has
experienced flooding of the main building and entry road as well
as loss of power during storm events. In order to better equip the
Center to support displaced residents during and after future
storms, this project would install backup generators and make
enhancements to the Center's stormwater management system.

$207,000

Proposed
Project

No

In addition to the Proposed Projects presented in Table
III-1, the Committee also identified one Additional
Resiliency Recommendation to pursue this strategy.
This measure is listed with full details in Section V.A.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations.

The Stony Point Community envisioned “…attracting
visitors to ensure an ecologically sound and economically strong future…” (Stony Point NYRCR Vision
Statement) and established a goal to “Enhance historical, natural, and cultural attractions for tourists”
(Stony Point NYRCR Goals).

Strategy 2: Encourage economic
development and support existing
businesses.
From the outset, many of the stories the Committee
told and the aspirations for Stony Point that they
voiced contained a common theme: a critical component of the Town’s economic engine was solidly
anchored to the waterfront. Four things became clear:
1. The damage to waterfront businesses sustained
during the recent storms was a set-back to the
local economy;
2. The owners of these economic engines required
additional support to recover fully;
3. The waterfront was a “diamond in the rough” for
the potential it holds; and
4. Plans were needed to further develop tourism.

III – 2

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

The US Gypsum plant on Grassy Point is currently not being used
and could be a redevelopment site (Jason Hellendrung)

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Waterfront development and redevelopment is a key
to fulfilling that vision. This is especially true in light of
the poor condition of portions of the shoreline since
Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm
Sandy. There exist many opportunities for new appropriate uses near the waterfront, which would enhance
the Town’s economic base and expand appreciation
of the Hudson River. A waterfront economic development strategy, supported by the Committee as a Proposed Project, must focus on increasing appropriate
water-dependent and water-enhanced economic
activity, which would include promoting tourism, the
marinas, and outdoor activities appropriate for a
shoreline location. Similarly, an effort must be made to
act on strategies presented in EPA Technical Assistance for Sustainable Communities: Stony Point
(2012) for sustainable economic development, including recommendations for combining hazard mitigation
planning with economic development plans. The
Community also indicated that there was a need to
diversify the businesses and uses of the Liberty Drive/
Route 9W Corridor, with a goal of revitalizing this key
economic center. The need to tie these two economic
areas together was discussed and projects associated with providing both pedestrian and public transportation access between the two were developed.
Developing a stronger and more resilient economic
base is one of Stony Point’s critical issues, and a
waterfront economic development strategy would be
an important step in the right direction. Strengthening

lines of communication and collaboration between
local government and the business community is of
critical importance to this strategy.
In addition to the Proposed Project presented in Table
III-2, the Committee also identified Additional Resiliency Recommendations to pursue this strategy.
These measures are listed in their entirety in Section
V.A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations.

Strategy 3: Improve on existing
emergency preparedness, response and
communications.
The Stony Point NYRCR Committee envisioned an
NYRCR Plan that would “protect our people and our
natural resources while making the community more
resilient in the face of future hazards” (Stony Point
NYRCR Vision). A key implementing goal of this Vision
was to “Foster emergency readiness” (Stony Point
NYRCR Goals).
To achieve this goal, the Committee identified projects
and actions that would improve and build on the
Town’s existing emergency preparedness, response
and communications systems. Focused improvements in the way that existing information is provided
to the public, including citizen education, were made
a priority based on the Committee’s articulation of this
need. A central emergency operations and communications center was identified by the Committee as a

Table III-2
Strategy 2: Encourage economic development and support existing businesses

Project Name Description

Estimated Cost

Category

Regional
Project

Grassy Point
Development /
Redevelopment

Develop a master plan for Grassy Point, which would address
resiliency through methods to manage sea level rise. The plan
would also seek to further public use, including tourism and
education, and promote appropriate economic development and
resilient water-dependent uses. The plan would consider both
private and public lands on Grassy Point and present a variety of
potential future uses in conceptual form.

$175,000

Proposed
Project

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

No

III – 3

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

key asset to be improved upon; while such a facility
does exist, it does not have the capacity to direct all
emergency operations from a single location, nor can
it send out communications to all residents. The proposed improvements would also include development
of a comprehensive emergency plan for the Town,
with procedures, evacuation routes, signage, regular
communication with residents regarding emergency
protocols, and an educational program to ensure all
residents understand the emergency systems in
place.

things including the uncertainty associated with when,
or worse, if they can move back into their home. After
the storm began to fade, residents were frustrated
with the lack of information available related to recovery procedures and funding, including available assistance for repair and buyout opportunities as well as
the option of demolition and relocation.

In addition to the Proposed Project presented in Table
III-3, the Committee also identified Additional Resiliency Recommendations to pursue this strategy.
These measures are listed in their entirety in Section
V.A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations.

Strategy 4: Provide information and
assistance to homeowners with pre-storm
flood-proofing and post-storm repair,
buyouts and demolition.
Residents’ homes suffered damages ranging from
flooded basements and the destruction of mechanical
equipment to catastrophic damage and ultimately
loss of structures due to substantial wave action.
These individuals then had to seek shelter in unfamiliar environs, some with very few personal belongings
in tow. The stress associated with such a dramatic
upheaval is significant and compounded by many

Many houses in Stony Point are still in critical condition, one and a
half years after Superstorm Sandy (Thomas McGuire)

Even though homes have been repaired and one has
been raised, many others remain damaged, some
irreparably. Residents need to understand all recovery
options to ensure that they will have the ability to
make the most informed decision on how to move
forward. While the focus here is on post-storm con-

Table III-3
Strategy 3: Improve on existing emergency preparedness, response and communications

Project Name Description

Estimated Cost

Category

Regional
Project

Letchworth Village
Disaster Recovery
and
Communications
Center

III – 4

Set up a short-term emergency/disaster recovery center, a cooling
center, and an Emergency Operations Command Center (EOCC).
The RHO Building would serve as the emergency/disaster
recovery center and be a central processing location for all
residents in need of assistance during and after disaster events.
The Police Station would serve as a flexible communications
command center to accommodate a variety of emergencies, and
to coordinate the activities of all emergency responders mainly
through radio communications, and internet connections, in real
time.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

$805,000

Proposed
Project

No

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

cerns, the community would also benefit from information on and assistance with flood-proofing, armoring and elevating homes in advance of storm events.
The Stony Point community envisioned that a successful NYRCR process would “…protect our
people…” (Stony Point NYRCR Vision Statement). To
achieve this vision, the Committee set goals to “Foster
emergency readiness” and “Develop design and construction standards for resilience” (Stony Point
NYRCR Goals).
Improvement in the resiliency of the Town’s housing
stock is an issue critical to the community. An opportunity exists to provide housing elsewhere in the Town.
The Committee felt that this could be accomplished
through a project to assess the potential for alternate
low income housing locations as a way forward to
reduce risk to the vulnerable population that resides in
the mobile home parks that sustained damage during
the storms.
Additionally, homeowner education and funding for
flood damage prevention was acknowledged as a key
housing issue and the desire to address the vulnerability of the existing housing stock was identified as a
need. Homeowners require assistance in planning, rebuilding, and modernizing their homes to withstand
future storm events. Through measures including elevation changes to existing homes, land acquisition and
relocation away from the most vulnerable regions of the
Town, and general flood proofing, homeowners can

safeguard themselves and their most important assets.
When a home is significantly damaged and the cost to
repair is too high for the homeowner to cover, it is critical to provide information to the homeowner on buyout
opportunities and/or home demolition and relocation
options.
Part of this education initiative must include examination of the existing Town code to ensure there is proper
language in ordinances to protect properties from
future flooding and to ensure that new construction
provides adequate flood damage prevention. The
Town recently adopted the post Superstorm Sandy
advisory base flood elevations into the local Flood
Damage Prevention Law (Chapter 112 of the Town
Code). To assist homeowners in complying with the
need to raise their home, the Town also amended the
Town Code (Section 215 – Zoning) to allow variances
for exceeding height restriction.
Consideration must be given to long-term resilience
should storm frequency or flood elevations increase in
the future. This strategy must also include assessment
of the community’s ability to apply for/administer flood
mitigation and community revitalization funds to
ensure long-term implementation of the NY Rising
Plan. Finally, the Town’s participation in the FEMA
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Community
Rating System (CRS) would increase resilience and
reduce flood insurance rates for residents improving
the economics of homeownership in areas prone to
flooding.

Table III-4
Strategy 4: Provide information and assistance to homeowners with pre-storm flood-proofing and post-storm repair,
buyouts and demolition.

Project Name Description

Estimated Cost

Category

Regional
Project

Demolition of
Damaged and
Abandoned
Structures

While many residents have rebuilt waterfront homes after they
were damaged by Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, there
remain a number of structures along Stony Point's Hudson River
shoreline that are unimproved and boarded up. This project would
acquire four such structures, all privately-owned single family
homes, and demolish them in order to eliminate potential hazard
and blight. These parcels would then be incorporated into the
Town Park network.

$1,252,000

Featured
Project

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

No

III – 5

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-5
Strategy 5: Promote sustainability and resilience through local land use planning and regulation

Project Name Description

Estimated Cost

Category

Regional
Project

Grassy Point
Development /
Redevelopment

Develop a master plan for Grassy Point, which would address
resiliency through methods to manage sea level rise. The plan
would also seek to further public use, including tourism and
education, and promote appropriate economic development and
resilient water-dependent uses. The plan would consider both
private and public lands on Grassy Point and present a variety of
potential future uses in conceptual form.

In addition to the Proposed Project presented in Table
III-4, the Committee also identified Additional Resiliency Recommendations to pursue this strategy.
These measures are listed in their entirety in Section
V.A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations.

Strategy 5: Promote sustainability and
resilience through local land use planning
and regulation.
In the face of storm damages and with the vulnerable
location on the waterfront, sensitive planning can
position Stony Point for resiliency. The Committee is
interested in exploring opportunities for avoiding the
impacts of natural disasters by revisiting its existing
planning documents with an eye toward sustainability
and resilience. The Town’s existing Master Plan and
Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP) can
be tailored to cater to the vulnerabilities exposed by
Superstorm Sandy, Tropical Storm Lee and Hurricane
Irene. The Committee feels that a comprehensive plan
for the Grassy Point neighborhood would be an excellent vehicle for finding ways to strengthen the Town’s
waterfront economy while providing more open space
and a more resilient and inclusive housing stock; such
a plan could ensure resilient construction by codifying
the use of the latest flood resistant materials and
building techniques. Improvements to local planning
practices would also take the form of a marina protection and harbor management plan, and an examination of the zoning code to facilitate the rebuilding of
damaged homes, buildings and infrastructure.
In addition to the Proposed Project presented in Table
III-5, the Committee also identified Additional

III – 6

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

$175,000

Proposed
Project

No

Resiliency Recommendations to pursue this strategy.
These measures are listed in their entirety in Section
V.A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations.

Strategy 6: Repair, rehabilitate, upgrade
and fortify critical infrastructure and
transportation.
Stony Point’s critical infrastructure – including roadways, wastewater treatment, electricity and stormwater management – was adversely affected by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee and Superstorm Sandy.
With those damages in mind, the visioning process
established goals to “improve waterfront access and
infrastructure” and “plan for better mobility and connectivity for people in cars, on foot, and with transit.”
Repairing and fortifying the shoreline infrastructure to
better withstand future storm events and enhancing
transit are important priorities for the Committee.

The Cedar Pond Brook interceptor sewer line is currently exposed
after being undermined during Superstorm Sandy (Kevin Maher)

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-6
Strategy 6: Repair, rehabilitate, upgrade and fortify critical infrastructure and transportation

Project Name Description

Estimated Cost

Category

Regional
Project

Cedar Pond Brook
Interceptor Sewer
Line Rehabilitation

The Cedar Pond Brook Interceptor Sewer Line is a major feeder
line for the Stony Point Wastewater Treatment Plant. The line and
its wood-framed support structure were undermined and exposed
during Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee and Superstorm Sandy,
leaving the support structure in a weakened condition due to
erosion of the berm that had covered the line. This project would
repair and stabilize the approximately 1/3 mile section of the
sewer line that is most at risk, and provide access to enable
ongoing maintenance work.

$15 million

Featured
Project

No

Hardening of
Wastewater
Treatment Plant

During Superstorm Sandy, the Stony Point Wastewater Treatment
Plant was flooded by storm surge from the Hudson, incurring
approximately $1 million in damages. This project seeks to secure
the wastewater treatment plant against future flooding through
installation of enclosed/submersible motors and controls,
floodproof entry doors and windows, installing new or refurbishing
existing electrical systems. Also included are the engineering,
design and architectural services associated with these
improvements.

$1.6 million

Proposed
Project

No

Rehabilitation of
Wastewater
Interceptors along
Beach Road and
the Ba Mar Sewer
Line

This project proposes resilient construction techniques that will
prevent inflow and infiltration into the sewer lines that flow into the
Beach Road Pump Station and on into the Town's Wastewater
Treatment Plant. This project would replace 20 manhole covers
and install 20 vents to prevent storm and tidal water intrusion into
the sewer lines during future flooding events and eliminate
sewerage overflow along Beach Road and in the Ba Mar Mobile
Home Park.

$125,000

Proposed
Project

No

Shoreline
Protection Against
Erosion and Wave
Action (Beach
Road)

The project includes half of the flooding/wave attenuation study
that will be performed for the waterfront south of the battlefield
park. Improvements to and/or rehabilitation of seawalls and
bulkheads to protect resources and improve beach retention
would be implemented. The design and installation of a wave
energy attenuation system is covered under this project.

$1 million

Proposed
Project

No

Shoreline
Protection Against
Erosion and Wave
Action (River Road)

The project includes half of the flooding/wave attenuation study
that will be performed for the waterfront south of the battlefield
park. Improvements to and/or rehabilitation of jetties and seawalls
to protect resources and improve beach retention would be
implemented. The design and installation of a wave energy
attenuation system is covered under this project.

$1.7 million

Proposed
Project

No

Resiliency initiatives that would enable Stony Point’s
infrastructure systems to continue operating with
minimal interruptions during and after future storm
events are essential to the ongoing viability of the
Town. Of the critical infrastructure systems seriously
affected by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and
Superstorm Sandy, most notable was the wastewater
treatment system. The network of roads and bridges
and the fuel system were also impacted by these
disasters. Repairing and fortifying these infrastructure
systems is imperative, as are development of new and
enhanced capabilities including new back-up power

supplies for gas stations and shelters; transportation
alternatives such as ferry, rail, and enhanced bicycle
and pedestrian networks; and a more integrated and
comprehensive system of shoreline defenses along
the Hudson River waterfront.
In addition to the Proposed and Featured Projects
presented in Table III-6, the Committee also identified
Additional Resiliency Recommendations to pursue
this strategy. These measures are listed in their entirety
in Section V.A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

III – 7

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy 7: Harness resiliency potential of
natural resources.
The visioning process in Stony Point identified a
strong desire in the Town to “Protect…our natural
resources” and to “ensure an ecologically sound…
future for the people of Stony Point.” The Committee
recognizes the importance of the Town’s natural
resources to a community that chose to describe itself
as “a vibrant and connected riverfront and hillside
community” (Vision Statement).
The Committee has indicated the potential for strategies to limit future damage in the vicinity of the shoreline through enhancements to the Town’s natural
resources such as wetlands, waterways, and shoreline. The preservation and restoration of these natural
systems would allow them to serve as flood banking
systems and buffer zones during storms, repel wave
action, and otherwise protect the people and assets
of Stony Point. Such a strategy would offer numerous
co-benefits depending on the means used. Stream
bank restoration to prevent erosion and protect nearby
roads and buildings would also provide fishing areas
and a more aesthetically pleasing upland environment
for residents; oyster/mussel shoals and restored tidal
wetlands would clean the water and provide habitat
while reducing wave action and storing stormwater.

III – 8

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Stream bank erosion on Cedar Pond Brook after Hurricane Irene
(Kevin Maher)

An enhanced natural environment also would bring
greater economic opportunities from tourism. These
numerous additional benefits make investments in
natural resources a smart strategy.
Although the Committee did not raise any projects for
this strategy to the level of Proposed or Featured, the
Committee did identify Additional Resiliency Recommendations to pursue this strategy. These measures
are listed in their entirety in Section V.A. Additional
Resiliency Recommendations.

2014
NY RISING COMMUNITY
RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
NYRCR STONY POINT

Section IV

Implementation - Project Profiles

IV

Implementation – Project Profiles

NYRCR Stony Point is eligible for up to $3.0 million in
CDBG-DR implementation funds. The funding is provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) Community Development
Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program.
While developing projects and actions for inclusion in
the NYRCR Plan, Planning Committees took into
account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the
effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to populations and critical assets, feasibility, and community
support. Planning Committees also considered the
potential likelihood that a project or action would be
eligible for CDBG-DR funding. The projects and
actions set forth in the NYRCR Plan are divided into
three categories. The order in which the projects and
actions are listed in the NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate the Community’s prioritization of these
projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects
proposed for funding through the Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are
projects and actions that the Planning Committee has
identified as important resiliency recommendations
and has analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for
funding through the NYRCR Program. Additional
Resiliency Recommendations (see Section V) are projects and actions that the Planning Committee would
like to highlight and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured Projects. The total cost of
Proposed Projects in the NYRCR Plan exceeds the
NYRCR Community’s CDBG-DR allocation to allow
for flexibility if some Proposed Projects cannot be
implemented due to environmental review, HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of the projects and actions found in the NYRCR
Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State, and
local laws and regulations, including the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion of a project or
action in the NYRCR Plan does not guarantee that a

particular project or action will be eligible for CDBG-DR
funding or that it will be implemented.
This section presents detailed profiles for all Proposed
and Featured Projects identified by the Stony Point
NYRCR Planning Committee and community throughout the eight-month planning process. Each profile
includes a detailed description, a map, plan, and/or
photograph, and a summary of the Risk Mitigation
and Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) completed for each
Proposed and Featured Project. A brief description of
the methodology for these models is provided below.

Proposed Projects are defined as those that
would be funded through a community’s allocation
of CDBG-DR funding.
.
Featured Projects are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee has identified as important
resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in
depth, but has not proposed for funding through
the NYRCR Program.

Risk Mitigation Analysis
The Risk Mitigation Analysis evaluates the extent to
which Proposed and Featured Projects will mitigate
storm damage (environmental, social and economic)
and flooding risk to specific community assets when
the project is in place. (The extent to which a Project
mitigates risk is also considered a benefit in the
CBA—as described under “Project Benefits” in the
section that follows.) Evaluating Risk “Mitigation” is
different than the Risk “Assessment” process, which
was described in detail in Section II of this NYRCR
Stony Point Plan. The Risk Assessment evaluated
storm and flood risks to community assets prior to

Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles

IV – 1

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

implementing the Project, whereas Risk Mitigation
evaluates the reduced risk with the Project in place.
To determine how the implementation of Proposed
and Featured Projects would impact the risk to assets
and asset groups, the Consultant Team ran the Risk
Assessment Tool for projects that are intended to
reduce the risk of flood damage to assets. The result
of this Risk Reduction Analysis is “mitigated” risk
scores for assets and asset groups. The evaluation
methodology included developing assumptions
regarding exposure and/or vulnerability and altering
these factors to reflect the effects of the project. A
complete description of the Risk Mitigation methodology and results is included in Section V. Additional
Materials of this NYRCR Stony Point Plan.

Cost Benefit Analysis
Methodology
The CBA developed the benefits and costs associated with Proposed and Featured Projects. The CBA
provides the anticipated cost of implementation and a
primarily qualitative evaluation of the benefits of the
various Proposed and Featured Projects. The purposes of the CBA are to inform the Committee as they
formulate and prioritize projects for implementation
and to help municipalities prepare grant applications
for CDBG-DR funds and other funding opportunities
identified in the future. The costs and benefits used to
evaluate projects through the CBA are explained
further below.

Project Costs
The Proposed and Featured Project Profiles include a
summary of anticipated Project cost. For the sewer
infrastructure projects, estimated costs developed in
support of submissions for grant and permit applications were provided by the Town staff engineer and/or
Town engineering and natural resources consultants.
For the other projects, the Consultant Team developed
preliminary cost estimates which included fees for construction, operation, and maintenance, as well as

IV – 2

Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles

overall life-cycle costs. Due to various uncertainties,
the estimates are just that—estimates. They provide
the community with a practical understanding of the
potential estimated costs of project implementation.
The CBA not only provides an assessment of the cost
of implementing the projects, but it also provides a
description of the future costs of not implementing the
Proposed and Featured Projects. If Projects are not
implemented, the long-term ability of municipalities to
withstand significant storm events and rebound afterward may be negatively impacted. The costs of not
implementing projects are more difficult to quantify,
but are nonetheless critical to the analysis and are
therefore addressed qualitatively. These costs include:
repetitive damage to personal property and public
infrastructure resulting from frequent, recurring flooding and future storm events; economic loss to residents and local and regional employers as a result of
the inability to work; and obstacles or limitations to
the provision of life safety and emergency services
resulting in the repeated inability to access certain
areas of the community.

Project Benefits
The types of benefits evaluated in the CBA are summarized below:
Risk Mitigation: The extent to which a Proposed or
Featured Project mitigates the risk of damage to an
identified community asset from a future storm event.
Economic Resiliency: The potential for a Proposed
or Featured Project to minimize costs and reduce
the time required for the local economy to rebound
from a storm event. Economic assessment data included, where applicable: an estimate of permanent
jobs secured/added; relationship to, and/or furtherance of, Regional Economic Development Plan
goals; potential for additional economic activity; and
the net effect on local municipal expenditures.
Health, Social, and Public Safety Services: The potential for a Proposed or Featured Project to benefit
the overall population due to improved access to

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

health and social service facilities and public safety
services; type and size of socially vulnerable population secured; and degree to which essential health
and social service facilities are able to provide services to a community during a future storm or
weather event as a result of the implementation of
a Proposed or Featured Project.

Environmental Protection: The potential for a Proposed or Featured Project to protect critical environmental assets, high-priority habitat, threatened and
endangered species, migration or habitat connectivity; any environmental clean-up resulting from the action; creation of open space or new recreational assets.

Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles

IV – 3

STONY POINT NY RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Town of Stony Point
Letchworth Village Disaster Recovery
and Communications Center

Proposed Project

Project Description: During Superstorm Sandy,
numerous Town residents sheltered in the basement of
the police station, which also houses the Town’s
emergency response center. As a result, the station was
overcrowded for both residents and emergency
services providers. A larger facility is needed for similar
storms in the future, as well as an enhanced emergency
communications center. This project would set up a
short-term emergency/disaster recovery center, a
cooling center, and an Emergency Operations
Command Center (EOCC). The RHO* Building would
serve as the emergency/disaster recovery center and
be a central processing location for all residents in
need of assistance during and after disaster events. The
Police Station would serve as a flexible communications
command center to accommodate a variety of
emergencies, and to coordinate the activities of all
emergency responders in real time, mainly through
radio communications and internet connections.
Estimated Cost:

Anticipated Risk Reduction: Improved storm shelter and emergency recovery facilities
will improve emergency preparedness, response and communications and contribute to a
coordinated and effective response to future disaster events.
Cost Benefit Summary: Implementation of this project would provide a short-term
emergency/disaster recovery center with an extended useful life. Potential environmental
effects of new construction would require additional assessment. Opportunity costs do
exist since benefits associated with other potential uses of the site would be lost. However,
this project has the potential to generate economic activity throughout construction and
rehabilitation.
Co-Benefits of Project:


Economic Benefits: An emergency/disaster recovery center would allow for a more
efficient distribution of provisions and services and for a more coordinated, real-time
response to emergencies, thereby allowing for savings in local government
expenditure. More efficient distribution of information would foster shorter recovery
times for residents and businesses, leading to an earlier restoration of economic
activity and a more resilient economy overall.



Health and Social Service Benefits: The project will allow residents who lost their
homes, either temporarily or permanently, a safe and secure location to obtain
information that will help them in recovering from the loss. The emergency operations
command center will allow for full coordination between first responders that service
the Town, a benefit for the entire community.

$805,000

Anticipated Regulatory Requirements:
Local approvals - building permits, etc. are anticipated.
Anticipated Timeframe: 6-12 Months

*RHO is the name of the 17th letter of the Greek alphabet. All of the buildings at
Letchworth Village were named after Greek letters when the facility was built in the early
1900s.

Entity with Jurisdiction: Town of Stony Point

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

IV – 4

Figure IV-1
Project Location - Letchworth Village Disaster Recovery Center

RHO Building (Karenanne Nigro)

Current Emergency Operations Center
(Stephen Scurti)

Town Boundary
Putnam
Orange
Westchester
Rockland

Data Sources

±

0

1,500

Feet
3,000

Municipal Boundaries:
Rockland County
Aerial Imagery: NYS Orthos
Transportation: ESRI
March 21, 2014
Copyright:© 2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, TomTom

STONY POINT NY RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Town of Stony Point
Stony Point Center Retrofit
Project Description: The Stony Point Center is
a
FEMA-approved
Emergency
Lodging
Assistance Program site, and housed displaced
residents for up to three months after
Superstorm Sandy. However, the facility has
experienced flooding of the main building and
entry road as well as loss of power during
Hurricane Irene, Superstorm Sandy, and other
events. Flooding is exacerbated by an
improperly designed stormwater conveyance
system on the property which causes
stormwater to back up into the Stony Point
Center’s roadway and main building. In order
to better equip the Center to support displaced
residents during and after future storms and
address the flooding, this project would install
two backup generators and replace the
stormwater conveyance system on site.

Proposed Project

Estimated Cost:

$207,000

Anticipated Regulatory Requirements:
Potential regulatory constraints include NYS
DEC for stormwater management and Town
approvals.

Anticipated Risk Reduction: Installation of the redesigned stormwater management system
will reduce the discharge of stormwater from an existing stormwater management feature
(detention pond) onto the property and eliminate the backing up of stormwater at the front
entrance to the building. The proposed stormwater management measures will also improve
the vulnerability of the asset by maintaining access to the Center. Installation of backup
generators will further decrease the asset's vulnerability.
Cost Benefit Summary: The new stormwater connection to the existing storm sewer will
reduce the risk of future flooding of the Stony Point Center for up to 50 years. This project will
reduce flooding of the main drive which provides access for emergency vehicles and patrons.
The backup generators, with a useful life of up to 20 years, will maintain electricity at the two
main buildings during extreme weather events. With a new stormwater connection and
consistent electrical power, the Stony Point Center will be better equipped to support displaced
residents and employment at the facility will be maintained even during significant storm events
and power outages, securing upwards of 50 jobs1. A reduced reliance on public provision of
resources during emergencies will also result from the implementation of this project.
Additional economic activity would be expected through tourism at the Stony Point Center.
Further savings in local government expenditures are expected since reduced flooding would
lower reconstruction costs following future storm events.
Co-Benefits of Project:


Economic Benefits: The new stormwater connection will reduce the risk of future flooding of
the Stony Point Center and the backup generators will maintain power, thereby enabling the
Center to remain open and continue to generate economic activity.



Environmental Benefits: The new stormwater connection would ease future flooding.
Improvements to water quality would be expected as flood waters in the building carry
pollutants into the Cedar Pond Brook.



Health and Social Service Benefits: The entire Town will benefit from the Stony Point
Center's increased ability to provide disaster relief services to those most in need. The
project will provide residents who lost their homes, either temporarily or permanently, the
ability to stay in the community. Children can continue to attend their schools and adults
can continue to go to work and rely on their neighbors and friends in the area for support.

1

A complete description of the methodology used to develop employment numbers is included in Section V.
Additional Materials.

Anticipated Timeframe: 6-12 Months
Entity with Jurisdiction: Town of Stony Point

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

IV – 5

Figure IV-2
Project Location - Stony Point Center Retrofit

Flooding at Stony Point Center, Hurricane Irene
(Stony Point Center)

Town Boundary
Putnam
Orange
Westchester
Rockland

Data Sources

±

0

1,500

Feet
3,000

Municipal Boundaries:
Rockland County
Aerial Imagery: NYS Orthos
Transportation: ESRI
March 21, 2014
Copyright:© 2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, TomTom

STONY POINT NY RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Town of Stony Point
Shoreline Protection Against Erosion and
Wave Action (Beach Road)
Project Description: Stony Point’s waterfront was
severely impacted during Hurricane Irene and
Superstorm Sandy by storm surge and wave action.
This project would select from a variety of methods for
dissipating wave energy to protect existing homes,
facilities, infrastructure, and other shoreline resources.
Improvements to and rehabilitation of seawalls and
bulkheads to protect resources and improve beach
retention would be implemented. Installation of a wave
attenuation system would protect shoreline resources
from the devastating effects of waves breaking on
unprotected structures. The project includes half of a
flooding/wave attenuation study that would be 
performed for the Stony Point waterfront, from the
battlefield south to the Town line.

Proposed Project

Estimated Cost:

$1 million

Anticipated Regulatory Requirements:
Regulatory constraints are anticipated including the 
need for approvals from USACE, NYS DEC (Article 15),
and NYS DOS. Also coordination with Rockland County
as some of these protective features are under their
jurisdiction.
Anticipated Timeframe: 24
Nationwide Permit from USACE

Months

assuming 

Entity with Jurisdiction: Town of Stony Point,
Rockland County

Anticipated Risk Reduction: Implementation of this project will result in the construction
of physical shore defense structures along the Beach Road shoreline that will reduce the
exposure of the following assets: Beach Road Economic Assets (Patsy's Bay Marina I and II,
Stony Point Bay Marina, Seaweed Yacht Club, TZ Marine Services), Beach Road Sewage
Pump Station, Beach Road Interceptor Sewer, Beach Road, Vincent A. Clark Riverview Park
& Kayak Access, and Beach Road Housing.
Cost Benefit Summary: Implementation of this project would provide medium-term
benefits since improving and/or stabilizing seawalls and bulkheads would have a useful
life of 10 to 20 years. Although no permanent jobs are expected to be added, there is
potential for increased economic activity since improved conditions at Vincent Clark Park
may attract additional visitors. This project would support the Mid-Hudson regional
economic goal of leveraging natural resources as drivers of tourism and quality-of-life
benefits. Savings in local government expenditure are expected since the project would
reduce flooding risk, improve access for emergency vehicles, and limit the cost of
reconstruction and rehabilitation to nearby homes, facilities, infrastructure and other
resources.
Co-Benefits of Project:
Economic Benefits: As a result of this project, flooding and wave damage from extreme
weather events would be reduced, limiting the cost and time to reconstruct and
rehabilitate after such an event. The reduced cost and time involved in rebuilding would
translate into greater availability of resources for enhanced economic activity. No
opportunity costs were identified.
Environmental Benefits: The Hudson River is mapped by the NYSDEC as a Significant
Natural Community - a "tidal river." Shoreline protection measures would serve to secure
and protect this habitat from coastal erosion and the deposition of sediment and debris
in the form of damaged structures, boats, docks and infrastructure by minimizing tidal
surge and reducing wave action in "V" zones.
Health and Social Service Benefits: The reduction in roadway inundation and potential
impacts to residences resulting from shoreline protection projects will benefit the
shoreline communities by reducing the duration of roadway flooding, thereby maximizing
access to these areas by emergency services personnel and vehicles.

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

IV – 6

Figure IV-3
Project Location - Shoreline Protection: Beach Road

Beach Road
(Chris Robbins)
Beach Road After Superstorm Sandy
(Dominick Posillipo)

Town Boundary
Putnam
Orange
Westchester
Rockland

Data Sources

±

0

1,500

Feet
3,000

Municipal Boundaries:
Rockland County
Aerial Imagery: NYS Orthos
Transportation: ESRI
March 21, 2014
Copyright:© 2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, TomTom

STONY POINT NY RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Town of Stony Point
Shoreline Protection Against Erosion
and Wave Action (River Road)
Project Description: Stony Point’s waterfront was
severely impacted during Hurricane Irene and
Superstorm Sandy by storm surge and wave action.
This project would select from a variety of methods for
dissipating wave energy to protect existing homes,
facilities, infrastructure, and other shoreline resources.
Improvements to and rehabilitation of jetties and
seawalls to protect resources and improve beach
retention would be implemented. Installation of a
wave attenuation system would protect shoreline
resources from the devastating effects of waves
breaking on unprotected structures. The project
includes half of a flooding/wave attenuation study
that would be performed for the Stony Point
waterfront, from the battlefield south to the Town line.

Proposed Project

Estimated Cost:

$1.7 million

Anticipated Regulatory Requirements:
Regulatory constraints are anticipated including the
need for approvals from USACE, NYS DEC (Article 15),
and NYS DOS. Also coordination with Rockland
County as some of these protective features are under
their jurisdiction.
Anticipated Timeframe: 24
Nationwide Permit from USACE

Months

assuming

Anticipated Risk Reduction: : Implementation of this project will result in the construction
of physical shore defense structures along the River Road shoreline that will reduce the
exposure of the following assets: River Road, River Road Housing, US Gypsum
Manufacturing Facility, PANCO Petroleum site, Gilligan’s on the Hudson, and the
Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Cost Benefit Summary: Implementation of this project would provide medium-term
benefits since improving and/or rehabilitating jetties and seawalls would have a useful life
of 10 to 20 years. Although no permanent jobs are expected to be added, there is potential
for increased economic activity since improved conditions at Riverfront Park may attract
additional visitors. This project would support the Mid-Hudson regional economic goal of
leveraging natural resources as drivers of tourism and quality-of-life benefits. Savings in
local government expenditure are expected since the project would reduce flooding risk,
improve access for emergency vehicles and limit the cost of reconstruction and
rehabilitation to nearby homes, facilities, infrastructure and other resources.
Co-Benefits of Project:


Economic Benefits: As a result of this project, flooding and wave damage from extreme
weather events would be reduced, limiting the cost and time to reconstruct and
rehabilitate after such an event. The reduced cost and time involved in rebuilding
would translate into greater availability of resources for enhanced economic activity. No
opportunity costs were identified.



Environmental Benefits: The Hudson River is mapped by the NYSDEC as a Significant
Natural Community - a "tidal river." Shoreline protection measures would serve to
secure and protect this habitat from coastal erosion and the deposition of sediment
and debris in the form of damaged structures, boats, docks and infrastructure by
minimizing tidal surge and reducing wave action in "V" zones.



Health and Social Service Benefits: The reduction in roadway inundation and potential
impacts to residences resulting from shoreline protection projects will benefit the
shoreline communities by reducing the duration of roadway flooding, thereby
maximizing access to these areas by emergency services personnel and vehicles.

Entity with Jurisdiction: Town of Stony Point,
Rockland County
Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

IV – 7

Figure IV-4
Project Location - Shoreline Protection: River Road

Small Breakwaters/Jetties on River Road
(Chris Robbins)

River Road (Chris Robbins)

Town Boundary
Putnam
Orange
Westchester
Rockland

Data Sources

±

0

1,500

Feet
3,000

Municipal Boundaries:
Rockland County
Aerial Imagery: NYS Orthos
Transportation: ESRI
March 21, 2014
Copyright:© 2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, TomTom

STONY POINT NY RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Town of Stony Point
Rehabilitation
of
Wastewater
Interceptors along Beach Road and the
Ba Mar Sewer Line
Project Description: During Superstorm Sandy, water
flowed into the interceptor lines through unsecured
manhole covers, adding significant freshwater to the
wastewater treatment system and causing sewerage
overflow into surrounding neighborhoods, wetlands
and watercourses. This project proposes resilient
construction techniques that will prevent inflow into
the sewer lines that flow into the Beach Road Pump
Station. Replacement of 20 manhole covers and
installation of 20 vents to prevent storm and tidal water
intrusion into the sewer lines will eliminate sewerage
overflow along Beach Road, in the Ba Mar Mobile
Home Park and into the environment. Reduction in the
volume of freshwater conveyed to the WWTP will also
be realized.

Proposed Project

Estimated Cost:

Anticipated Risk Reduction: Installation of sealed manhole covers and accompanying
vents along the sewer line constitute defensive and protective measures. The proposed
improvements will reduce the exposure of the asset to floodwater and reduce its
vulnerability.
Cost Benefit Summary: Manhole covers and vents are expected to have a useful life of
20+ years. The benefits of securing the wastewater stream from inflow and infiltration so
that the Beach Road pump station and the wastewater treatment plant do not process
freshwater are long-term, as is protection of the local environment from sewage overflow.
This project would support the Mid-Hudson regional economic goal of investing in
infrastructure improvements, including sewer infrastructure. These improvements would
reduce the level of emergency response needed during and after extreme weather events
to manage and remediate sewage release to local neighborhoods and the environment.
Co-Benefits of Project:


Economic Benefits: Improvements to manhole covers and vents would secure the
wastewater system against inflow of floodwater, which would result in a long-term
benefit to the community in terms of savings on infrastructure expenditures. In
addition, reducing the volume of freshwater entering and overwhelming the
wastewater system could lead to further savings in local government expenditure by
eliminating the need for the conveyance of sewage through the town bypass system
and into the wastewater treatment facility in Haverstraw, which charges the Town of
Stony Point to process the sewage. No negative externalities or opportunity costs were
identified.



Environmental Benefits: The project will prevent environmental degradation of nearby
wetlands, watercourses, and the Hudson River by reducing sewage overflows. The
Hudson River is listed by NYSDEC as habitat for threatened and endangered species,
including Atlantic and Shortnose Sturgeon. Prevention of the release of untreated
sewage would avoid potential negative impacts on these fish species and other
aquatic flora and fauna that use the Hudson River and Haverstraw Bay.



Health and Social Service Benefits: Ensuring that all wastewater continues to be
properly treated during and after storm events will benefit the overall health of the
community.

$125,000

Anticipated Regulatory Requirements:
Regulatory constraints are anticipated including the
need for approvals from NYS DEC (may require Article
24 permit depending on specific activities proposed).
Also coordination with Rockland County as Beach Road
is a County road.
Anticipated Timeframe: 4-8 Months
Entity with Jurisdiction: Town of Stony Point;
Rockland County

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

IV – 8

Figure IV-5
Project Location - Rehabilitation of Wastewater Interceptors

Sealed Manhole Cover and Vent System
(Kevin Maher)

Town Boundary
Putnam
Orange
Westchester
Rockland

Data Sources

±

0

1,500

Feet
3,000

Municipal Boundaries:
Rockland County
Aerial Imagery: NYS Orthos
Transportation: ESRI
March 21, 2014
Copyright:© 2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, TomTom

STONY POINT NY RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Anticipated Risk Reduction: As this project improves the asset's ability to withstand and
recover from flooding, it reduces the asset's vulnerability.

Town of Stony Point
Hardening
of
Treatment Plant

Wastewater

Project Description: During Superstorm
Sandy, the Stony Point Wastewater Treatment
Plant was flooded by storm surge from the
Hudson, incurring approximately $1 million in
damages. This project seeks to secure the
wastewater treatment plant against future
flooding
through
installation
of
enclosed/submersible motors and controls as
well as floodproof entry doors, bilco doors and
first floor windows. The project also proposes
installing new or refurbishing existing electrical
systems to protect them from potential
flooding. Included in this project is the
engineering, design and architectural services
associated with these improvements.
Estimated Cost:

Cost Benefit Summary: Securing the wastewater treatment plant against flooding would have
the long term benefit of increasing the plant's resilience. This project would support the MidHudson regional economic goal of investing in infrastructure improvements, including sewer
infrastructure. Increased flood protection for the wastewater treatment plant would reduce the
level of emergency response needed to protect the facility and power down during extreme
weather events. Further savings in local government expenditure would be expected since this
project would lower reconstruction costs following future storm events.
Co-Benefits of Project:


Economic Benefits: The project would secure the plant against flooding, which would result
in a long-term benefit to the community in terms of savings on infrastructure repair
expenses. In addition, reducing the potential for a shutdown or failure of the wastewater
treatment plant could lead to further savings in local government expenditure by
eliminating the need for the conveyance of sewage through the town bypass system and
into the wastewater treatment facility in Haverstraw, which charges the Town of Stony Point
to process the sewage. No negative externalities or opportunity costs were identified.



Environmental Benefits: The project would protect the wastewater treatment plant from
future flooding that could lead to catastrophic failure and release of sewage to the
environment, resulting in degradation of adjacent wetlands, watercourse and important fish
habitat in Haverstraw Bay and beyond. The Hudson River is listed by NYSDEC as habitat for
threatened and endangered species, including Atlantic and Shortnose Sturgeon. Prevention
of the release of untreated sewage would avoid potential negative impacts on these fish
species and other aquatic flora and fauna that use the Hudson River and Haverstraw Bay.



Health and Social Service Benefits: Ensuring that all wastewater continues to be properly
treated during and after storm events will benefit the overall health of the community.

$1.6 million

Proposed Project

Anticipated Regulatory Requirements:
No regulatory constraints anticipated.
Anticipated Timeframe: 6-12 Months
Entity with Jurisdiction: Town of Stony Point

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

IV – 9

Figure IV-6
Project Location - Hardening of Wastewater Treatment Plant

Town Boundary
Putnam
Orange
Westchester
Rockland

Data Sources

±

0

1,500

Feet
3,000

Municipal Boundaries:
Rockland County
Aerial Imagery: NYS Orthos
Transportation: ESRI
March 21, 2014
Copyright:© 2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, TomTom

Figure IV-6-a
Project Location - Hardening of Wastewater Treatment Plant
Click Here & Upgrade

PDF
Complete

Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Documents

LEGEND

NORTH STREET
SEWER TREATMENT PLANT

BOUNDARY AND TOPOGRAPHIC
SURVEY

JOHN R. ATZL
N.Y.S. P.L.S. LIC. NO. 50228

3883

1

This Page Intentionally Blank

STONY POINT NY RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Town of Stony Point
Grassy Point
Redevelopment

Development

/

Project Description: Grassy Point is an
important waterfront district in Stony Point, with
great economic potential; the Town’s diamond
in the rough. Its location and topography leave
it very exposed to the elements. The
neighborhood was severely affected during
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy by storm
surge and wave action. This project would
develop a Master Plan for Grassy Point, which
would address resilience through methods to
manage storm impacts and sea level rise. The
plan would seek to further public use, including
tourism
and
education,
and
promote
appropriate economic development and
resilient water-dependent uses. Private and
public lands on Grassy Point would be
considered and a variety of potential future uses
would be presented in conceptual form.

Proposed Project

Estimated Cost:

$175,000

Anticipated Risk Reduction: The Master Plan for Grassy Point would focus on developing
resilient uses along the waterfront. The plan and any subsequent implementation efforts are
expected to result in the construction of resilient structures, additional open spaces, and other
measures that will improve the sustainability and resilience of area development and nearby
uses. Beyond proposed new uses on the island, assets on Grassy Point that could benefit from
a resiliency-focused plan include Grassy Point’s housing stock, the Wastewater Treatment
Plant, River Road and Grassy Point Road, River Front Park, the US Gypsum plant and water
tower, Gilligan’s on the Hudson, PANCO Petroleum, the Minisceongo Yacht Club/Marina,
Surfside 3 at the Pennybridge Marina, and the Haverstraw kayak launch.
Cost Benefit Summary: A Master Plan for Grassy Point would provide long-term benefits to
the community by improving resilience of existing and new development and addressing sealevel rise in this area, which is extremely susceptible to flooding. While the master planning
effort would not secure or add new jobs, its implementation will likely improve protection of
businesses along the shoreline. With less down time after a storm event, businesses would be
better able to retain employees that might otherwise seek employment elsewhere as a result of
a long recovery period. New employment opportunities resulting from the expected waterfront
appropriate development identified in the plan would bring both temporary construction and
permanent operational jobs to the area. An increase in economic activity (retail, industrial,
construction, and tourism) is expected from the implementation of master plan
recommendations. The implementation of resilience measures in the plan could result in a
more efficient emergency response in the area, allowing Grassy Point to recover more quickly
after an extreme weather event.
Co-Benefits of Project:


Economic Benefits: The local and regional economies would benefit from a stronger
waterfront, with local residents experiencing additional benefits. With the implementation
of new resilience measures, Grassy Point would be better able to recover from future
extreme weather events thereby bringing this economic engine back online more quickly.
The plan could include new waterfront uses able to withstand storm surge and sea level
rise, including uses that could provide greater access to the waterfront for both residents
and visitors/tourists. An identified negative externality is the potential need to assess the
environmental effects of construction at Grassy Point.



Health and Social Service Benefits: Depending on the types of projects and improvements
envisioned, the project may improve access to these services in the future.

Anticipated Regulatory Requirements:
No regulatory constraints related to the master
planning process are anticipated. Regulatory
constraints are expected for implementation of
some or all of the plan recommendations.
Anticipated Timeframe: 24 Months
Entity with Jurisdiction: Town of Stony Point;
Rockland County

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

IV – 10

Figure IV-7
Project Location - Grassy Point Development / Redevelopment

Example of Riverfront Amphitheatre
(Sasaki Associates)

(Patrick Magee)

Town Boundary
Putnam
Orange
Westchester
Rockland

Data Sources

±

0

1,500

Feet
3,000

Municipal Boundaries:
Rockland County
Aerial Imagery: NYS Orthos
Transportation: ESRI
March 21, 2014
Copyright:© 2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, TomTom

STONY POINT NY RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Town of Stony Point
Cedar Pond Brook Interceptor Sewer
Line Rehabilitation
Project Description: The Cedar Pond Brook
Interceptor Sewer Line, a major feeder to the Stony
Point Wastewater Treatment Plant, and its woodframed support structure were exposed during
Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee and Superstorm
Sandy, leaving the support structure in a weakened
condition due to erosion of a protective berm.
Should the line experience a catastrophic collapse
due to undermining and deterioration of the aged
and inadequate wooden support structure, raw
sewage would be discharged into the Cedar Pond
Brook, affecting public parks, fishing and bathing
areas, and critical habitat areas of the Hudson River.
This project would repair and stabilize the
approximately 1/3 mile section of the sewer line that
is most at risk, and provide access to enable ongoing
maintenance work on the line.

Featured Project

Estimated Cost:

$15 million

Anticipated Regulatory Requirements:
NYS DEC (Article 24) and USACE permit for impact to
State and Federally regulated wetlands. Possibly NYS
DOT (Highway Work Permit) and Rockland County
Drainage Agency approval.

Anticipated Risk Reduction: Installation of protective structures on the Cedar Pond
Brook Sewer Line would lower the asset's exposure during storm events. Overall repairs to
the asset, including hardening and covering of exposed sections, will reduce its
vulnerability.
Cost Benefit Summary: Repairing and stabilizing the interceptor sewer line would have a
useful life of more than 20 years and would provide long-term benefits to the community.
This project would support the Mid-Hudson regional economic goal of investing in
infrastructure improvements, including sewer infrastructure. Savings in local government
expenditures are expected since rehabilitation of the sewer line will eliminate the need for
a crew to respond to a catastrophic failure of the line during and/or after future storm
events. The implementation of the project would prevent the discharge of raw sewage
into the Cedar Pond Brook, resulting in lower disaster recovery costs.
Co-Benefits of Project:


Economic Benefits: Repairing and stabilizing the Cedar Pond Brook Interceptor Sewer
Line would provide long-term, community-wide benefits resulting in a more resilient
wastewater conveyance system. This would lower ongoing inspection and
maintenance costs, as well as potential future repair costs. In addition, repairing and
stabilizing the interceptor sewer line could lower disaster recovery costs by eliminating
the need for the conveyance of sewage through the town bypass system and into the
wastewater treatment facility in Haverstraw, which charges the Town of Stony Point to
process the sewage. No negative externalities or opportunity costs have been
identified.



Environmental Benefits: The repair and stabilization of the sewer line will result in
preventative environmental benefits by reducing the potential for sewage spills in the
Cedar Pond Brook.



Health and Social Service Benefits: Ensuring that all wastewater continues to be
properly treated during and after storm events will benefit the overall health of the
community and prevent interruptions in service during storm events.

Anticipated Timeframe: 12-24 Months dependent
upon permitting and mitigation review process
Entity with Jurisdiction: Town of Stony Point
Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

IV – 11

Figure IV-8
Project Location - Cedar Pond Brook Interceptor Sewer Line

Cedar Pond Brook Interceptor
(Kevin Maher)

Cedar Pond Brook Interceptor
(Kevin Maher)

Town Boundary
Putnam
Orange
Westchester
Rockland

Data Sources

±

0

1,500

Feet
3,000

Municipal Boundaries:
Rockland County
Aerial Imagery: NYS Orthos
Transportation: ESRI
March 21, 2014
Copyright:© 2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, TomTom

Figure IV-8-a
Project Detail - Cedar Pond Brook Interceptor Sewer Line

This Page Intentionally Blank

STONY POINT NY RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Town of Stony Point
Demolition
of
Damaged
Abandoned Structures

and

Project Description: While many residents have
repaired or rebuilt waterfront homes after they were
damaged by Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy,
there remain a number of residences along Stony
Point's Hudson River shoreline that remain damaged
and uninhabitable. Walls are missing, roofs have
collapsed, yards are overgrown, windows and doors
are boarded up and some are surrounded by
hurricane fencing to protect residents. The result is
twofold: certain areas along the Hudson River
waterfront have a blighted appearance, and the
damaged structures present a clear and present
danger to the public. This project would acquire four
such residences, all privately-owned single family
homes, and demolish them in order to eliminate the
existing hazard and blight. Once the structures are
removed, the parcels would be incorporated into the
Town Park network.

Featured Project

Estimated Cost:

Anticipated Risk Reduction: Demolition of the damaged and abandoned structures
along Stony Point’s shoreline and incorporation of the properties into the park system
would eliminate the possibility for new residential uses to be established on the affected
properties, thereby reducing the number of residents and assets that are at risk of damage
in future storms.
Cost Benefit Summary: Eliminating these abandoned and damaged structures would
provide permanent protection to the community from existing hazard and blight. The
affected parcels would be incorporated into the Town Park network, which would be a
new, long-term open area resource for the entire community and visitors to the Town.
This is in line with the Mid-Hudson regional economic goal of leveraging natural resources
as drivers of tourism and quality-of-life attributes. In addition, once these houses are
removed, the Town would no longer need to coordinate evacuation of residents and fence
off damaged, abandoned structures, resulting in savings in local government expenditure.
Co-Benefits of Project:


Economic Benefits: Although no permanent jobs will be added, this project would
result in new open space, which would attract additional visitors to the community and
boost economic activity. Additionally, the negative economic effects of blighted
properties on the all-important waterfront would be eliminated.



Health and Social Service Benefits: Removal of four homes would prevent potential
health and safety impacts associated with abandoned structures.

$1,252,000

Anticipated Regulatory Requirements:
Local approvals – demolition permits, etc. are
anticipated.
Anticipated Timeframe: 24 Months
Entity with Jurisdiction: Town of Stony Point

Section IV: Implementation - Project Profiles

IV – 12

Figure IV-9
Project Location - Demolition of Damaged / Abandoned Structures

Town Boundary
Putnam
Orange
Westchester
Rockland

Data Sources

±

0

1,500

Municipal Boundaries:
Rockland County
Aerial Imagery: NYS Orthos
Transportation: ESRI

Feet
3,000

March 21, 2014
Copyright:© 2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ, TomTom

(Chris Robbins)

(Chris Robbins)

Damaged House (Chris Robbins)

This Page Intentionally Blank

2014
NY RISING COMMUNITY
RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
NYRCR STONY POINT

Section V

Additional Materials

V

Additional Materials

A. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations
Table V-1
Additional Resiliency Recommendations

Project Name

Description

Estimated Regional
Project
Costs

Strategy 1: Strengthen current short- and long-term emergency shelters and develop new sheltering opportunities
Improvements to West Main
Street to increase walkability
and connectivity

After Superstorm Sandy, a large number of Town residents sheltered at the
Stony Point Center for up to three months. The Center, located on West Main
Street in a suburban area of the Town, is somewhat distant from certain
services that displaced persons need to access, including supermarkets and
Town services, which are located largely along Liberty Drive/Route 9W. This
project would seek to improve the connections between the Center and the
cluster of services along Liberty Drive by widening West Main Street and
adding street lights and sidewalks. These improvements would improve
walkability and access for residents, visitors, and displaced persons traveling
to shelters.

$295,000

No

Strategy 2: Encourage economic development and support existing businesses
Improve Access to Waterfront

This project would investigate ways to improve public access to the
waterfront from other areas of Stony Point, as well as access among different
sections of the waterfront area. Improvements could include new/refurbished
sidewalks and drainage improvements to reduce flooding. The project would
also improve evacuation and emergency vehicle access to the area, while
encouraging economic development and appropriate uses on the riverfront.

$50,000 to
$100,000

No

Improve Public Transportation

In order to improve accessibility throughout the Town and facilitate
evacuation in advance of serious storms, this project would provide a public
transportation expansion for Stony Point. Routes would run throughout the
Town along major corridors, and would focus on the waterfront with shuttle
transportation in that area.

$30,000 to
$200,000

No

Improvements to West Main
Street to increase walkability
and connectivity

After Superstorm Sandy, a large number of Town residents sheltered at the
Stony Point Center for up to three months. The Center, located on West Main
Street in a suburban area of the Town, is somewhat distant from certain
services that displaced persons need to access, including supermarkets and
Town services, which are located largely along Liberty Drive/Route 9W. This
project would seek to improve the connections between the Center and the
cluster of services along Liberty Drive by widening West Main Street and
adding street lights and sidewalks. These improvements would improve
walkability and access for residents, visitors, and displaced persons traveling
to shelters.

$295,000

No

Rebuild Stony Point King’s
Ferry Landing

The King's Ferry Landing in Stony Point, just upriver from the Stony Point
Battlefield, is an important historical site in the Town as the location of one of
the first river crossings in the area. Until Superstorm Sandy, a floating dock
was located on the site, but wave action during that storm swept the dock
away. This project would replace the floating dock that was lost, clean up
debris on the site, and provide public access to what is now a fenced-off
area.

$136,000

No

Section V: Additional Materials

V–1

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-1
Additional Resiliency Recommendations (Cont’d)

Project Name

Description

Estimated
Costs

Regional
Project

Strategy 2: Encourage economic development and support existing businesses
Reduce Residential Flood
Insurance Rates

In response to the need to reduce flood insurance premiums for Stony Point
residents, the Town has expressed interest in participation in the FEMA
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Community Rating System (CRS).
This project, which the Town has already begun working on, would involve
increased municipal participation in the program.

$50,000 to
$100,000

No

Sidewalk Improvements

To facilitate pedestrian activity along major roadways in the center of the
Town, this project would build and/or rehabilitate sidewalks on Holt Drive
from South Liberty Drive to the Kay Fries plant, and along Crickettown Road
from West Main Street to the Stony Point Center.

$160,500

No

Town Dock / Pier

This project would involve design and construction of a new Town dock/pier
on the Hudson River to provide access to the water for residents and
tourists. This project would make the waterfront a more attractive place for
locals and visitors alike and would be an important component of economic
development along the Town waterfront.

$1.85 million

No

Strategy 3: Improve on existing emergency preparedness, response and communications
Dam management

This project would develop a management plan that would allow for the
release of water in advance of significant storm events to increase reservoirs'
capacity for stormwater storage. Dams to be included in the project are those
at Lake Welch, Lake Tiorati, Camp Addison Boyce, and Camp Bullowa.

$900,000

No

Develop an Emergency Plan

This project would involve undertaking a collaborative public process to
develop a Town emergency plan. Once a plan is produced, an educational
campaign would ensure citizens and first responders are aware of the plan.
The plan would need to provide for regular distribution of emergency
information to all Town residents, in both English and Spanish.

$35,000 to
$70,000

No

Develop an Evacuation Plan
and Signage

This project would develop routes for coastal and riverine evacuation, then
develop and install signage and otherwise educate the public about
evacuation procedures. The project would also ensure provision of sidewalks
and other means of access along the designated evacuation routes.

$100,000 to
$200,000

No

Organize Affected Residents

Responding to a disconnect between residents and the resources they need
for recovery, this project would develop an organization of affected residents
to share information and best practices about recovery and resiliency. The
forum would distribute information about recovery programs, connect people
with information and services, and serve as a venue for residents to meet
with building professionals who can provide estimates and rebuilding
services. The group could participate in trainings such as Governor Cuomo’s
Citizen Preparedness Corps Training Program. Information would be made
available in English and Spanish, and specific outreach would be made to
socially vulnerable populations that have been heavily affected.

$20,000 to
$40,000

No

Strategy 4: Provide information and assistance to homeowners with pre-storm flood-proofing and post-storm repair, buyouts and demolition
Assess the potential for
alternate low income housing
locations

Several of Stony Point's low income housing locations, including the Ba Mar
Mobile Home Park, are located in areas of high or extreme flood risk, placing
some of the Town's most vulnerable residents directly in harm's way. This
project would seek to rectify this problem by studying and identifying
potential opportunities that will enable residents of mobile home parks in
flood risk zones to relocate to other areas of Stony Point outside of flood risk
zones. This would maintain the viability of these neighborhoods, which
preserve critical mixed-income and multi-generational housing for the Town.

$75,000 to
$150,000

No

Assess Zoning Code for
Rebuilding Requirements/
Processes

This project would assess the Stony Point zoning code to determine if
changes to the code would be required to ease the process of rebuilding
homes, other buildings, and infrastructure in the floodplain.

$25,000 to
$50,000

No

Reduce Residential Flood
Insurance Rates

In response to the need to reduce flood insurance premiums for Stony Point
residents, the Town has expressed interest in participation in the FEMA
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Community Rating System (CRS).
This project, which the Town has already begun working on, would involve
increased municipal participation in the program.

$50,000 to
$100,000

No

V–2

Section V: Additional Materials

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-1
Additional Resiliency Recommendations (Cont’d)

Project Name

Description

Estimated
Costs

Regional
Project

Strategy 5: Promote sustainability and resilience through land use planning and regulation
Assess Zoning Code for
Rebuilding Requirements/
Processes

This project would assess the Stony Point zoning code to determine if changes
to the code would be required to ease the process of rebuilding homes, other
buildings, and infrastructure in the floodplain.

$25,000 to
$50,000

No

Update and adopt revised
Master Plan and LWRP

The Town of Stony Point's Master Plan and Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program (LWRP) are in need of updates to address sustainability, energy
efficiency, resilience and sea level rise. This project would initiate the public
process required for updating these documents. In addition to the topics listed
above, other ideas for improvements to these plans include incorporation of a
Harbor Management Plan and a Marina Protection Plan to be employed during
storm events.

$125,000 to
$225,000

No

Strategy 6: Repair, rehabilitate, upgrade and fortify critical infrastructure and transportation
Bridge Repairs

This project would conduct a study to assess the need for repairs to bridges
throughout the Town. Key bridges to be addressed include those on Lowland
Hill Road and Reservoir Road, and the Penny Bridge connecting the mainland to
Grassy Point. This study would be conducted by a structural engineer and would
include field inspection, documentation of existing conditions and damage, and
a report documenting those conditions and recommending repairs or further
testing that may be required.

$75,000 to
$120,000

No

Grassy Point Road
Drainage

During Superstorm Sandy, Grassy Point Road flooded on both sides of the
Penny Bridge, preventing emergency vehicle access between the mainland and
Stony Point. Evacuation of residents required the use of boats. In order to
eliminate/reduce the duration of roadway flooding, this project would improve
stormwater management along this stretch of Grassy Point Road and/or raise
the road where flooding occurs during heavy rains and there are no catch basins.

$465,000

No

Hardening of Beach Road
sewage pump station

This project would conduct an engineering study of the pump station on Beach
Road to determine measures required to protect the pump station from flooding
and wave action due to sea level rise and future storm events. In the short term,
the project would involve installation of a floodproof door to prevent water from
entering the building, floodproofing of the walls, installation of a generator with a
new room to house it, and raising wall vents above flood elevation.

$54,000

No

Hardening of Kay Fries
sanitary by-pass pump
station

This project would conduct an engineering study of the Kay Fries pump station
to determine measures required to protect the pump station from flooding and
storm surge due to sea level rise and future storm events. At a minimum, the
project would require installation of a generator and waterproof electrical
controls.

$299,000 to
$339,000

No

Improve Access to
Waterfront

This project would investigate ways to improve public access to the waterfront
from other areas of Stony Point, as well as access among different sections of
the waterfront area. Improvements could include new/refurbished sidewalks and
drainage improvements to reduce flooding. The project would also improve
evacuation and emergency vehicle access to the area, while encouraging
economic development and appropriate uses on the riverfront.

$50,000 to
$100,000

No

Improvements to West
Main Street to increase
walkability and connectivity

After Superstorm Sandy, a large number of Town residents sheltered at the Stony
Point Center for up to three months. The Center, located on West Main Street in
a suburban area of the Town, is somewhat distant from certain services that
displaced persons need to access, including supermarkets and Town services,
which are located largely along Liberty Drive/Route 9W. This project would seek
to improve the connections between the Center and the cluster of services along
Liberty Drive by widening West Main Street and adding street lights and
sidewalks. These improvements would improve walkability and access for
residents, visitors, and displaced persons traveling to shelters.

$295,000

No

Lowland Park Flood
Resilience

During Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, Lowland Park experienced
significant flooding. This project would conduct a study to determine the best
method to address flooding, erosion, sedimentation, streambed stability at
Lowland Hill Park. The end goal would be to reconfigure the park so that
equipment and structures are moved to higher ground or rebuilt to withstand
flooding with minimal damage.

$54,000

No

Section V: Additional Materials

V–3

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-1
Additional Resiliency Recommendations (Cont’d)

Project Name

Description

Estimated
Costs

Regional
Project

Strategy 6: Repair, rehabilitate, upgrade and fortify critical infrastructure and transportation
Relocate
wastewater
treatment plant

The Stony Point Wastewater Treatment Plant suffered approximately $1 million in
damage during Superstorm Sandy, when floodwaters entered the facility. Aside from the
damages, this also increased the Town's insurance premiums dramatically, creating a
long-term cost increase for Stony Point taxpayers. This project would attempt to
eliminate flood risk at the wastewater treatment facility entirely by assessing options for
relocating the plant to an area of the Town that lies outside of the flood zone.

$157, 500

No

Reservoir Road
Bridge Crossing /
Cedar Pond Brook

Conduct a study to determine the best method for addressing flooding, erosion,
sedimentation, and streambed stability at the Cedar Pond Brook crossing on Reservoir
Road. This is a study only. Study includes: analysis of watershed flows to bridge;
floodplain and channel survey from 200 feet upstream to falls located approximately
1500' downstream as well as the bridge and roadway geometry in the floodplain; field
estimation of flow parameters; HEC-RAS analysis for flow, sediment and stability; and
identification and assessment of alternatives on the basis of these analyses.

$90,000

No

Sidewalk
Improvements

To facilitate pedestrian activity along major roadways in the center of the Town, this
project would build and/or rehabilitate sidewalks on Holt Drive from South Liberty Drive
to the Kay Fries plant, and along Crickettown Road from West Main Street to the Stony
Point Center.

$160,500

No

Strategy 7: Harness resiliency potential of natural resources
Clean Up and
Maintain Cedar
Pond Brook and
Unnamed Streams

Blockages of the Cedar Pond Brook and other waterways in Stony Point occurred
during Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, causing flooding of these creeks and
damage to nearby roadways and utility lines. This project would involve coordination
between the Town, County, and State to develop an environmentally sensitive program
to clear the channels of these streams by removing debris and detritus from
approximately 1.5 miles of creek beds.

$50,000 to
$200, 000

No

Lowland Park Flood
Resilience

During Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, Lowland Park experienced significant
flooding. This project would conduct a study to determine the best method to address
flooding, erosion, sedimentation, streambed stability at Lowland Hill Park. The end goal
would be to reconfigure the park so that equipment and structures are moved to higher
ground or rebuilt to withstand flooding with minimal damage.

$54,000

No

Oyster reef /
mussels reef
feasibility

This project would investigate the feasibility of and potential locations for oyster and/or
mussel reefs along the Hudson River waterfront. If put in place, such reefs would
provide natural storm buffers. This is a Phase I study only in which the frequency and
occurrence of salinity and other environmental factors would be assessed at the
potential project locations and measures would be identified and preliminarily evaluated
that may provide a flood protection benefit. These measures and an analysis of their
feasibility and benefit would be presented for consideration of further study and
implementation.

$45,000

No

Tidal wetland
restoration north of
Stony Point Bay
Marina and South of
Stony Point
Battlefield

This project would investigate the feasibility of and potential locations for tidal wetland
restoration along the Hudson River between Stony Point Bay Marina and the Stony
Point Battlefield. If put in place, new or restored wetlands would provide natural buffers
to flooding and wave action. This is a Phase I study only, in which wetland construction/
restoration that may provide a flood protection benefit would be evaluated. These
measures and an analysis of their feasibility and benefit would be presented for
consideration of further study and implementation.

$45,000

No

Watershed
Evaluation and
Intervention for
Stream
Improvements

This project would perform a comprehensive restoration assessment of Stony Point's
waterways to identify restoration goals and associated performance metrics, assess
existing conditions with respect to erosion and deposition patterns, identify local and
watershed-scale stressors, understand patterns of channel evolution, and determine
and diagnose root-causes of observed problems (e.g. erosion problems). Based on the
restoration assessment, a restoration plan would be developed, which will describe,
map, and provide preliminary cost estimates for specific reach and sub-reach scale
interventions required to remediate existing problems and achieve restoration goals,
including but not limited to channel and floodplain redesign, bank stabilization,
in-stream flow modification, bridge redesign or modification, and/or watershed
restoration activities. The final step would be to develop an environmentally sensitive
program with the Town, County and State to maintain these streams.

$160,000

No

V–4

Section V: Additional Materials

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Master Table of Projects
Table V-2
Master Table of Projects

Project Name

Description

Category

Estimated

Regional

Costs

Project

Strategy 1: Strengthen current short- and long-term emergency shelters and develop new sheltering opportunities
Improvements to
West Main Street to
increase walkability
and connectivity

After Superstorm Sandy, a large number of Town residents sheltered at
the Stony Point Center for up to three months. The Center, located on
West Main Street in a suburban area of the Town, is somewhat distant
from certain services that displaced persons need to access, including
supermarkets and Town services, which are located largely along
Liberty Drive/Route 9W. This project would seek to improve the
connections between the Center and the cluster of services along
Liberty Drive by widening West Main Street and adding street lights
and sidewalks. These improvements would improve walkability and
access for residents, visitors, and displaced persons traveling to
shelters.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$295,000

No

Letchworth Village
Disaster Recovery
and
Communications
Center

Set up a short-term emergency/disaster recovery center, a cooling
center, and an Emergency Operations Command Center (EOCC). The
RHO Building would serve as the emergency/disaster recovery center
and be a central processing location for all residents in need of
assistance during and after disaster events. The Police Station would
serve as a flexible communications command center to accommodate
a variety of emergencies, and to coordinate the activities of all
emergency responders mainly through radio communications, and
internet connections, in real time.

Proposed Project

$805,000

No

Stony Point Center
Retrofit

The Stony Point Center is a FEMA-approved Emergency Lodging
Assistance Program site, and housed displaced residents for up to
three months after Superstorm Sandy. However, the facility has
experienced flooding of the main building and entry road as well as
loss of power during storm events. In order to better equip the Center
to support displaced residents during and after future storms, this
project would install backup generators and make enhancements to
the Center's stormwater management system.

Proposed Project

$207,000

No

Update and adopt
revised Master Plan
and LWRP

The Town of Stony Point's Master Plan and Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program (LWRP) are in need of updates to address
sustainability, energy efficiency, resilience and sea level rise. This
project would initiate the public process required for updating these
documents. In addition to the topics listed above, other ideas for
improvements to these plans include incorporation of a Harbor
Management Plan and a Marina Protection Plan to be employed during
storm events.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$125,000 to
$225,000

No

Strategy 2: Encourage economic development and support existing businesses
Improve Access to
Waterfront

This project would investigate ways to improve public access to the
waterfront from other areas of Stony Point, as well as access among
different sections of the waterfront area. Improvements could include
new/refurbished sidewalks and drainage improvements to reduce
flooding. The project would also improve evacuation and emergency
vehicle access to the area, while encouraging economic development
and appropriate uses on the riverfront.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$50,000 to
$100,000

No

Grassy Point
Development /
Redevelopment

Develop a master plan for Grassy Point, which would address resiliency
through methods to manage sea level rise. The plan would also seek to
further public use, including tourism and education, and promote
appropriate economic development and resilient water-dependent
uses. The plan would consider both private and public lands on Grassy
Point and present a variety of potential future uses in conceptual form.

Proposed Project

$175,000

No

Improve Public
Transportation

In order to improve accessibility throughout the Town and facilitate
evacuation in advance of serious storms, this project would provide a
public transportation expansion for Stony Point. Routes would run
throughout the Town along major corridors, and would focus on the
waterfront with shuttle transportation in that area.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$30,000 to
$200,000

No

Section V: Additional Materials

V–5

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2
Master Table of Projects (Cont’d)

Project Name

Description

Category

Estimated

Regional

Costs

Project

Strategy 2: Encourage economic development and support existing businesses
Improvements to
West Main Street to
increase walkability
and connectivity

After Superstorm Sandy, a large number of Town residents sheltered at
the Stony Point Center for up to three months. The Center, located on
West Main Street in a suburban area of the Town, is somewhat distant
from certain services that displaced persons need to access, including
supermarkets and Town services, which are located largely along
Liberty Drive/Route 9W. This project would seek to improve the
connections between the Center and the cluster of services along
Liberty Drive by widening West Main Street and adding street lights
and sidewalks. These improvements would improve walkability and
access for residents, visitors, and displaced persons traveling to
shelters.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$295,000

No

Rebuild Stony Point
King’s Ferry Landing

The King's Ferry Landing in Stony Point, just upriver from the Stony
Point Battlefield, is an important historical site in the Town as the
location of one of the first river crossings in the area. Until Superstorm
Sandy, a floating dock was located on the site, but wave action during
that storm swept the dock away. This project would replace the floating
dock that was lost, clean up debris on the site, and provide public
access to what is now a fenced-off area.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$136,000

No

Reduce Residential
Flood Insurance
Rates

In response to the need to reduce flood insurance premiums for Stony
Point residents, the Town has expressed interest in participation in the
FEMA National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Community Rating
System (CRS). This project, which the Town has already begun working
on, would involve increased municipal participation in the program.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$50,000 to
$100,000

No

Sidewalk
Improvements

To facilitate pedestrian activity along major roadways in the center of
the Town, this project would build and/or rehabilitate sidewalks on Holt
Drive from South Liberty Drive to the Kay Fries plant, and along
Crickettown Road from West Main Street to the Stony Point Center.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$160,500

No

Town Dock / Pier

This project would involve design and construction of a new Town
dock/pier on the Hudson River to provide access to the water for
residents and tourists. This project would make the waterfront a more
attractive place for locals and visitors alike and would be an important
component of economic development along the Town waterfront.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$1.85 million

No

Strategy 3: Improve on existing emergency preparedness, response and communications
Dam management

This project would develop a management plan that would allow for the
release of water in advance of significant storm events to increase
reservoirs' capacity for stormwater storage. Dams to be included in the
project are those at Lake Welch, Lake Tiorati, Camp Addison Boyce,
and Camp Bullowa.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$900,000

No

Develop an
Emergency Plan

This project would involve undertaking a collaborative public process
to develop a Town emergency plan. Once a plan is produced, an
educational campaign would ensure citizens and first responders are
aware of the plan. The plan would need to provide for regular
distribution of emergency information to all Town residents, in both
English and Spanish.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$35,000 to
$70,000

No

Develop an
Evacuation Plan and
Signage

This project would develop routes for coastal and riverine evacuation,
then develop and install signage and otherwise educate the public
about evacuation procedures. The project would also ensure provision
of sidewalks and other means of access along the designated
evacuation routes.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$100,000 to
$200,000

No

Letchworth Village
Disaster Recovery
and
Communications
Center

Set up a short-term emergency/disaster recovery center, a cooling
center, and an Emergency Operations Command Center (EOCC). The
RHO Building would serve as the emergency/disaster recovery center
and be a central processing location for all residents in need of
assistance during and after disaster events. The Police Station would
serve as a flexible communications command center to accommodate
a variety of emergencies, and to coordinate the activities of all
emergency responders mainly through radio communications, and
internet connections, in real time.

Proposed Project

$805,000

No

V–6

Section V: Additional Materials

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2
Master Table of Projects (Cont’d)

Project Name

Description

Category

Estimated

Regional

Costs

Project

$20,000 to
$40,000

No

Strategy 3: Improve on existing emergency preparedness, response and communications
Organize Affected
Residents

Responding to a disconnect between residents and the resources they
need for recovery, this project would develop an organization of
affected residents to share information and best practices about
recovery and resiliency. The forum would distribute information about
recovery programs, connect people with information and services, and
serve as a venue for residents to meet with building professionals who
can provide estimates and rebuilding services. Information would be
made available in English and Spanish, and specific outreach would be
made to socially vulnerable populations that have been heavily
affected.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

Strategy 4: Provide information and assistance to homeowners with pre-storm flood-proofing and post-storm repair, buyouts and demolition
Assess the potential
for alternate low
income housing
locations

Several of Stony Point's low income housing locations, including the
Ba Mar Mobile Home Park, are located in areas of high or extreme
flood risk, placing some of the Town's most vulnerable residents
directly in harm's way. This project would seek to rectify this problem
by studying and identifying potential opportunities that will enable
residents of mobile home parks in flood risk zones to relocate to other
areas of Stony Point outside of flood risk zones. This would maintain
the viability of these neighborhoods, which preserve critical mixedincome and multi-generational housing for the Town.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$75,000 to
$150,000

No

Assess Zoning
Code for Rebuilding
Requirements/
Processes

This project would assess the Stony Point zoning code to determine if
changes to the code would be required to ease the process of
rebuilding homes, other buildings, and infrastructure in the floodplain.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$25,000 to
$50,000

No

Demolition of
Damaged and
Abandoned
Structures

While many residents have rebuilt waterfront homes after they were
damaged by Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, there remain a
number of structures along Stony Point's Hudson River shoreline that
are unimproved and boarded up. This project would acquire four such
structures, all privately-owned single family homes, and demolish them
in order to eliminate potential hazard and blight. These parcels would
then be incorporated into the Town Park network.

Featured Project

$1,252,000

No

Reduce Residential
Flood Insurance
Rates

In response to the need to reduce flood insurance premiums for Stony
Point residents, the Town has expressed interest in participation in the
FEMA National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Community Rating
System (CRS). This project, which the Town has already begun working
on, would involve increased municipal participation in the program.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$50,000 to
$100,000

No

Strategy 5: Promote sustainability and resilience through land use planning and regulation
Assess Zoning
Code for Rebuilding
Requirements/
Processes

This project would assess the Stony Point zoning code to determine if
changes to the code would be required to ease the process of
rebuilding homes, other buildings, and infrastructure in the floodplain.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$25,000 to
$50,000

No

Grassy Point
Development /
Redevelopment

Develop a master plan for Grassy Point, which would address resiliency
through methods to manage sea level rise. The plan would also seek to
further public use, including tourism and education, and promote
appropriate economic development and resilient water-dependent
uses. The plan would consider both private and public lands on Grassy
Point and present a variety of potential future uses in conceptual form.

Proposed Project

$175,000

No

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$75,000 to
$120,000

No

Strategy 6: Repair, rehabilitate, upgrade and fortify critical infrastructure and transportation
Bridge Repairs

This project would conduct a study to assess the need for repairs to
bridges throughout the Town. Key bridges to be addressed include
those on Lowland Hill Road and Reservoir Road, and the Penny Bridge
connecting the mainland to Grassy Point. This study would be
conducted by a structural engineer and would include field inspection,
documentation of existing conditions and damage, and a report
documenting those conditions and recommending repairs or further
testing that may be required.

Section V: Additional Materials

V–7

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2
Master Table of Projects (Cont’d)

Project Name

Description

Category

Estimated

Regional

Costs

Project

Strategy 6: Repair, rehabilitate, upgrade and fortify critical infrastructure and transportation
Cedar Pond Brook
Interceptor Sewer
Line Rehabilitation

The Cedar Pond Brook Interceptor Sewer Line is a major feeder line for
the Stony Point Wastewater Treatment Plant. The line and its woodframed support structure were undermined and exposed during
Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee and Superstorm Sandy, leaving the
support structure in a weakened condition due to erosion of the berm
that had covered the line. This project would repair and stabilize the
approximately 1/3 mile section of the sewer line that is most at risk,
and provide access to enable ongoing maintenance work.

Featured Project

$15 million

No

Grassy Point Road
Drainage

During Superstorm Sandy, Grassy Point Road flooded on both sides of
the Penny Bridge, preventing emergency vehicle access between the
mainland and Stony Point. Evacuation of residents required the use of
boats. In order to eliminate/reduce the duration of roadway flooding,
this project would improve stormwater management along this stretch
of Grassy Point Road and/or raise the road where flooding occurs
during heavy rains and there are no catch basins.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$465,000

No

Hardening of Beach
Road sewage pump
station

This project would conduct an engineering study of the pump station
on Beach Road to determine measures required to protect the pump
station from flooding and wave action due to sea level rise and future
storm events. In the short term, the project would involve installation of
a floodproof door to prevent water from entering the building,
floodproofing of the walls, installation of a generator with a new room
to house it, and raising wall vents above flood elevation.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$54,000

No

Hardening of Kay
Fries sanitary
by-pass pump
station

This project would conduct an engineering study of the Kay Fries pump
station to determine measures required to protect the pump station
from flooding and storm surge due to sea level rise and future storm
events. At a minimum, the project would require installation of a
generator and waterproof electrical controls.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$299,000 to
$339,000

No

Hardening of
Wastewater
Treatment Plant

During Superstorm Sandy, the Stony Point Wastewater Treatment Plant
was flooded by storm surge from the Hudson, incurring approximately
$1 million in damages. This project seeks to secure the wastewater
treatment plant against future flooding through installation of enclosed/
submersible motors and controls, floodproof entry doors and windows,
installing new or refurbishing existing electrical systems. Also included
are the engineering, design and architectural services associated with
these improvements.

Proposed Project

$1.6 million

No

Improve Access to
Waterfront

This project would investigate ways to improve public access to the
waterfront from other areas of Stony Point, as well as access among
different sections of the waterfront area. Improvements could include
new/refurbished sidewalks and drainage improvements to reduce
flooding. The project would also improve evacuation and emergency
vehicle access to the area, while encouraging economic development
and appropriate uses on the riverfront.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$50,000 to
$100,000

No

Improvements to
West Main Street to
increase walkability
and connectivity

After Superstorm Sandy, a large number of Town residents sheltered at
the Stony Point Center for up to three months. The Center, located on
West Main Street in a suburban area of the Town, is somewhat distant
from certain services that displaced persons need to access, including
supermarkets and Town services, which are located largely along
Liberty Drive/Route 9W. This project would seek to improve the
connections between the Center and the cluster of services along
Liberty Drive by widening West Main Street and adding street lights
and sidewalks. These improvements would improve walkability and
access for residents, visitors, and displaced persons traveling to
shelters.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$295,000

No

Lowland Park Flood
Resilience

During Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, Lowland Park
experienced significant flooding. This project would conduct a study to
determine the best method to address flooding, erosion, sedimentation,
streambed stability at Lowland Hill Park. The end goal would be to
reconfigure the park so that equipment and structures are moved to
higher ground or rebuilt to withstand flooding with minimal damage.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$54,000

No

V–8

Section V: Additional Materials

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2
Master Table of Projects (Cont’d)

Project Name

Description

Category

Estimated

Regional

Costs

Project

Strategy 6: Repair, rehabilitate, upgrade and fortify critical infrastructure and transportation
Rehabilitation of
Wastewater
Interceptors along
Beach Road and the
Ba Mar Sewer Line

This project proposes resilient construction techniques that will prevent
inflow and infiltration into the sewer lines that flow into the Beach Road
Pump Station and on into the Town's Wastewater Treatment Plant.
This project would replace 20 manhole covers and install 20 vents to
prevent storm and tidal water intrusion into the sewer lines during
future flooding events and eliminate sewerage overflow along Beach
Road and in the Ba Mar Mobile Home Park.

Proposed Project

$125,000

No

Relocate
wastewater
treatment plant

The Stony Point Wastewater Treatment Plant suffered approximately $1
million in damage during Superstorm Sandy, when floodwaters entered
the facility. Aside from the damages, this also increased the Town's
insurance premiums dramatically, creating a long-term cost increase
for Stony Point taxpayers. This project would attempt to eliminate flood
risk at the wastewater treatment facility entirely by assessing options
for relocating the plant to an area of the Town that lies outside of the
flood zone.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$157,500

No

Reservoir Road
Bridge Crossing /
Cedar Pond Brook

Conduct a study to determine the best method for addressing flooding,
erosion, sedimentation, and streambed stability at the Cedar Pond
Brook crossing on Reservoir Road. This is a study only. Study
includes: analysis of watershed flows to bridge; floodplain and channel
survey from 200 feet upstream to falls located approximately 1500'
downstream as well as the bridge and roadway geometry in the
floodplain; field estimation of flow parameters; HEC-RAS analysis for
flow, sediment and stability; and identification and assessment of
alternatives on the basis of these analyses.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$90,000

No

Shoreline Protection
Against Erosion and
Wave Action (Beach
Road)

The project includes half of the flooding/wave attenuation study that
will be performed for the waterfront south of the battlefield park.
Improvements to and/or rehabilitation of seawalls and bulkheads to
protect resources and improve beach retention would be implemented.
The design and installation of a wave energy attenuation system is
covered under this project.

Proposed Project

$1 million

No

Shoreline Protection
Against Erosion and
Wave Action (River
Road)

The project includes half of the flooding/wave attenuation study that
will be performed for the waterfront south of the battlefield park.
Improvements to and/or rehabilitation of jetties and seawalls to protect
resources and improve beach retention would be implemented. The
design and installation of a wave energy attenuation system is covered
under this project.

Proposed Project

$1.7 million

No

Sidewalk
Improvements

To facilitate pedestrian activity along major roadways in the center of
the Town, this project would build and/or rehabilitate sidewalks on Holt
Drive from South Liberty Drive to the Kay Fries plant, and along
Crickettown Road from West Main Street to the Stony Point Center.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$160,500

No

Strategy 7: Harness resiliency potential of natural resources
Clean Up and
Maintain Cedar
Pond Brook and
Unnamed Streams

Blockages of the Cedar Pond Brook and other waterways in Stony
Point occurred during Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, causing
flooding of these creeks and damage to nearby roadways and utility
lines. This project would involve coordination between the Town,
County, and State to develop an environmentally sensitive program to
clear the channels of these streams by removing debris and detritus
from approximately 1.5 miles of creek beds.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$50,000 to
$200,000

No

Lowland Park Flood
Resilience

During Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, Lowland Park
experienced significant flooding. This project would conduct a study to
determine the best method to address flooding, erosion, sedimentation,
streambed stability at Lowland Hill Park. The end goal would be to
reconfigure the park so that equipment and structures are moved to
higher ground or rebuilt to withstand flooding with minimal damage.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$54,000

No

Section V: Additional Materials

V–9

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2
Master Table of Projects (Cont’d)

Project Name

Description

Category

Estimated

Regional

Costs

Project

Strategy 7: Harness resiliency potential of natural resources
Oyster reef /
mussels reef
feasibility

This project would investigate the feasibility of and potential locations
for oyster and/or mussel reefs along the Hudson River waterfront. If
put in place, such reefs would provide natural storm buffers. This is a
Phase I study only in which the frequency and occurrence of salinity
and other environmental factors would be assessed at the potential
project locations and measures would be identified and preliminarily
evaluated that may provide a flood protection benefit. These measures
and an analysis of their feasibility and benefit would be presented for
consideration of further study and implementation.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$45,000

No

Tidal wetland
restoration north of
Stony Point Bay
Marina and South of
Stony Point
Battlefield

This project would investigate the feasibility of and potential locations
for tidal wetland restoration along the Hudson River between Stony
Point Bay Marina and the Stony Point Battlefield. If put in place, new or
restored wetlands would provide natural buffers to flooding and wave
action. This is a Phase I study only, in which wetland construction/
restoration that may provide a flood protection benefit would be
evaluated. These measures and an analysis of their feasibility and
benefit would be presented for consideration of further study and
implementation.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$45,000

No

Watershed
Evaluation and
Intervention for
Stream
Improvements

This project would perform a comprehensive restoration assessment of
Stony Point's waterways to identify restoration goals and associated
performance metrics, assess existing conditions with respect to
erosion and deposition patterns, identify local and watershed-scale
stressors, understand patterns of channel evolution, and determine and
diagnose root-causes of observed problems (e.g. erosion problems).
Based on the restoration assessment, a restoration plan would be
developed, which will describe, map, and provide preliminary cost
estimates for specific reach and sub-reach scale interventions required
to remediate existing problems and achieve restoration goals, including
but not limited to channel and floodplain redesign, bank stabilization,
in-stream flow modification, bridge redesign or modification, and/or
watershed restoration activities. The final step would be to develop an
environmentally sensitive program with the Town, County and State to
maintain these streams.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$160,000

No

C. Public Engagement Process
The public and stakeholder engagement process
incorporated a range of techniques to involve Stony
Point residents in shaping their NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan:

Regular Committee Meetings
The Stony Point NYRCR Planning Committee was
comprised of two co-chairs and 13 members including local business owners, elected officials, civic
leaders, and storm-impacted residents. The Committee members met roughly every other week to review
progress and provide input on every aspect of the plan
– study area, vision, needs and opportunities, strategies, and projects. This typically took the form of

V – 10

Section V: Additional Materials

group conversations, with key points and decisions
recorded in meeting summaries. The Committee also
had several weekend meetings to provide detailed
information about assets, potential projects, to visit
potential projects sites, and to deliberate on various
aspects of the planning process.
Members of the Committee were instrumental in
reaching out to vulnerable populations, particularly
residents of the Ba Mar mobile home park, to include
them in the NYRCR dialogue and encourage their
attendance at Public Engagement Meetings. Committee members also distributed posters and flyers,
spoke with Stony Point residents and business
owners, and used social media to notify their personal
networks about upcoming Public Engagement
opportunities.

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Four Public Engagement Meetings
Each Public Engagement Meeting was an opportunity
for community members to learn about the NYRCR
planning process and to provide input that informed
the final elements of the plan.

Meeting #1: Vision, Assets, Needs &
Opportunities
Goals for the first meeting were to familiarize community members with the NYRCR process, goals, and
expected outcomes; to gather input on the draft community vision; to review and comment on the community asset list; to develop preliminary lists of community needs and opportunities; and to gather
suggestions for potential projects.

Residents in conversation with Committee member Rebecca Casscles
at Public Engagement Meeting #1. In the foreground are maps of
economic development and housing needs and opportunities along
with pens for community members to add items to the map. In the
background are posters where Committee and Consultant Team
members recorded needs and opportunities suggested by residents.
These were added to the master list of needs and opportunities in
initial drafts of the NYRCR Plan.

This was accomplished through a presentation that
gave an introduction to the NY Rising program and
process, provided an overview of the project timeline,
and reported on the progress to date. This informational presentation was followed by an open-housestyle community break-out session during which
community members provided input on the draft
community vision, added to the list of community
assets, fleshed out a preliminary list of needs and
opportunities, and contributed project ideas.
For each topic, residents visited stations set up around
the room to have conversations, provide their feedback, and contribute ideas:

At another station, residents were invited to view the draft asset map
and add post-it notes recording additional assets. While many
of the assets added by residents were actually needs or opportunities, the information was invaluable in fleshing out the initial sections
of the plan. Among the assets identified were the Hudson River, local
elementary schools, the waterfront, Letchworth Village, and the
Palisades Parkway.

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 11

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

the list of potential projects drafted by the Committee
and Consulting Team. Everyone at the table was given
an opportunity to explain their point of view and
provide suggestions.

Residents were also offered worksheets with the draft vision
statement and asked to indicate whether they agreed with the draft
statement or had edits.

Throughout the meeting, a representative of the NY
Rising Housing Recovery Program was on hand to
provide information about that program and to assist
homeowners interested in applying for funding. The
NY Rising Housing Recovery Program is operated by
the Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR) and
facilitates home repairs, rehabilitation, mitigation, and
elevation for the owners of single-family homes.

At each Public Engagement Meeting, additional information was available about the Committee’s activities
to date, Committee meeting summaries, the NY Rising
Program (including how to become and stay involved),
and other related recovery efforts.

Meeting #2: Conceptual Plan &
Preliminary Project Assessment
The primary goals for the second NY Rising Public
Engagement Meeting were to:
­Present the Conceptual Plan;
­Open dialogue with the community to foster understanding and build support for the NYRCR Plan;
Engage with and listen to members of the public who
have firsthand knowledge of Stony Point and the issues being addressed in the NYRCR planning process;
­Identify reconstruction strategies to help shape the
NYRCR Plan;
­Promote community understanding of storm risks,
the NYRCR Plan, and management measures; and
­Forecast next steps of the NYRCR process.
Residents were welcomed to the meeting and then
given a brief presentation about the NYRCR program,
the Conceptual Plan, and the concept of resiliency.
They then participated in small group discussions in
which they applied the vision from the Conceptual
Plan and their group’s definition of resiliency to assess

V – 12

Section V: Additional Materials

Small group discussions in progress. Residents reported that they
appreciated the opportunity to discuss the planning work in progress,
but even more so, the chance to connect with other Stony Point
residents.

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

At the close of the session, representatives from each
table summarized their group discussions for the rest
of the attendees. This meaningful public comment
helped set the groundwork for the Committee’s next

This Public Engagement Meeting began with a brief
overview presentation providing background about
the NYRCR Program and process and briefly summarized the projects that had risen to the top of the draft
Stony Point NYRCR Plan. After the presentation, residents again transitioned into an open-house format to
visit posters about each of the proposed and other
projects. Residents were given “passports” – a packet
of worksheets with questions and rating opportunities
for each of the listed projects, as well as space for
additional questions and feedback about the project.

round of reviewing project ideas and priorities. Key
resiliency related themes from the report back included
upgrading emergency shelters, improving pedestrian
access to the waterfront and throughout the Town,
addressing flooding/access issues along the waterfront, and educating the public before, during and after
the storm. An example of the report back input is presented in the following figure.

Meeting #3: Project Categorization
Goals for the third Public Engagement Meeting included:
Familiarizing the community with the Risk Assessment Tool (and with the metrics for evaluating Costs/
Benefits if available);
­Promoting community understanding of storm risks,
the NYRCR Plan, and management measures;
­Presenting proposed projects and assessing community support for these projects;
­Gathering feedback and detailed local knowledge
about projects in order to inform categorization; and
­Informing the public that the proposed project list
would be further evaluated by the State to confirm
funding eligibility.

Attendees visited project posters with the “passports,” learning about
the potential projects and providing written feedback. Committee and
Consultant Team members were available to answer questions about
the projects.

Passport comments were an important component of
Stony Point’s final project categorization. As indicated in
the table below, community members present at the third
Public Engagement Meeting supported the Proposed
and Featured Projects identified by the Committee.
Section V: Additional Materials

V – 13

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-3
Community Support for Projects Voiced at Third Public Engagement Meeting

Project

Community Support

Letchworth Village Utilization (Emergency and Operations Communications Center)

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Stony Point Center Retrofit

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Shoreline Protection (Protect Against Erosion and Wave Action - Beach Road)

High - Strong support with consensus to move forward

Shoreline Protection (Protect Against Erosion and Wave Action - River Road)

High - Strong support with consensus to move forward

Rehabilitation of Wastewater Interceptors (Beach Road and Ba Mar Sewer Line)

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Wastewater Treatment Plant Hardening

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Grassy Point Redevelopment

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Interceptor Sewer Line Rehabilitation (Cedar Pond Brook)

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Demolition of Damaged/Abandoned Structures

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Update Revised Master Plan and LWRP

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Alternate Low Income Housing Locations

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Marina Protection

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Rebuild Stony Point King's Ferry Landing

Minimal - Action is not presently supported, but bears
additional study and evaluation

Improve Access to Waterfront

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Dam Management

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Improvements to West Main Street (Increase Walkability and Connectivity)

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Sidewalk Improvements

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Hardening of Kay Fries Pump Station

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Hardening of Beach Road Pump Station

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Clean Up and Maintain Cedar Pond Brook

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Lowland Park Flood Resilience

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Oyster Reef / Mussel Reef Feasibility

Minimal - Action is not presently supported, but bears
additional study and evaluation

Tidal Wetland Restoration

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Assess Zoning Code (Rebuilding Requirements/Processes)

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Organize Home and Business Owners

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Develop an Emergency Plan

High - Strong support with consensus to move forward

Develop an Evacuation Plan and Signage

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Grassy Point Road Drainage

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Relocate Wastewater Treatment Plant

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Improve Public Transportation

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Bridge Repairs

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Reservoir Road Bridge Crossing

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Watershed Evaluation and Intervention (Stream Improvements)

Minimal - Action is not presently supported, but bears
additional study and evaluation

Town Dock/Pier

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

Reduce Residential Flood Insurance Rates

Medium - General support, but some issues to resolve

V – 14

Section V: Additional Materials

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

The Committee, in turn, had developed these projects
taking into account the input from the Community at
the second Public Engagement Meeting.
Similar to Meeting #2, Meeting #3 closed with residents reporting back their ideas on a series of

questions. The Committee invited attendees to share
their thoughts on which projects would make Stony
Point more resilient, benefit economic development,
best support vulnerable populations, have regional
impact, and improve resiliency for low/moderate
income residents. The responses informed the final
project categorization and are as follows:

Meeting #4: Implementing the NYRCR Plan
A fourth Public Engagement Meeting will be held to
discuss implementation goals and initial plans with
Stony Point residents and business owners, and will
include a presentation summarizing the final plan and
a discussion around the implementation strategy and
action plan. While this meeting will be after the official
submittal of the NYRCR Plan, it will be an important
opportunity for community members to discuss its
benefits and the projects within it.
Section V: Additional Materials

V – 15

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

D. Community Asset Inventory
Table V-4	Stony Point Coastal Community Assets
Table V-5	Stony Point Riverine Community Assets
Figure V-1	Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet Completed Example
Figure V-2	Vulnerability Score Determination Worksheet Completed Example

V – 16

Section V: Additional Materials

S TON Y POIN T N Y R ISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-4
Stony Point Coastal Community Assets
Map Asset #
1
2
3
4
5

6
7
8
12
14
16
17
22
26

Asset Name
Patsy's Bay Marina I
and II
Stony Point Bay
Marina
Vincent A. Clark
Riverview Park &
Kayak Access
Minisceongo Yacht
Club/Marina
Access to Grassy Point
Road Bridge (Penny
Bridge)
River Front Park
Gilligan's on the
Hudson
Ba Mar Mobile Home
Park
Kings Ferry
Landing/State-owned
houses
Beach Road Sewage
Pump Station
Wastewater
Treatment Plant
PANCO site
US Gypsum
Manufacturing facility
US Gypsum Water
Tower

28

Grassy Point Road

29

River Road

30

Jones Point

Asset
Class
Economic
Economic

Risk
Area

E ros ion R ate ≥1
foot per year or
unknown

Waterline
frequently at shore
defense or upland
vegetation

Lack of Shore
Defenses

Lack of
Protective
Vegetation

Dunes
Absent

On Barrier
Island or Filled
Wetland

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability
Score

Risk
Score

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Economic

Small Business

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and
Recreation

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Economic

Restaurants

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

5

68

Housing
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Infrastructur
e Systems
Infrastructur
e Systems
Economic
Economic
Infrastructur
e Systems
Infrastructur
e Systems
Infrastructur
e Systems
Housing

Single-Family
Residence
Historic
Landmarks and
Facilities

No

Low

Wastewater

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

3

41

Wastewater

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Small Business

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Large Business

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

1

14

Large Business

No

No

Medium

High

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

3.5

2

21

Transportation

Yes

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Transportation

Yes

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Multi-Family
Residence
Single-Family
Residence
Small Business

No, Locally
Significant
No, Locally
Significant

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

No
No

Medium
Medium

Extreme
Extreme

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

2.5
2

3
3

4.5
4

4
3

54
36

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

5

68

Wastewater

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

3

41

Transportation

Yes

No, Locally
Significant

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Wastewater

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

3

41

Economic

Marina/Water
Based Business

Yes

No

High

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

Kayak access point Haverstraw

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and
Recreation

No

No

Low

Extreme

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Bridge - CSX tracks at
Stony Point Bay
Marina

Infrastructur
e

Transportation

No

33

CSX

34
35

TZ Marine Services
WH Kassner

36

River Road (Housing)

Housing

37

Grassy Point Road
(Housing)

Housing

38

Beach Road (Housing)

Housing

40

Kay Fries Sanitary ByPass Pump Station

43

Beach Road

Infrastructur
e Systems
Infrastructur
e Systems
Infrastructur
e Systems

52

Community
Value

Yes

Economic
Infrastructur
e Systems
Economic
Economic

47

Critical
Facility

Parks and
Recreation

32

46

Marina/Water
Based Business
Marina/Water
Based Business

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

770 N. Liberty Drive RT
& other RT9W houses
Seaweed Yacht Club

31

Asset
Subcategory

Table V-4
Stony Point Coastal Community Assets

Beach Road
Interceptor Sewer
Surfside 3 at Penny
Bridge Marina

Housing

Transportation
Small Business
Small Business
Single-Family
Residence
Single-Family
Residence
Single-Family
Residence

Medium

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 17

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-4
Stony Point Coastal Community Assets (Cont’d)
Map Asset #

Asset Name
Bridge - CSX tracks at
Tomkins Ave
Bridge - E Main Street
at CSX tracks
County
Seawalls/Jetties
Iona Island
Kings Ferry Landing
Land mass on Grassy
Point
Lovett Generating
Station
Stony Point Battlefield
Park & Lighthouse
The Hudson River
TILCON quarry
Turning Point Church

V – 18

Asset
Class
Infrastructur
e
Infrastructur
e
Infrastructur
e Systems
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Table V-4
Stony Point Coastal Community Assets
Asset
Subcategory

Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Economic
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Vacant lands along
Hudson

Economic

Waldron Cemetery

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Section V: Additional Materials

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Transportation

No

High

Transportation

No

High

Stormwater

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Parks and
Recreation

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Historic
Landmarks and
Facilities

No

No

High

Economic
Economic

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

No
Single-Family
Residence
Historic
Landmarks and
Facilities

Yes

High
Yes, FEMA

No

High
High

Water Bodies

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Large Business
Cultural or
Religious
Establishments

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Historic
Landmarks and
Facilities

No

Medium

No

High

No

High

Risk
Area

Extreme

Erosion Rate ≥1
foot per year or
unknown

No

Waterline
frequently at shore
defense or upland
vegetation

Lack of Shore
Defenses

Yes

Yes

Lack of
Protective
Vegetation

No

Dunes
Absent

On Barrier
Island or Filled
Wetland

No

No

Landscape
Attribute
Score

1

Hazard
Score

3

Exposure
Score

3

Vulnerability
Score

1

Risk
Score

9

S TON Y POIN T N Y R ISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-5
Stony Point Riverine Community Assets

Table V-5
Stony Point Riverine Community Assets
Map
Asset #

Asset Name

9

Stony Point Center

10
11

15

Charles S.
Eccher/Lowland
Park
Four houses on
Lighthouse Court
Letchworth
Village/RHO
Emergency
Services

Asset Class
Health and
Social
Services
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Asset Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Risk
Area

Lack of
Defensive Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation
Below BFE

Occupied <_
2ft above BFE

At
Confluence
of 2 or More
Streams

Flood Risk from
Stormwater

Lack of
Vegetated
Landscape
Stream Bank Attribute Score
Buffer

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability Score Risk Score

Emergency
Yes
Operations/Response

Yes, FEMA

High

High

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

1.5

3.00

2.5

2

15

Parks and Recreation Yes

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Housing

Single-Family
Residence

No

Medium

Moderate

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

2.5

3

23

Health and
Social
Services

Emergency
Yes
Operations/Response

Yes

High

18

Boy Scout Camp
Bullowa

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation Yes

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

19

Camp Addison
Boyce - Girl Scout

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Natural Habitats

No

High

Extreme

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

1

3

3

2

18

20

Stony Point
Ambulance

Health and
Social
Services

Emergency
No
Operations/Response

21

North Rockland
soccer fields

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation No

Extreme

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

1

3

3

2

18

23

Rockland Food
Pantry

Health and
Social
Services

Public Works
Facilities

Yes

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

High

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

3.5

2

21

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

2

3

4

2

24

24

25

Central Dr (Rte
210)/Gate Hill Rd
and Bridges
Willow Grove Road
near entrance to
PIP

Yes

High

No

Medium

Medium

27

Stony Point Police
Department

Health and
Social
Services

Emergency
Yes
Operations/Response

Yes, FEMA

High

39

Cedar Flats Mobile
Home Park

Housing

Affordable Housing

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

1

3

3

2

18

41

Cedar Flats Road

Transportation

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

1

3

3

2

18

Transportation

Yes

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

2

24

Government and
Administrative
Services

No

Moderate

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

1

3

1.5

1

5

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

3

41

42
44

Infrastructure
Systems
Reservoir Road and Infrastructure
Bridge
Systems
Lowland Hill Road
and Bridge

45

Town Hall

48

Laurel Drive Park

49

Library

50

Wayne Hose Fire
Station

51
53

Stony Point Town
Garage
Cedar Pond Brook
Interceptor Sewer
Aldi

Infrastructure
Systems
Health and
Social
Services
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Health and
Social
Services

Parks and Recreation No

Libraries

High

No

Yes

Medium

High

Emergency
No
Operations/Response

High

Infrastructure

Transportation

No

No

High

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

No

Yes, FEMA

High

Economic

Grocery/Food
Suppliers

No

Medium

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 19

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-5
Stony Point Riverine Community Assets

Table V-5
Stony Point Riverine Community Assets (Cont’d)
Map
Asset #

Asset Name

Asset Class

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Appalachian Trail

Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Economic

Parks and Recreation No

Low

Bear Mountain Inn

Economic

Tourism Destination

No

Medium

Bear Mountain
State Park

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation No

Medium

Bridge - Battlefield
Road/CSX Tracks

Infrastructure

Transportation

No

High

Bridge - South
Liberty Drive

Infrastructure

Transportation

No

High

Parks and Recreation No

High

Ambrey Pond

Camp Venture
Cedar Pond
Brook/Cedar Pond

Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

No

High

Water Bodies

Yes

Public Works
Facilities

Yes

Medium

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

Medium

Health and
Crickettown Nursery
Social
School
Services

Schools

Yes

Medium

Cross Roads

Economic

Grocery/Food
Suppliers

No

Medium

CVS Pharmacy

Health and
Social
Services

Healthcare Facilities

No

Medium

Elm Avenue at
Route 9W

Infrastructure

Transportation

No

Medium

Flora Falls

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Natural Habitats

No

High

Gilmore Sloan
House

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

Good Samaritan

Health and
Social
Services

Healthcare Facilities

Yes

Health and
Children of America Social
Services
Children of Mary,
Marian Shrine

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Yes, FEMA

No

High

Medium

Medium

Natural and
Harriman State Park Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation No

Medium

Helen Hayes
Hospital
(rehabilitation only)

Health and
Social
Services

Primary/Regional
Hospitals

No

Medium

Hogan's

Economic

Grocery/Food
Suppliers

No

Medium

Immaculate
Conception School

Health and
Social
Services

Schools

Yes

Medium

James Farley
Middle School

Health and
Social
Services

Schools

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Water Bodies

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Primary/Regional
Hospitals

No

Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Keller Army
Health and
Community Hospital Social
at West Point
Services
Jessup Stream

V – 20

Asset Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Section V: Additional Materials

Low

Risk
Area

Lack of
Defensive Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation
Below BFE

Occupied <_
2ft above BFE

At
Confluence
of 2 or More
Streams

Flood Risk from
Stormwater

Lack of
Vegetated
Landscape
Stream Bank Attribute Score
Buffer

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability Score Risk Score

S TON Y POIN T N Y R ISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-5
Stony Point Riverine Community Assets (Cont’d)
Map
Asset #

Asset Name

Asset Class

Asset Subcategory

Table V-5
Stony Point Riverine Community Assets
Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Knights Corner

Health and
Social
Services

Schools

Yes

Medium

Liberty Drive/Route
9W Corridor

Housing

Senior Housing

Yes

Medium

Liberty Ridge Senior
Housing
Housing

Senior Housing

Yes

Medium

Housing

Affordable Housing

Yes

Medium

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

High

North Rockland
High School

Health and
Social
Services

Schools

Yes

High

Nyack Hospital

Health and
Social
Services

Primary/Regional
Hospitals

No

Medium

O&R Substation

Infrastructure

Power Supply

No

High

Mountain View
Mobile Home Park
New York State
Garage

Palisades Interstate Infrastructure
Park
Systems
Patriot Hills Golf
Economic
Course
Penguin Repertory
Theater
Pyngyp School

Rite-Aide
Rockland Animal
Shelter

Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Health and
Social
Services
Health and
Social
Services
Health and
Social
Services

Parks and Recreation No

Medium

Large Business

No

Medium

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

High

Schools

Yes

Medium

Healthcare Facilities

No

Medium

Public Works
Facilities

No

Low

Rockland County
Highway
Department

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

High

Rockland Mobile
Care

Health and
Social
Services

Healthcare Facilities

Yes

Medium

Septra/Algonquin
Gas

Infrastructure
Systems

Liquid Fuels

Yes

High

Shop Rite

Economic

Grocery/Food
Suppliers

No

Medium

Sopko Apartments
(Stony Point elderly
apartments)

Housing

Senior Housing

Yes

High

Stony Point
Elementary School

Health and
Social
Services

Schools

Yes

High

Stony Point Gas
Stations

Infrastructure
Systems

Liquid Fuels

No

Medium

Stony Point
Industrial Park

Economic

No

Medium

Stony Point Motel

Economic

No

Low

Stony Point
Pharmacy

Health and
Social
Services

Healthcare Facilities

No

Medium

Stony Point Pool

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation No

Medium

Industrial,
Warehousing and
Manufacturing
Lodging

Risk
Area

Lack of
Defensive Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation
Below BFE

Occupied <_
2ft above BFE

At
Confluence
of 2 or More
Streams

Flood Risk from
Stormwater

Lack of
Vegetated
Landscape
Stream Bank Attribute Score
Buffer

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability Score Risk Score

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 21

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-5
Stony Point Riverine Community Assets

Table V-5
Stony Point Riverine Community Assets (Cont’d)
Map
Asset #

Asset Name

Asset Class

Health and
Teddy Bear Nursery Social
Services
Thamsen Mobile
Housing
Home Park
Natural and
Timp Brook
Cultural
Resources

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Schools

Yes

Medium

Affordable Housing

Yes

High

Water Bodies

Yes

Tiorati Brook

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

Unnamed Stream
empties into
wetlands at
Battlefield

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Water Bodies

Yes

Yes, FEMA

High

US Gypsum Pump
House

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

No

Medium

US Post Office Stony Point

Health and
Social
Services

Government and
Administrative
Services

No

High

US Post Office Tomkins Cove

Health and
Social
Services

Government and
Administrative
Services

No

High

Veteran's Memorial
baseball park

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation No

Medium

Natural Habitats

No

High

Healthcare Facilities

No

Medium

Economic

Tourism Destination

No

Medium

Natural and
Cultural
Resources

Wetlands and
marshes

Yes

Waldron Spring

Walgreens
West Point Military
Academy
Wetlands along the
Hudson River and
within Battlefield
Park

V – 22

Asset Subcategory

Natural and
Cultural
Resources
Health and
Social
Services

Section V: Additional Materials

Yes, FEMA

High

Risk
Area

Lack of
Defensive Flood
Protection
Measures

Elevation
Below BFE

Occupied <_
2ft above BFE

At
Confluence
of 2 or More
Streams

Flood Risk from
Stormwater

Lack of
Vegetated
Landscape
Stream Bank Attribute Score
Buffer

Hazard
Score

Exposure
Score

Vulnerability Score Risk Score

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure V-1
Landscape Attribute Determination
Worksheet Completed Example

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 23

Coastal Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Coastal Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Attribute: Erosion Rate
Asset:
Ba Mar Mobile
Home
Asset ID: Attribute
15 Address:
400 Ba Mar
Dr Stony Point, NY 1098
Coastal
Landscape
Determination
Worksheet
Attribute: Erosion Rate
Determination:
Long‐term average erosion rate is 1 foot or more per year (YES)
Asset:
Ba Mar Mobile Home Asset ID:
15 Address: 400 Ba Mar Dr Stony Point, NY 1098
Long‐term average erosion rate is less than 1 foot per year (NO)
Attribute: Erosion Rate
Determination:
Long‐term average erosion rate is 1 foot or more per year (YES)
Long‐term
erosion
rate is400
unknown
Asset:
Ba Mar Mobile Home Asset
ID: average15
Address:
Ba Mar(YES)
Dr Stony Point, NY 1098
Long‐term average erosion rate is less than 1 foot per year (NO)
Determination:
Long‐term average erosion rate is 1 foot or more per year (YES)
Long‐term average erosion rate is unknown (YES)
Determination methodology: Long‐term1)average
Refer toerosion
Coastalrate
Erosion
for the asset's
is lessHazard
than 1Area
foot (CEHA)
per yearmap
(NO)
location.
If the rate
assetisisunknown
within a Structural
Hazard Area, the long‐
Long‐term average
erosion
(YES)
Determination methodology:
1) Refer to Coastal Erosion Hazard Area (CEHA) map for the asset's
term average erosion rate is greater than or equal to 1 foot or
location. If the asset is within a Structural Hazard Area, the long‐
moretoper
year. Erosion Hazard Area (CEHA) map for the asset's
Determination methodology:
1) Refer
Coastal
term average erosion rate is greater than or equal to 1 foot or
2)location.
If a CEHAIf map
is notisavailable
the asset
location,
the asset
within a for
Structural
Hazard
Area,compare
the long‐
more per year.
successive
years
of aerial
toor
determine
term
average
erosion
rate photographs
is greater than
equal to 1whether
foot or
2) If a CEHA map is not available for the asset location, compare
thereper
is observable
shoreline recession. If possible, calculate
more
year.
successive years of aerial photographs to determine whether
erosion
rate
based
on
demonstrated
shoreline
recession.
2) If a CEHA map is not available
for the asset
location,
compare
there is observable shoreline recession. If possible, calculate
successive years of aerial photographs to determine whether
erosion rate based on demonstrated shoreline recession.
3)there
If methods
1 and 2shoreline
are not feasible
for the
asset location,
assume
is observable
recession.
If possible,
calculate
erosionrate
is 1 based
foot per
or greater shoreline
for all ocean
and Long Island
erosion
onyear
demonstrated
recession.
3) If methods 1 and 2 are not feasible for the asset location, assume
Sound coast lines, but not within bays.
erosion is 1 foot per year or greater for all ocean and Long Island
3) If methods 1 and 2 are not feasible for the asset location, assume
Sound coast lines, but not within bays.
erosion is 1 foot per year or greater for all ocean and Long Island
Justification:
Coastal Erosion Hazard
Areacoast
mapslines,
do not
for Rockland
Sound
butexist
not within
bays. County. Because the county
is not located on an ocean or Long Island sound coast line, the long‐term average
Justification:
Coastal Erosion Hazard Area maps do not exist for Rockland County. Because the county
erosion rate is assumed to be less than one foot per year.
is not located on an ocean or Long Island sound coast line, the long‐term average
Justification:
Coastal Erosion Hazard Area maps do not exist for Rockland County. Because the county
erosion rate is assumed to be less than one foot per year.
is not located on an ocean or Long Island sound coast line, the long‐term average
Data gaps/questions: erosion
None. rate is assumed to be less than one foot per year.
Data gaps/questions: None.
Data gaps/questions: None.
Aerial photograph:
Aerial photograph:
Legend
Asset
Aerial photograph:
Legend
Asset
Legend
Asset

V – 24

Section V: Additional Materials

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan
Coastal Landscape Attribute Determination
Worksheet
Coastal Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet

Attribute: Beach Width
Attribute:
Beach
Coastal
Landscape
Determination
Worksheet
Asset:
Ba MarWidth
Mobile
Home
Asset ID: Attribute
15 Address:
400 Ba Mar
Dr Stony Point, NY 1098
Asset:
Ba Mar Mobile Home Asset
15 Address:
Ba Mar
Stony
Point, structure
NY 1098 or
WaterID:
line is frequently
or daily in 400
contact
withDr
shore
defense
Determination:
Attribute:
Beach
Width
Water
is frequently
Determination:
uplandline
vegetation
(YES) or daily in contact with shore defense structure or
Asset:
Ba Mar Mobile Home upland
Asset
ID:
15 Address:
Ba Mar with
Dr Stony
NY 1098
vegetation
(YES)
Water line is not frequently
or daily400
in contact
shorePoint,
defense
structure or
Water
line
is
frequently
or
daily
in
contact
with
shore
defense
structure
or or
Determination:
Water
is not frequently
or daily in contact with shore defense structure
uplandline
vegetation
(NO)
upland vegetation
vegetation (NO)
(YES)
upland
Water line
not frequently
dailyphotographs
in contact with
shore
defense
structure
Determination methodology:
1) isDetermine,
usingoraerial
or site
visits,
whether
shoreor
upland
vegetation
(NO)
Determination methodology:
1) Determine,
using aerial
photographs
or site
whether
defense structures
or upland
vegetation
arevisits,
present.
Then, shore
defense
structures
or
upland
vegetation
are
present.
Then,
determine base elevation of shore defense structure or upland
Determination methodology:
1) determine
Determine,base
usingelevation
aerial photographs
or site
visits,
whether
shore
of shore
structure
orhigh
upland
vegetation
using
relevant
LiDAR
GISdefense
map.
Mean
higher
water
defense
structures
or
upland
vegetation
are
present.
Then,
vegetation
using
LiDAR
Mean higher
high water
level (MHHW)
forrelevant
Stony Point
is GIS
2.03map.
ft (NAVD88)
(obtained
from
determine
base
elevation
of
shore
defense
structure
or
upland
level
(MHHW)
for
Stony
Point
is
2.03
ft
(NAVD88)
(obtained
from
http://www.ngs.noaa.gov/Tidal_Elevation/). If MHHW is greater
vegetation
using
relevant
LiDAR GISof
map.
higher
water
http://www.ngs.noaa.gov/Tidal_Elevation/).
If MHHW
ishigh
greater
than
or equal
to the
base elevation
the Mean
defense
structure
or
level
(MHHW)
for
Stony
Point
is
2.03
ft
(NAVD88)
(obtained
from
than
or vegetation,
equal to theanswer
base elevation
upland
"YES." of the defense structure or
http://www.ngs.noaa.gov/Tidal_Elevation/).
If MHHW is greater
upland
vegetation, answer "YES."
than or equal to the base elevation of the defense structure or
upland vegetation, answer "YES."

Justification:
Justification:
Justification:

2) If tidal elevation or shore structure elevation data are not
2) If
tidal elevation
shorephotography
structure elevation
datainare
not
available,
consultoraerial
or observe
field
whether
available,
consult
aerial
photography
or
observe
in
field
whether
the water line is in frequent or daily contact with shore defense
2) the
If tidal
elevation
orfrequent
shore structure
datashore
are not
water
line
is in
or dailyelevation
contact with
defense
structures
or vegetation.
available,
consult
aerial
photography
or
observe
in
field
whether
structures or vegetation.
the water
line is defense
in frequent
or daily
contact
with shore
Minimum ground elevations
at shore
structure
are
approximately
0‐2defense
feet
structures
or
vegetation.
Minimum
elevations
atshoreline
shore defense
are approximately 0‐2 feet
(NAVD88),ground
and MHHW
for the
is 2.03structure
ft (NGVD88).
(NAVD88), and MHHW for the shoreline is 2.03 ft (NGVD88).
Minimum ground elevations at shore defense structure are approximately 0‐2 feet
(NAVD88), and MHHW for the shoreline is 2.03 ft (NGVD88).

Data gaps/questions: None.
Data gaps/questions: None.
Data gaps/questions: None.
Aerial photograph:
Aerial photograph:
Aerial photograph:
2011‐2012 NYSDEC LiDAR
2011‐2012
NYSDEC LiDAR
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/lidar
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/lidar
2011‐2012 NYSDEC LiDAR
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/lidar

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 25

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Coastal Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet

Attribute: Shore Defenses
Coastal Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Asset:
Ba Mar Mobile Home Asset ID:
15 Address: 400 Ba Mar Dr Stony Point, NY 1098
Attribute:
Shore
Defenses
Determination:
Shore defenses are absent, not constructed to anticipated storm or sea level
Asset:
Ba Mar Mobile Home Asset
ID:
15 deteriorating
Address: 400
Ba Mar Dr Stony Point, NY 1098
rise conditions,
or are
(YES)
Determination:
Shore defenses are absent,
constructed
to anticipated
storm
or sea
level
present,not
constructed
to anticipated
storm
or sea
level
rise
rise
conditions,
or
are
deteriorating
(YES)
conditions, and in good condition (NO)
Shore defenses are present, constructed to anticipated storm or sea level rise
and in good
condition
(NO)aerial and street‐level imagery to
Determination methodology: conditions,
1) Conduct
a site
visit or use
determine whether shore defense structures are present. If
Determination methodology:
1) Conduct
a site visit
or use aerial
and defenses
street‐level
imagery
to of the
present, observe
condition
of shore
in the
vicinity
determine
whether
shore bulkheads,
defense structures
are If
present.
asset, including
sea walls,
and levees.
in goodIf
present,
shore relative
defenses
the vicinity
of the
condition,observe
observecondition
structureofheight
toinground
elevation.
asset, including sea walls, bulkheads, and levees. If in good
condition,structure
observe structure
relative
to levels
ground(available
elevation.
2) Compare
height to height
anticipated
flood
from FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps, http://fema.maps.arcgis
2) Compare
structure height to anticipated flood levels (available
.com/home/webmap/viewer.html?webmap=2f0a884bfb434d76
from
FEMA
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, http://fema.maps.arcgis
af8c15c26541a545&extent=‐3.99491620295004,41.2261073109
.com/home/webmap/viewer.html?webmap=2f0a884bfb434d76
551,‐73.9912737631073,41.22711596758084)
and sea level rise
af8c15c26541a545&extent=‐3.99491620295004,41.2261073109
projections (http://www.geoplatform.noaa.gov/home/
551,‐73.9912737631073,41.22711596758084)
and sea level rise
webmap/viewer.html?webmap=3097fc32e98f490cbacc54057519
projections
(http://www.geoplatform.noaa.gov/home/
38e9).
webmap/viewer.html?webmap=3097fc32e98f490cbacc54057519
2) If direct observation is not feasible, interview local residents,
38e9).
experts, and/or authorities for information regarding shore
If direct observation
2) defense
structures. is not feasible, interview local residents,
experts, and/or authorities for information regarding shore
defense
Justification:
A site visit indicated that
shorestructures.
defense structures are present on the nearest shoreline,
but the seawall stops at ground elevation, which is roughly 0‐2 feet (NAVD88). FEMA
Justification:
A site indicate
visit indicated
that
defensefor
structures
arestorm
present
on the
nearest shoreline,
maps
a BFE of
12shore
ft (NAVD88)
a 100 year
in this
area.
but the seawall stops at ground elevation, which is roughly 0‐2 feet (NAVD88). FEMA
maps indicate a BFE of 12 ft (NAVD88) for a 100 year storm in this area.
Data gaps/questions: None.
Data
None.
FEMAgaps/questions:
Best Available Flood
Hazard Maps (2013)

J. Reed (Image Date: 11/20/13)

FEMA Best Available Flood Hazard Maps (2013)

J. Reed (Image Date: 11/20/13)

Ba Mar Homes Shoreline
Ba Mar Homes Shoreline
V – 26

Section V: Additional Materials

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan
Coastal Landscape Attribute Determination
Worksheet

Attribute: Vegetation
Coastal Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Asset:
Ba Mar Mobile Home Asset ID:
15 Address: 400 Ba Mar Dr Stony Point, NY 1098
Determination:
Protective vegetation, wetlands, or intervening structures between asset and
Attribute:
Vegetation
flood source
are absent
(YES)
Asset:
Ba Mar Mobile Home Asset
ID:
15 Address:
400 Ba Mar Dr Stony Point, NY 1098
Protective
vegetation,
wetlands,
or
intervening structures between asset and
Determination:
present(YES)
(NO)
flood source are absent
Protective vegetation, wetlands, or intervening structures between asset and
Determination methodology: flood source
1) Locate
the asset
on the Preliminary Coastal Hazards Composite
are present
(NO)
Risk Map (http://www.arcgis.com/home/webmap
/viewer.html?webmap=82a2fa929168434dabb6a3970e1d38e0).
Determination methodology:
1) Locate
the asset on the Preliminary Coastal Hazards Composite
Add
the
Land Cover NLCD_2006 layer. Determine if there
Risk MapUSGS
(http://www.arcgis.com/home/webmap
are wetlands or at least 300 feet of shrubbery, dense vegetation,
/viewer.html?webmap=82a2fa929168434dabb6a3970e1d38e0).
or
forested
land
between
asset andlayer.
the flood
source.if Confirm
Add
the USGS
Land
Cover the
NLCD_2006
Determine
there
presence
or absence
of vegetation
observingdense
aerialvegetation,
imagery of
are wetlands
or at least
300 feet ofby
shrubbery,
theforested
locationland
or bybetween
conducting
site and
visit.the flood source. Confirm
or
the aasset
presence or absence of vegetation by observing aerial imagery of
the location or by conducting a site visit.
2) If the land cover map is unavailable for the asset location, or if the
information provided in the map is inconclusive, verify presence or
ofcover
protective
through
observations.
2) absence
If the land
map isvegetation
unavailable
for theon‐site
asset location,
or if the
information provided in the map is inconclusive, verify presence or
absence of protective vegetation through on‐site observations.
Justification:
USGS land cover maps show the asset with low‐high density development located at the
edge of the flood source.
Justification:
USGS land cover maps show the asset with low‐high density development located at the
edge of the flood source.
Data gaps/questions: None.
Data gaps/questions: None.
Legend
Asset
Legend
Asset

USGS Land Cover
Map 2006
http://www.arcgis.com/home/webma
USGS Land Cover
p/viewer.html?webmap=82a2fa92916
8434dabb6a3970e1d38e0
Map 2006
http://www.arcgis.com/home/webma
p/viewer.html?webmap=82a2fa92916
8434dabb6a3970e1d38e0

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 27

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Coastal Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Attribute: Dunes or Bluffs
Asset:
Ba Mar Mobile Home Asset ID:
15 Address: 400 Ba Mar Dr Stony Point, NY 1098
Dunes are absent, below BFE, or eroding (scarped), discontinuous, or have
Determination:
little vegetation. Bluff slopes are unstable, partially vegetated. (YES)
Dunes are present, above BFE, not eroding (scarped) or discontinuous, and
have adequate vegetation. Bluff slopes are stable and adequately vegetated.
(NO)
Determination methodology:

1) Conduct a site visit to determine presence of dunes or bluffs. If
present, observe condition of dunes or bluffs. If in good condition,
determine height of dunes relative to the base ground elevation.
2) Determine the base ground elevation of the location using the

relevant LiDAR GIS elevation maps. Then add the dune height to
the ground elevations, and compare to the base flood elevation
(BFE) found on the appropriate FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) (http://fema.maps.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.
html?webmap=2f0a884bfb434d76af8c15c26541a545&extent=‐
73.99491620295004,41.2261073109551,‐
73.9912737631073,41.22711596758084).
Justification:

Site visits indicated that dunes and bluffs are not present in this area.

Data gaps/questions: None.

J. Reed (Image Date: 11/20/13)

Ba Mar Homes Shoreline

V – 28

Section V: Additional Materials

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Coastal Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Coastal Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet

Attribute: Soils
Asset:
Mar Mobile Home Asset ID:
15 Address: 400 Ba Mar Dr Stony Point, NY 1098
Attribute: Ba
Soils
Asset
is
located
on
a
barrier400
island
or filled
wetland
(YES)
Determination:
Asset:
Ba Mar Mobile Home Asset ID:
15coastal
Address:
Ba Mar
Dr Stony
Point,
NY 1098
Asset
is
not
located
on
a
coastal
barrier
island
or
filled
wetland
Determination:
Asset is located on a coastal barrier island or filled wetland (YES)(NO)
Determination methodology:
Determination methodology:

Asset is not located on a coastal barrier island or filled wetland (NO)
1) Locate the asset location on the FWS Wetlands Mapper
(http://www.fws.gov/wetlands/Wetlands‐Mapper.html).
1) Locate
the asset location on the FWS Wetlands Mapper Identify
whether
the asset location coincides with a historical wetland
or is
(http://www.fws.gov/wetlands/Wetlands‐Mapper.html).
Identify
on a coastal
island, or
is located
onaan
area of historic
whether
the barrier
asset location
coincides
with
historical
wetlandopen
or is
water.
Confirm
through
use
of
historical
imagery
(Google
Earth
or
on a coastal barrier island, or is located on an area of historic open
Sanborn
maps).
water. Confirm through use of historical imagery (Google Earth or
Sanborn maps).
2) If wetland mapping data is unavailable for the asset location,
through
on‐site
observations
or interviews
with
local
2) verify
If wetland
mapping
data
is unavailable
for the asset
location,
residents,
experts,
and/or
authorities.
verify
through
on‐site
observations
or interviews with local
residents, experts, and/or authorities.

Justification:

The asset is located in very close proximity to wetlands/open water, as seen in the FWS
wetland
tool.
It is possible
that thistoarea
is built on a water,
filled wetland,
butthe
noFWS
The
assetmapping
is located
in very
close proximity
wetlands/open
as seen in
historical
data is available
determine
Assumed
historic
wetland
wetland mapping
tool. It istopossible
thatconclusively.
this area is built
on a filled
wetland,
buttonomake
conservative
assessment.
historical data is available to determine conclusively. Assumed historic wetland to make

Justification:

conservative assessment.
Data gaps/questions: Historical wetland data unavailable.
Data gaps/questions: Historical wetland data unavailable.
Aerial photograph:
Aerial photograph:
Legend
Legend

Asset
Asset

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 29

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Riverine Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet

Riverine
Landscape
Attribute Determination Worksheet
Attribute: Defensive
Flood Protection
Measures
Asset:
Area 6B
Asset ID: 55, 85
Address: Lowland Hill Rd.
Attribute:
Defensive
Flood
Protection
Measures
Defensive flood protection measures are absent, below BFE, in poor
Determination:
Asset:
Area 6B
Asset
ID: or
55,
85 maintenance
Address:commitment
Lowland Hill
Rd.
condition,
lack
(YES)
Defensive flood
flood protection
protection measures
measures are
are present,
absent, below
Determination:
Defensive
aboveBFE,
BFE,ininpoor
good
condition,
or
lack
maintenance
commitment
(YES)
condition, and have maintenance commitment (NO)
Defensive flood protection measures are present, above BFE, in good
condition,
have maintenance
commitment
(NO) condition, and
Determination methodology:
1)and
Conduct
a site visit to observe
presence,
Determination methodology:

Justification:
Justification:

residents, experts and/or authorities for information
direct observation
is notprotection
feasible, interview
local
2) If
regarding
defensive flood
measures.
residents, experts and/or authorities for information
regarding
defensive
protection
No defensive flood protection
measures
areflood
in place,
as seenmeasures.
in site photos
below.
No defensive flood protection measures are in place, as seen in site photos
below.

Data gaps/questions: None
Data gaps/questions: None
Aerial photograph:
Aerial
Legendphotograph:
Asset
Legend
Asset
Site Photos take by J.
Dellaria 11/20/13
Site Photos take by J.
Dellaria 11/20/13

2011‐2012 NYSDEC LiDAR
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/lidar
2011‐2012 NYSDEC LiDAR
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/lidar
V – 30

height of flood protection measures in the vicinity of the
1) asset.
Conduct
a site visit
to observe
presence,
condition,
and
Compare
structure
height
to BFE levels
(available
heightFEMA
of flood
protection
measures
in the
vicinity of the
from
Flood
Insurance
Rate Maps
(FIRM),
asset.
Compare structure height to BFE levels (available
http://fema.maps.arcgis.com/home/webmap/
from
FEMA
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM),
viewer.html?webmap=2f0a884bfb434d76af8c15c26541a
http://fema.maps.arcgis.com/home/webmap/
545&extent=‐73.99491620295004,41.2261073109551,‐
viewer.html?webmap=2f0a884bfb434d76af8c15c26541a
73.9912737631073,41.22711596758084). Determine
545&extent=‐73.99491620295004,41.2261073109551,‐
base ground elevation using LiDAR GIS elevation maps.
73.9912737631073,41.22711596758084). Determine
base
ground
elevation
LiDAR GIS
elevation
maps.
direct
observation
is using
not feasible,
interview
local
2) If

Section V: Additional Materials

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Riverine Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Riverine Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Freeboard

Attribute:
Asset:
Area 6B
Attribute: Freeboard
Determination:
Asset:
Area 6B
Determination:

Determination methodology:
Determination methodology:

Justification:
Justification:

Asset ID: 55, 85
Address: Lowland Hill Rd.
Elevation of the habitable or occupied portion of the asset is less
Asset ID: 55, 85
Address: Lowland Hill Rd.
than two (2) feet above BFE. (YES)
Elevation of the habitable or occupied portion of the asset is less
Elevation of the habitable or occupied portion of the asset is more
than two (2) feet above BFE. (YES)
than two (2) feet above BFE. (NO)
Elevation of the habitable or occupied portion of the asset is more
than two (2) feet above BFE. (NO)
1) Refer to the most recent FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) information
1) Refer to the most recent FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map
(http://fema.maps.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.ht
(FIRM) information
ml?webmap=2f0a884bfb434d76af8c15c26541a545&exte
(http://fema.maps.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.ht
nt=‐73.99491620295004,41.2261073109551,‐
ml?webmap=2f0a884bfb434d76af8c15c26541a545&exte
73.9912737631073,41.22711596758084) to determine
nt=‐73.99491620295004,41.2261073109551,‐
base flood elevation (BFE) for the asset location. Compare
73.9912737631073,41.22711596758084) to determine
to LiDAR GIS elevation map of the area to determine base
base flood elevation (BFE) for the asset location. Compare
ground elevation of the asset. Then, conduct a site visit to
to LiDAR GIS elevation map of the area to determine base
determine the height from the ground of the lowest
ground elevation of the asset. Then, conduct a site visit to
habitable or occupied portion of the asset. Add this value
determine the height from the ground of the lowest
to the ground elevation and compare to the BFE.
habitable or occupied portion of the asset. Add this value
to the ground elevation and compare to the BFE.

Elevations in the asset area range from 8‐18 feet, with BFEs ranging from 12‐21
feet (NAVD88, converted from 13‐22 feet NGVD29). Occupied portion of asset is
Elevations in the asset area range from 8‐18 feet, with BFEs ranging from 12‐21
same as ground level. Asset is below BFE.
feet (NAVD88, converted from 13‐22 feet NGVD29). Occupied portion of asset is
same as ground level. Asset is below BFE.

Data gaps/questions: None
Data gaps/questions: None
Aerial photograph:
Aerial photograph:
Legend
Asset
Legend
Asset
FEMA FIRM
panel 3606930011C
FEMA
FIRM
Effective
Date 9/30/1981
panel 3606930011C
http://msc.fema.gov
Effective Date 9/30/1981
http://msc.fema.gov
2011‐2012 NYSDEC LiDAR
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/lidar
2011‐2012 NYSDEC LiDAR
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/lidar
Section V: Additional Materials

V – 31

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Riverine Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Attribute: Elevation
Asset:
Area 6B
Determination:

Asset ID: 55, 85
Address: Lowland Hill Rd.
Elevation of the asset site is below BFE. (YES)
Elevation of the asset site is above BFE. (NO)

Determination methodology:

Justification:

Elevations in the asset area range from 8‐18 feet, with BFEs ranging from 12‐21
feet (NAVD88, converted from 13‐22 feet NGVD29). Asset is below BFE.

Data gaps/questions: None

Aerial photograph:
Legend
Asset
FEMA FIRM
panel 3606930011C
Effective Date
9/30/1981

http://msc.fema.gov

2011‐2012 NYSDEC LiDAR
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/lidar
V – 32

1) Refer to the most recent FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) information
(http://fema.maps.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.ht
ml?webmap=2f0a884bfb434d76af8c15c26541a545&exte
nt=‐73.99491620295004,41.2261073109551,‐
73.9912737631073,41.22711596758084) to determine
base flood elevation (BFE) for the asset location. Compare
to LiDAR GIS elevation map of the area to determine base
ground elevation of the asset. Compare this value to the
BFE.

Section V: Additional Materials

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Riverine Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet

Attribute: Point
of Confluence
Riverine
Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Asset:
Area 6B
Asset ID: 55, 85
Address: Lowland Hill Rd.
Attribute:
Point of Confluence
Determination:
Asset is located within area subject to increased flood risk due to
Asset:
Area 6B
Asset
ID: 55,
85
Address:(YES)
Lowland Hill Rd.
confluence
of merging
streams
Determination:
located
within
areaarea
subject
to increased
flood
risk risk
due due
to to
Asset is not
located
within
subject
to increased
flood
(YES)
confluence of merging streams (NO)
Asset is not located within area subject to increased flood risk due to
confluence
of merging
streams
(NO)Preliminary Coastal Hazards
Determination methodology:
1) Locate
the asset
on the
Composite Risk Map (http://www.arcgis.com/home/
Determination methodology:
1) Locate
the asset on the Preliminary Coastal Hazards
webmap/viewer.html?webmap=82a2fa929168434dabb6
Composite
Risk Map
a3970e1d38e0).
Add (http://www.arcgis.com/home/
the National Hydrography Dataset
webmap/viewer.html?webmap=82a2fa929168434dabb6
layer. Determine whether there are points of confluence
a3970e1d38e0).
the National
Hydrography
Dataset
of
streams, rivers,Add
or other
waterbodies
in the vicinity
of
layer.
Determine whether there are points of confluence
the asset.
of streams, rivers, or other waterbodies in the vicinity of
asset. confluence is present, interview local
2) the
If a stream
residents, experts, or authorities for reports of flooding
2) during
If a stream
pastconfluence
storms. is present, interview local
or authorities
for reports
of flooding
3) residents,
If mappingexperts,
data is unavailable,
determine
presence
of
during
past
storms.
merging
streams
through site observations.
3) If mapping data is unavailable, determine presence of
merging
site
observations.
Justification:
Map data shows that the
area is streams
not nearthrough
a point of
confluence
Justification:

Map data shows that the area is not near a point of confluence

Data gaps/questions: None
Data gaps/questions: None
Aerial photograph:
Aerial photograph:
Legend
Asset
Legend
Asset Dataset
National Hydrography
National Map Viewer
National
Hydrography Dataset
http://viewer.nationalmap.gov
National Map Viewer
http://viewer.nationalmap.gov

(Insert aerial photograph with asset outlined in red )
(Insert aerial photograph with asset outlined in red )

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 33

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Riverine Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Attribute: Stormwater Discharge
Asset:
Area 6B
Asset ID: 55, 85
Address: Lowland Hill Rd.
Determination:
Asset is located within area subject to increased flood risk due to
storm water system discharge (YES)
Asset is not located within area subject to increased flood risk due to
storm water system discharge (NO)
Determination methodology:

1) Compare historic aerial imagery of the asset location
(Google Earth or Sanborn maps). If the area upgrade from
the asset location has developed significantly within the
timeframe of available imagery, answer yes. Note years of
available images in justification area below.
2) If historical imagery is unavailable or inconclusive,
interview local residents, experts, or authorities about
past flooding in the asset location.
3) If no information is available, answer YES.

Justification:

Historic map data shows that the area surrounding the asset has not developed
significantly since 1994.

Data gaps/questions: None

Aerial photograph:

Imagery Date 5/26/2011
Image USDA Farm Service Agency

Legend
Asset
Google Earth 2013

V – 34

Section V: Additional Materials

Imagery date 4/3/1994
Image US Geological Survey

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Riverine Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Riverine Landscape Attribute Determination Worksheet
Vegetated Stream bank Buffers

Attribute:
Asset:
Area 6B
Asset ID: 55, 85
Address: Lowland Hill Rd.
Attribute: Vegetated Stream bank Buffers
Asset is within floodway fringe of stream and without adequate
Determination:
Asset:
Area 6B
Asset ID: 55, 85
Address: Lowland Hill Rd.
vegetated buffers to absorb or divert flood waters (YES)
Asset is within floodway fringe of stream and without adequate
Determination:
Asset is not within floodway fringe of stream and has adequate
vegetated buffers to absorb or divert flood waters (YES)
vegetated buffers to absorb or divert flood waters (NO)
Asset is not within floodway fringe of stream and has adequate
vegetated buffers to absorb or divert flood waters (NO)
Determination methodology:
1) Identify asset location on FEMA FIRM
(http://fema.maps.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.ht
Determination methodology:
1) Identify asset location on FEMA FIRM
ml?webmap=2f0a884bfb434d76af8c15c26541a545&exte
(http://fema.maps.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.ht
nt=‐73.99491620295004,41.2261073109551,‐
ml?webmap=2f0a884bfb434d76af8c15c26541a545&exte
73.9912737631073,41.22711596758084). If located in a
nt=‐73.99491620295004,41.2261073109551,‐
zone designated A1‐A30 or AE, asset is within flood fringe.
73.9912737631073,41.22711596758084). If located in a
If asset is not within flood fringe, answer no. If within
zone designated A1‐A30 or AE, asset is within flood fringe.
flood fringe, continue to step 2.
If asset is not within flood fringe, answer no. If within
2) Locate the asset on the Preliminary Coastal Hazards
flood fringe, continue to step 2.
Composite Risk Map (http://www.arcgis.com/home/
2) Locate the asset on the Preliminary Coastal Hazards
webmap/viewer.html?webmap=82a2fa929168434dabb6
Composite Risk Map (http://www.arcgis.com/home/
a3970e1d38e0). Add the USGS Land Cover NLCD_2006
webmap/viewer.html?webmap=82a2fa929168434dabb6
layer. Determine if there are vegetated buffers between
a3970e1d38e0). Add the USGS Land Cover NLCD_2006
the asset and the flood source. Confirm with site
layer. Determine if there are vegetated buffers between
observations or aerial and street‐level imagery.
the asset and the flood source. Confirm with site
observations or aerial and street‐level imagery.
Justification:
Justification:

The asset is located partially within the flood fringe and without adequate
vegetative barrier, as seen in aerial imagery below.
The asset is located partially within the flood fringe and without adequate
vegetative barrier, as seen in aerial imagery below.

Data gaps/questions: None
Data gaps/questions: None
Aerial photograph:
Aerial photograph:
Legend
Asset
Legend
FEMA FIRM
Asset
panel 3606930011C
FEMADateFIRM
Effective
9/30/1981
panel 3606930011C
http://msc.fema.gov
Effective
Date
9/30/1981

http://msc.fema.gov

© 2014 Microsoft Corporation
Pictometry Bird's Eye
© 2014 Microsoft Corporation
© 2012 Pictometry International
Pictometry Bird's Eye
© 2012 Pictometry International
Section V: Additional Materials

V – 35

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Figure V-2
Vulnerability Score Determination
Worksheet Completed Example

V – 36

Section V: Additional Materials

STON Y POIN T N Y R IS IN G Community Reconstruction Plan

Vulnerability Score Determination Worksheet
Asset:
Asset class (select one):
Instructions:

Characteristic

Asset ID: 24
Seaweed Yacht Club
Economic
1) For each of the asset characteristics below, select the score for which the description best
matches the characteristics of the asset under consideration. Enter that score number in the
"Score" column.
2) In the "Justification" column, explain the source of information used to make the
determination. Attach any relevant documentation on the subsequent pages.
3) If no information is available, use a score of 3 for that characteristic and note in the

Insignificant
1

Impact of storms on service/function
of asset (including impact from
historic storms and accessibility
to/from asset during storms)

Limited interruption in
service or short term
reduced service

Primary materials of construction

Glazed brick, Cast stone,
clay tile, concrete, fiber
or polyethylene recycled
plastic lumber, stone

Condition of asset

Perfect condition. No
visible deterioration.

Presence of vulnerable critical
features

No critical electrical,
mechanical, or
instrumentation
features in flood‐prone
locations

Vulnerable population occupation

Floor elevation relative to BFE
(freeboard)

Minor
2

VULNERABILITY
Moderate
3

Major
5

Score

Weight

Justification

4

30%

Input from committee on impact of historic storms

2

5%

Materials of construction appear to be exterior ‐grade
treated plywood with vinyl siding.

Moderate visible
Major deterioration,
Minor visible
deterioration, primarily Significant visible
including structural
deterioration (e.g.
deterioration (e.g.
superficial (e.g.
deficiencies (e.g. partial
chipped paint, a few
holes in roof or walls)
damaged siding,
collapse, holes in floor)
roof shingles missing)
broken windows)

5

5%

As shown in the site photograph below, the roof
structure is severely damaged and displaced.

Cellar entrance or
Instrumentation or
Mechanical equipment
Electrical equipment in
grate in flood‐prone
control equipment in
in flood‐prone location
flood‐prone location
location
flood‐prone location

4

30%

Boat maintenance equipment at ground level

Service loss for more Service loss for more
Service loss for up to
Permanent loss of
than 1 week up to 1
than 1 month or
1 week or longer
service of the economic
month or longer term permanent reduced
term reduced service
asset
reduced service
capacity
Common bricks,
formed‐in‐place
cement, exterior‐
grade treated
plywood, treated
solid hardwood

Wood‐filled recycled
Tempered
plastic lumber, gypsum hardboard, exterior‐
products (sheathing
grade oriented‐
panels, gypsum board)
strand board

No occupation by
0‐20% vulnerable
20‐50% vulnerable
vulnerable populations population occupancy population occupancy

More than 2 ft. above
BFE

Significant
4

Address: 66 Beach Rd, Stony Point, NY 10980

0‐2 ft. above BFE

At BFE to 1 ft below
BFE

Particle board,
fiberboard

50‐70% vulnerable
population
occupancy

70‐100% vulnerable
population occupancy

1

5%

There is no occupation by vulnerable populations

1‐3 ft. below BFE

More than 3 ft. below
BFE

5

25%

According to the LiDAR map, the elevation of the asset
is 0‐4 ft, while the BFE for 100‐year storm is 12 feet, as
shown in the FEMA Flood Hazard Map

4

100%

Overall Vulnerability Score:

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 37

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Vulnerability Score Determination Worksheet
Use this page to attach any relevant documentation.

USACE 2012 Post‐Sandy LiDAR
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/lidar
Legend
Asset

FEMA Best Available Flood Hazard Data
2013
http://fema.maps.arcgis.com/home/
webmap/viewer.html?webmap=2f0a
884bfb434d76af8c15c26541a545&ext
ent=‐
73.99491620295004,41.22610731095
51,‐
73.9912737631073,41.227115967580
84

V – 38

Section V: Additional Materials

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Vulnerability Score Determination Worksheet
Site Visit Photographs
J. Reed
20‐Nov‐13
Seaweed Yacht Club

Pictometry Bird's Eye
©2012 Pictometry International Corp

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 39

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

E. End Notes
Photo Credits
Cover Page:
Stony Point from the Air (Patrick Magee)
Waterfront Seen from Stony Point Battlefield (Chris
Robbins)

Methodology and Other Technical Notes
Cost Benefit Analysis
Methodology for Full Time Equivalent (FTE) Job Projections: A number of different methods were utilized
to determine projections of estimated retained and/or
added employees. Four approaches were utilized depending on the baseline assumptions of the project:

Dividers:
Section I
Stream Bank Erosion on Cedar Pond Brook (Kevin
Maher)
Danger – Unsafe Structure (Thomas McGuire)
Debris on the Waterfront (Thomas McGuire)
Marina District on Beach Road (Patrick Magee)

Section II
Hurricane Irene Flooding at Lowland Park (Luanne
Konopko)
Damaged Boats and Damaged Houses (Thomas
McGuire)
Downed Trees near the Waterfront (Thomas McGuire)
Jetties on River Road (Chris Robbins)

Section III
Stony Point Sunrise (Thomas McGuire)
Motorcyclists Rally to Support Superstorm Sandy
Victims (Dominick Posillipo)
Collapsed Structure in River Front Park (Thomas
McGuire)
Fall Color in Stony Point (Alice Brown)

Section IV
Damaged House in Grassy Point (Thomas McGuire)
Stony Point from the Hudson River (Chris Robbins)

1. The business to be potentially displaced/ retained
was identifiable by name: In this case we used
employment counts from a public source such as
Manta.com or Dun & Bradstreet. Typically, businesses need to be of a certain size to be recorded by
one of the business databases. Smaller establishments and branch offices tend to be missing.
2. The business to be potentially displaced/ retained
was not identifiable by name (or was not part of one
of the business databases). In this instance, we
reviewed aerial photographs to estimate the total
square footage of the business. We then applied an
industry standard ratio to determine employment.
For example, a use ratio of 1 FTE per 500 square feet
for retail and 1 FTE per 1,000 square feet of industrial
space was used to determine employment. A similar
approach was used to determine potential employment to be added through a project with defined
potential build out conditions.
3. Individual facilities without a defined scope: This
methodology was applied primarily to emergency
shelters. Since not much was known about the size
and specific time of operation of these facilities, it
was assumed that fewer than 5 FTEs, the smallest
employment range category, would be necessary to
operate the facility. Similar assumptions were made
for single facility expansions.

Debris Scattered on a Jetty (Thomas McGuire)
Marina at Dusk (Chris Robbins)

Section V
Waterfront Seen from Stony Point Battlefield (Chris
Robbins)
Third Public Engagement Meeting (Luanne Konopko)
Damaged Docks at Ba Mar (Thomas McGuire)
Stony Point Battlefield and Lighthouse (Patrick Magee)

V – 40

Section V: Additional Materials

4. Area-wide improvements without a defined scope:
For projects with an undefined scope that affect multiple facilities (such as improvements to a downtown
district), it was assumed that 10 employees or less
would be retained/added. This was based on the
assumption that each district would house no more
than 10 small businesses and each of the businesses
would be able to retain/add one employee.

ST O N Y P O I N T N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Bibliography
Blake, E.S., et al. (2013). Tropical Cyclone Report,
Hurricane Sandy (AL182012). National Hurricane
Center.
Georgas, Nickitas, et al. (2013). Sandy and the Big
Climate Change Picture. Stevens Institute, Hoboken,
NJ. Accessible via http://www.slideshare.net/rebeccakaplan16/
sandy-and-the-big-climate-change-picture-nickitasgeorgas.

National Climatic Data Center (2014). Record of Climatological Observations. National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Accessible via
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/.
Maryellen Gonyea, ed. (1976). Stony Point in Words &
Pictures: Commemorating the Celebration of Our
Nation’s Bicentennial, 1776-1976. Stony Point American Revolution Bicentennial Commission, Stony Point, NY.

F. Glossary
AKRF

AKRF, Inc.

BFE

Base Flood Elevation

CBA

Cost-Benefit Analysis

CDBG-DR

Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery

CDM

CDM Smith, Inc.

CHPE

Champlain Hudson Power Express

Consultant

The AKRF/CDM Team Assigned to Stony Point

Team
CPCB

Community Planning and Capacity Building

CRS

Community Rating System

EOCC

Emergency Operations Command Center

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency

FHWA

Federal Highway Administration

FIRMs

Flood Insurance Rate Maps

GIS

Geographic Information System

GOSR

Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery

HSS

Health and Social Services

HUD

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 41

S TONY POINT NY RI S I NG Community Reconstruction Plan

LWRP

Local Waterfront Revitalization Program

NCR

Natural and Cultural Resources

NDRF

National Disaster Recovery Framework

NFIP

National Flood Insurance Program

NOAA

National Oceanic and Atmosphere Administration

NYRCR

NYRCR New York Rising Community Reconstruction

NYRCR Catskills/
Hudson Valley
Regional Lead

Lori DuBord, Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery

NYS

New York State

NYS DEC

New York State Department of Environmental Conservation

NYS DHCR

NYS Department of Housing and Community Renewal

NYS DOS

NYS Department of State

NYS DOS
Lead Planner

William Harding

NYS DOS
Planners

Barbara Kendall, Lisa Melville

NYS DOT

New York State Department of Transportation

RSF

Recovery Support Function

Sasaki

Sasaki Associates, Inc.

Stony Point NYRCR
Planning Committees

Stony Point Community Co-Chairs and At-Large Members

USACE

United States Army Corps of Engineers

USEPA

United State Environmental Protection Agency

USFWS

United States Fish and Wildlife Service

USGS

United States Geological Survey

V – 42

Section V: Additional Materials

