SUFFERN NYRCR

NY RISING COMMUNIT Y
R EC O N S T R U C T I O N PL A N
December 2014

NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Program

Members of the Suffern NYRCR Planning Committee
Beth Barone, Chair
Trish Abato*
Jo Corrigan*
James Lyons
Bruce McClintlock
Daniel McInerney
Charles Sawicki
Dina Schmidt
Bruce Simon
*(non-voting member)

Prepared By
This document was developed by the Suffern NYRCR Planning Committee as
part of the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program within the
Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is supported by NYS
Homes and Community Renewal and NYS Department of State. The document
was prepared by the following consulting firms: AKRF, Inc.; MJ Engineering and
Land Surveying, P.C.; Nagle, Tatich, Cranston LLC d/b/a Elan.3.Consulting (E.3);
Sasaki Associates; Arch Street Communications, Inc.; and CDM Smith.

i

Foreword

Introduction
In the span of approximately one year, beginning in
August 2011, the State of New York experienced three
extreme weather events. Hurricane Irene, Tropical
Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on
the lives of New Yorkers and their communities. These
tragic disasters signaled that New Yorkers are living in
a new reality defined by rising sea levels and extreme
weather events that will occur with increased frequency and power. They also signaled that we need to
rebuild our communities in a way that will mitigate
against future risks and build increased resilience.
To meet these pressing needs, Governor Andrew M.
Cuomo led the charge to develop an innovative,
community-driven planning program on a scale
unprecedented and with resources unparalleled. The
NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Program, within the Governor’s Office of Storm
Recovery (GOSR), empowers the State’s most
impacted communities with the technical expertise
and funding resources needed to develop thorough
and implementable reconstruction plans to build
physically, socially, and economically resilient and
sustainable communities.

Program Overview
The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor
Cuomo in April of 2013, is a more than $700 million
planning and implementation program established to
provide rebuilding and resiliency assistance to communities severely damaged by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy. Drawing on
lessons learned from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR
Program is a unique combination of bottom-up community participation and State-provided technical

expertise. This powerful combination recognizes not
only that community members are best positioned to
assess the needs and opportunities of the places
where they live and work, but also that decisions are
best made when they are grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by the latest innovative solutions.
Launched in the summer of 2013 and completed in
March 2014, Round I of the NYRCR planning process
included 50 NYRCR Planning Areas, comprising 102
storm-impacted localities. In January 2014, Governor
Cuomo announced a second round of the planning
process, serving an additional 22 storm-impacted
localities. Four of these localities were absorbed into
existing Round I NYRCR Planning Areas, bringing the
number of localities participating in Round I up to 106;
the other 18 localities formed 16 new Round II NYRCR
Planning Areas. Between Rounds I and II, there are 66
NYRCR Planning Areas, comprising 124 localities.
The program serves over 2.7 million New Yorkers and
covers nearly 6,500 square miles, which is equivalent
to 14% of the overall State population and 12% of the
State’s overall geography.
In Rounds I and II, the State allotted between $3
million and $25 million to each participating locality for
the implementation of eligible projects identified in the
NYRCR Plan. The funding for these projects is provided through the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) Community Development
Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR)
program.1
Each NYRCR Planning Area is represented by a
NYRCR Planning Committee composed of local residents, business owners, and civic leaders. Members
1. Five of the Round I Planning Areas—Niagara, Herkimer, Oneida,
Madison, and Montgomery Counties—are not funded through the
CDBG-DR program.

Foreword

iii

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

of the Planning Committees were identified in consultation with established local leaders, community organizations and, in some cases, municipalities. The
NYRCR Program sets a new standard for community
participation in recovery and resiliency planning, with
community members leading the planning process.
Across the State, more than 650 New Yorkers have
represented their communities by serving on Planning
Committees. Nearly 650 Planning Committee Meetings have been held, during which Planning Committee members worked with the State’s team to develop
community reconstruction plans, which identify
opportunities to make their communities more resilient. All meetings were open to the public. An additional 250+ Public Engagement Events attracted
thousands of community members, who provided
feedback on the planning process and resulting proposals. The NYRCR Program’s outreach has included
communities that are traditionally underrepresented,
such as immigrant populations and students. All planning materials are posted on the program’s website
(www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr), providing several
ways for community members and the public to
submit feedback on the program and materials in
progress.
Throughout the planning process, Planning Committees were supported by staff from GOSR, planners
from New York State (NYS) Department of State and
NYS Department of Transportation, and consultants
from world-class planning firms that specialize in
engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green infrastructure, and more.
The NYRCR Program does not end with this NYRCR
Plan. Governor Cuomo has allotted over $700 million
for planning as well as implementing eligible projects
identified in NYRCR Plans. NYRCR Planning Areas
are also eligible for additional funds through the NY
Rising to the Top Competition, which evaluates applications from Round II NYRCR Planning Committees
across three categories—Regional Approach, Inclusion of Vulnerable Populations, and Use of Green
Infrastructure. The winner of each category will be

iv

Foreword

allotted a share of the competition’s $3.5 million to
fund additional eligible projects.
In April 2014, Governor Cuomo announced that projects identified in NYRCR Plans would receive priority
consideration through the State’s Consolidated
Funding Application (CFA) process and charged the
Regional Economic Development Councils (REDCs),
which play an advisory role in the CFA process, to
support NYRCR projects. In December 2014, Governor Cuomo announced that 24 NYRCR projects
received nearly $12 million in CFA funding. This
announcement is an example of the Governor honoring his commitment to leverage the work of the
NYRCR Planning Committees to incorporate resilience into other State programs and to find additional
sources of funding for NYRCR projects. The NYRCR
Program is also working with both private and public
institutions to identify existing funding sources and to
create funding opportunities where none existed
before.
The NYRCR Program has successfully coordinated
with State and Federal agencies to help guide the
development of feasible projects. The program has
leveraged the REDC State Agency Review Teams
(SARTs), composed of representatives from dozens of
State agencies and authorities, for feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR Planning Committees. The
SARTs review projects with an eye toward regulatory
and permitting needs, policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding sources. The NYRCR Program is
continuing to work with the SARTs to streamline the
permitting process and ensure shovels are in the
ground as quickly as possible.
On the pages that follow, you will see the results of
months of thoughtful, diligent work by the Suffern
NYRCR Planning Committee, which is passionately
committed to realizing a brighter, more resilient future
for its community.

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

The NYRCR Plan
This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward rebuilding a more resilient community. Each NYRCR Planning
Committee began the planning process by defining
the scope of its planning area, assessing storm
damage, and identifying critical issues. Next, the
Planning Committee inventoried critical assets in the
community and assessed the assets’ exposure to risk.
On the basis of this work, the Planning Committee
described recovery and resiliency needs and identified opportunities. The Planning Committee then
developed a series of comprehensive reconstruction
and resiliency strategies, and identified projects and
implementation actions to help fulfill those strategies.
The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR Plan
are divided into three categories. The order in which
the projects and actions are listed in this NYRCR Plan
does not necessarily indicate the Planning Committee’s prioritization of these projects and actions. Proposed Projects are projects proposed for funding
through an NYRCR Planning Area’s allotment of
CDBG-DR funding. Featured Projects are projects
and actions that the Planning Committee has identified as important resiliency recommendations and has
analyzed in depth, but has not proposed for funding
through the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee would like to highlight and that
are not categorized as Proposed Projects or Featured
Projects. The Proposed Projects and Featured Projects found in this NYRCR Plan were voted for inclusion by voting members of the Planning Committee.
Those voting members with conflicts of interest
recused themselves from voting on any affected projects, as required by the NYRCR Ethics Handbook and
Code of Conduct.
As part of Round II of the NYRCR Program, the Suffern
NYRCR Planning Area has been allotted up to $3
million in CDBG-DR funds for the implementation of
eligible projects identified in this plan.

While developing projects for inclusion in NYRCR
Plans, Planning Committees took into account cost
estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the effectiveness of
each project in reducing risk to populations and critical assets, feasibility, and community support. Planning Committees also considered the potential likelihood that a project or action would be eligible for
CDBG-DR funding. Projects and actions implemented
with this source of Federal funding must satisfy a
Federally-designated eligible activity category, fulfill a
national objective (i.e., meeting an urgent need,
removing slums and blight, or benefiting low- to
moderate-income individuals), and have a tie to the
natural disaster to which the funding is linked. These
are among the factors that GOSR will consider, in
consultation with local municipalities and nonprofit
organizations, when determining which projects and
actions are best positioned for implementation.
The total cost of Proposed Projects in this NYRCR
Plan exceeds the NYRCR Planning Area’s CDBG-DR
allotment to allow for flexibility if some Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due to environmental
review, HUD eligibility, technical feasibility, or other
factors. Implementation of the projects and actions
found in this NYRCR Plan are subject to applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, including the Americans with Disabilities Act. Inclusion of a
project or action in this NYRCR Plan does not guarantee that a particular project or action will be eligible for
CDBG‐DR funding or that it will be implemented.
Projects will be implemented on a staggered timeline,
and the NYRCR Program will choose an appropriate
State or local partner to implement each project.
GOSR will actively seek to match projects with additional funding sources, when possible.
In the months and years to follow, many of the projects and actions outlined in this NYRCR Plan will
become a reality, helping New York not only to rebuild,
but also to build back better.

Foreword

v

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

NY Rising Planning Areas

Note: Map displays the 66 NYRCR Planning Areas from Rounds I and II. (Five of the Round I Planning Areas—Niagara,
Herkimer, Oneida, Madison, and Montgomery Counties—are not funded through the CDBG-DR program.)

vi

Foreword

Table of Contents

Section I.

Community Overview .................................................................... I-1
A. Geographic Scope ......................................................................... I-2
B. Description of Storm Damage ....................................................... I-3
C. Critical Issues................................................................................. I-8
D. Community Vision ........................................................................ I-13
E. Relationship to Regional Plans .................................................... I-14

Section II:

Assessment of Risk and Needs.................................................... II-1
A. Description of Community Assets and Assessment of Risk......... II-1
i. Description of Community Assets .................................................II-1
ii. Assessment of Risk to Assets and Systems ...............................II-12
B. Assessment of Needs and Opportunities ................................... II-18

Section III:

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies.................................. III-1

Section IV:

Implementation – Project Profiles .............................................. IV-1
Backup Power for Critical Community Facilities .............................. IV-4
Emergency Railroad Crossing into the West Ward........................... IV-7
Drainage Improvements to Transportation Assets ........................... IV-9

Table of Contents

vii

Flood Mitigation Assessment – Mahwah and Ramapo River Watersheds..........IV-12
Hardening of Wastewater Treatment Plant and Facilities
through Physical Protective Measures ................................................................IV-15
Hardening of Water Treatment Plant and Facilities through
Physical Protective Measures .............................................................................IV-18
Homeowner Buyout Program Support and Economic Development Plan .........IV-21
Homeowner Support for Raising Utility Connections and Mechanicals .............IV-23
Inventory of Existing Stormwater Management Infrastructure ............................IV-25
Village-wide Stormwater Management: Green Infrastructure and
Storage Systems Feasibility Study ......................................................................IV-27
Stormwater Management Facilities in Village Parking Lots A and B...................IV-30
VFW Building Emergency Power and Electrical Upgrades .................................IV-33

Section V:

Additional Materials .........................................................................................V-1
A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations.......................................................... V-1
B. Master Table of Projects ................................................................................... V-3
C. Public Engagement Process............................................................................. V-9
D. Community Asset Inventory............................................................................ V-15
E. Endnotes ......................................................................................................... V-19
F. Glossary ........................................................................................................... V-23

viii

Table of Contents

Suffern NYRCR
Executive Summary

I. Overview
The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR)
Program was established by New York Governor
Andrew M. Cuomo to provide rebuilding and revitalization assistance to communities damaged by
Superstorm Sandy, Hurricane Irene, and Tropical
Storm Lee. Recovery and reconstruction initiatives
began immediately following these storm events. The
goal of the program is to rebuild from these storms
and to increase communities’ physical, economic,
and social resilience to future storm events. The
NYRCR Program provides an opportunity for residents, business owners, and community leaders to
actively participate in planning for a stronger future.
The Program empowers communities to prepare
locally driven recovery plans to identify innovative
reconstruction and resiliency projects and other
actions to allow each community not only to survive,
but also to thrive in an era when natural risks are
becoming increasingly common.
The Suffern NYRCR Plan was developed during six
months of community stakeholder engagement. The
NYRCR Plan reflects Suffern’s vision and goals, honoring its unique qualities and assets for building a
safer, more resilient, and sustainable future.

a. Community Location and Allotment
Amount
The Village of Suffern, located within the Town of
Ramapo in Rockland County, 20 miles west of the
Hudson River, measures 2.1 square miles. The community has just over 10,000 residents and maintains
true small town charm while being just an hour drive
or train ride from the heart of New York City. The
Ramapo River Watershed, which is part of the Passaic
River Basin, encompasses the entire Village.

Suffern has been allotted up to $3 million in Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery
(CDBG-DR) funding through the NYRCR program.

b. Scope of Planning Area
The Suffern NYRCR planning area encompasses the
entire Village of Suffern, and a small part of the New
Jersey Township of Mahwah at the New York and New
Jersey border. The portion of Mahwah contained in
the geographic scope includes an important access
point for residents and emergency vehicles to the
West Ward neighborhood of the Village. The Suffern
NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) agreed that
they would include the entire Village in the planning
area since important community assets are located
throughout. In addition, upland areas have potential
for resilient reconstruction and stormwater management practices that can absorb stormwater and
potentially reduce flooding impacts in lower lying
areas.

c. Summary of Storm Impacts
Hurricane Irene (August 28, 2011) hit Suffern with its
full force. The heavy and sustained rains caused the
Village’s two rivers (Mahwah and Ramapo) to reach
historic levels and flow into and beyond their floodplains resulting in significant damage to roads, homes,
and businesses throughout the Village. The majority of
storm damage from Hurricane Irene was concentrated
along the rivers and in the area surrounding Lake
Antrim. Roads were flooded, and a bridge washed out
severing the link between residents and emergency
services providers. The flooding caused the wastewater and water treatment plants to be taken offline,
leaving the Village no way to process sewage and
unable to produce potable water.

Executive Summary

1

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

During Superstorm Sandy (October 29, 2012), it was
not water but the high speed winds that wreaked
havoc throughout the Village. The storm’s strong
winds took down trees and power lines, blew off roofs,
and compromised utilities and Village infrastructure.
Following Superstorm Sandy, a State of Emergency
was declared at both the County and local level.
Throughout Rockland County, over 75,000 homes lost
power, some for as long as two weeks.
Unfortunately these storm events are not isolated incidents. Businesses, home owners, and Village government services are barely able to recover financially
and structurally in time for the next storm. Today, the
Village of Suffern is still working to repair damages
caused by Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene.

d. Summary of Critical Issues
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy caused
damage that directly and indirectly impacted homes,
businesses, roads, critical infrastructure systems, and
natural resources throughout the Village. These storms
exposed many vulnerabilities and revealed critical
issues affecting the community and its ability to
respond to and recover from natural disasters. The
key critical issues facing the Village of Suffern include:
 Emergency Access
 Flooding in Residential Neighborhoods
 Road Closures
 Inundation of Critical Facilities
 Stream Bank Erosion
 Business Closures
 Loss of Power

II. Community-Driven Process
All of the material presented in this Suffern NYRCR
Plan has been developed collaboratively. The NYRCR
Program provided the Community with a unique
opportunity to participate in a bottom-up/communitydriven planning effort to shape its resilient future.

a. Community Vision and Goals
The Suffern NYRCR Vision Statement:
Suffern is a quaint, resilient, easily accessible community dedicated to building back better. We are a
united community that works together to maintain our
quality of life, small town charm, multi-modal transportation options, educational framework, and cultural
attractions as investments in future generations. Residents are dedicated to restoring, redeveloping, revitalizing, and making more resilient our downtown,
infrastructure, stormwater systems, natural and cultural resources, all of which make Suffern a unique,
historic, and vibrant place.

Goals:
To realize the vision, NYRCR Suffern has developed
the following goals:
Build closer working relationships with neighboring
communities and the State of New Jersey to
address flooding issues that do not respect municipal boundaries.
Continue high level of emergency services and
enhance physical access to neighborhoods.
Enhance infrastructure and stormwater systems
where needed.
Preserve community character to maintain small
town charm.
Protect and clean Lake Antrim and the Mahwah
and Ramapo Rivers.
Protect, promote and enhance cultural attractions
that draw people to the village.
Revitalize downtown businesses and protect from
future storm damage.

2

Executive Summary

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

b. Summary of Public Outreach
The NYRCR Program is fundamentally a grassroots
initiative. Initial project recommendations were generated by the Suffern NYRCR Planning Committee,
which comprised residents, past and present Village
staff, and elected officials. The Committee met 10
times, approximately every other week from the end
of June 2014 through mid-November 2014. Materials
were circulated to the Committee before and after
each meeting and also posted to the Village page on
the NYRCR website. Interested members of the public
attended each of the Planning Committees Meetings.
Three Public Engagement Events were held throughout the six month planning process, with a fourth to be
conducted on January 14, 2015 after the final NYRCR
Plan is complete. These meetings provided the opportunity for Suffern residents to learn about the NYRCR
planning process, assets, and projects, and provide
input to community-driven plans for a more resilient
future. The format of the Public Engagement Events
varied throughout the process, but generally included
PowerPoint presentations, display boards and
mapping, workgroups and discussion supported by
maps and markers, survey sheets, and a photo booth.
Committee Members also shared information with
their community by posting relevant materials to the
Village website, leaving materials in the Library and
other high traffic areas, posting information throughout the Village, reaching out to friends and neighbors
through email and conversation, and attending municipal meetings and functions to report on their NYRCR
Plan progress. In addition, Committee Members and
the Village spread the word by distributing emails
through the Village’s network and sending materials
home with school-aged students.

III. Final Plan as Blueprint for
Implementation
a. Needs and Risks Underpin Projects
The Suffern NYRCR Planning Committee understands
where the Village is vulnerable, where the critical
assets are located, and what the risks are to those
assets. To address their specific vulnerabilities, a
comprehensive Needs and Opportunities analysis
was prepared through a combination of research,
analysis, and Committee and community feedback. A
sample of the needs and the opportunities identified
to address those needs, follows:

NEEDS:
Continue high level emergency services
operation and communication among
responders.
Improve regional coordination with state,
federal, and municipal governments to
protect the community and plan for future
disasters.
Investigate floodplain protection/restoration
and alternative stormwater management
measures (i.e., green technology).
Protect existing residential neighborhoods
and their access points from flooding.
Protect identified road, bridge, and culvert
infrastructure assets.
Provide businesses with assistance to
improve recovery time following a storm
event.

Executive Summary

3

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

OPPORTUNITIES:
Create a Regional Coordination Committee
to address flooding issues across state and
municipal boundaries.
Encourage continued training and education
on cutting edge technologies for emergency
service operations.
Evaluate ingress and egress routes to
vulnerable neighborhoods to develop safe
emergency access and evacuation routes
during storm events.
Examine resources such as low interest
loans and/or grants to help small businesses
recover from storm events.
Identify areas where floodplains can be
protected and/or restored and where green
infrastructure techniques can be used to
alleviate flooding from stormwater runoff.
Inventory infrastructure needs including age
and condition of facilities and preparation of
a maintenance and/or replacement/relocation plan.

b. Strategies
The strategies proposed in the NYRCR Plan consider
emergency, disaster recovery, long-term resiliency,
and economic development needs that remain unmet.
They represent statements of action that address how
to best fortify community assets, address stated
needs, capitalize on opportunities, resolve critical
issues, and meet short-, medium-, and long-term
goals identified during the planning process.
Assist residents with preparation for, response to,
and recovery from future storm events through
emergency communication, outreach, and education initiatives.
Broaden services at existing storm shelter facilities
to more fully cover basic needs, accommodate
pets, and, where needed, investigate new shelter
opportunities.
Collaborate with municipal neighbors in New York
and New Jersey to manage watershed development and control flooding.
Develop storm assistance programs and provide
consolidated information on financial initiatives that
allow residents and businesses to better protect
themselves and their assets from future storm
damage.
Improve stormwater management and drainage
systems throughout the Village to improve
resiliency.
Promote resilience and flood management practices through land-use planning, policy, and
regulation.
Repair, protect, and improve resiliency of critical
infrastructure and transportation assets such as
water and wastewater systems, utilities, roads, culverts, and bridges.

Flooded Wastewater Treatment Plant along Ramapo River
(Charles Sawicki)

4

Executive Summary

Restore, preserve, and augment natural resources—
including floodplains, streams, rivers, lakes and
wetlands—to help mitigate flooding and support
flood resiliency.

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

c. Projects are the Path to Executing the
Strategies
The strategies presented in the Table A, and the Proposed or Featured Projects that implement them,
specifically address the stated needs and transform
opportunities into action items. While certain Proposed and Featured Projects can be associated with
more than one strategy, each of these projects is presented within this NYRCR Plan in conjunction with the
most applicable strategy that they fulfill. Projects and
Strategies are not presented in any particular order of
priority.

PROJECT CATEGORIES:
Proposed Projects are proposed for funding
through a community’s allotment of CDBG-DR
funding.
Featured Projects are innovative projects where
an initial study or discrete first phase of the
project is proposed for CDBG-DR funding or
other identified funding; and regulatory reforms
and other programs that do not involve capital
expenditures.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations are
resiliency projects and actions that the Committee would like to highlight and are not categorized as Proposed or Featured Projects.

Table A: Proposed and Featured Projects
Strategy

Project Name

Project Category

Broaden services at existing storm shelter facilities
to more fully cover basic needs and accommodate
pets, and investigate new shelter opportunities

VFW Building Emergency Power and Electrical
Upgrades

Featured Project

Homeowner Buyout Program Support and Economic
Development Plan

Proposed Project

Homeowner Support for Raising Utility Connections
and Mechanicals

Proposed Project

Inventory of Existing Stormwater Management
Infrastructure

Proposed Project

Develop storm assistance programs and provide
consolidated information on financial initiatives that
allow residents and businesses to better protect
themselves and their assets from future storm
damage

Improve stormwater management and drainage
Village-wide Stormwater Management: Green
systems throughout the Village to improve resiliency Infrastructure and Storage Systems Feasibility Study

Repair, protect, and improve resiliency of critical
infrastructure and transportation assets such as
water and wastewater systems, utilities, roads,
culverts, and bridges

Restore, preserve, and augment natural resources,
including floodplains, streams, rivers, lakes, and
wetlands, to help mitigate flooding and support
flood resiliency

Proposed Project

Stormwater Management Facilities in Village Parking
Lots A and B

Featured Project

Backup Power for Critical Community Facilities

Proposed Project

Emergency Railroad Crossing into the West Ward

Proposed Project

Drainage Improvements to Transportation Assets

Proposed Project

Hardening of Wastewater Treatment Plant and
Facilities through Physical Protective Measures

Proposed Project

Hardening of Water Treatment Plant and Facilities
through Physical Protective Measures

Proposed Project

Flood Mitigation Assessment – Mahwah and
Ramapo River Watersheds

Proposed Project

Executive Summary

5

2014
NY RISING COMMUNITY
RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
SUFFERN NYRCR

Section I

Community Overview

I

Community Overview

The Village of Suffern is an incorporated village within
the Town of Ramapo in Rockland County, New York.
Harriman State Park makes up a portion of the Village’s northern boundary, while the Ramapo River
flows along its western extent, and Mahwah Township
in New Jersey borders it to the south. The Ramapo
Villages of Hillburn, Montebello, and Airmont surround
Suffern with the Town of Clarkstown located further to
the east. Suffern is well served by transportation
routes, owing to its position at the “Ramapo Pass.”
The New York State (NYS) Thruway (I-87), connecting
Albany and New York City passes through Suffern, as
does I-287, a major connector between Rockland
County, New Jersey, Westchester County, and Connecticut. In addition, the area is served by New Jersey
Transit (NJT) and Metro-North Railroad commuter
lines which stop at the Suffern train station. Freight rail
also passes through the Village. It is Suffern’s location
at this geographically significant intersection that has
made it an important crossroads for more than 250
years.
Prior to European settlement, the Village of Suffern
was inhabited by the Munsee and Ramapough
Indians. Arriving in the early 18th century, the first
European settlers were primarily from the Germanic
states, Scotland, England, Ireland, and the
Netherlands.”1
John Suffern, the Village’s namesake, settled in the
area now known as Suffern in 1773. Mr. Suffern
worked as a teacher, farmer, and store owner and later
served in both houses of New York State government.
He initially called the Village, incorporated in 1796,
“New Antrim,” after the County in Ireland in which he
lived. During the Revolutionary War, George Washington, Marquis de Lafayette, and Aaron Burr all conducted operations of the war from the Village. Washington himself is known to have stayed for five days in

Suffern’s Tavern, while his troops were stationed at
what is currently the Salvation Army.1
In the 1840s, the New York and Erie railroad was built
through the Ramapo Pass, opening up what was still
a very rural village. The railroad requested that the
station be called “Suffern,” after the Suffern family
whose land was used for the railroad’s right-of-way.2

Suffern Village Museum and Police Department
(Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)

Owing to the Village’s important location along major
transportation routes, industry also flourished in the
Village. Avon Products settled in the Village in 1897
and after growing for more than a century, constructed
a new 225,000-square-foot research and development facility in the Village in 2005. Good Samaritan
Hospital, which serves all of Rockland County, has
been open since 1902 and is a major employer in the
Village. Novartis Pharmaceuticals also has a large
manufacturing facility in Suffern; although, in January

Section I: Community Overview

I–1

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

2014, the company announced its plans to close
operations and move overseas.3 In addition, the
Village is home to the Salvation Army’s School for
Officer Training campus, which is situated on a 30-acre
site just west of the hospital.
Suffern is developed at a generally suburban scale.
Higher-density residential neighborhoods are located
mostly to the south of NYS Route 59 and in its north
and northeast reaches. Commercial and industrial
areas are strung predominantly along NYS Route 59
and the freight rail line, with additional retail sporadically sited on US Route 202 and in other areas within
the Village. Suffern has a small but defined downtown
with a historic theater, retail shops, restaurants and
some office uses. The Palisades Interstate Park/Harriman State Park on the Village’s northwestern border.
The open space surrounding the Stone Hill Quarry
and Novartis complex, along with the undeveloped
parcels surrounding the hospital, comprise the
balance of the landmass in the Village.
As of 2012, Suffern had a population of 10,764. 73%
of residents are white, 8% are African-American, and
18% of residents are Hispanic or Latino.4
Nearly two-thirds of the Village’s housing stock was
built between 1960 and 1990, with only 6% being
constructed after that time. 30% of the Village’s
housing units are single-family detached houses,
while another 30% are located in buildings housing
three to four units. Another 16% of housing units are
single-family attached houses, with the remaining
roughly 11% of the units being situated in buildings of
20 units or more. More than half of the 28% of Village
residents that live in rental housing pay more than
30% of their household income in gross rent.
Suffern is located in the Ramapo River Watershed.
The Watershed’s namesake, the Ramapo River, flows
along the western border of the Village. North of I-287,
the Mahwah River, a tributary to the Ramapo River,
flows into Lake Antrim. It then continues south through
the heart of Suffern and empties into the Ramapo
River just south of the Village line in Mahwah, NJ. It is

I–2

Section I: Community Overview

Ramapo Quarry (Flaam Hardy, AKRF, Inc.)

this stretch of the Mahwah River running through the
center of the Village that has caused the most flooding problems for residents and businesses. Flooding
along the Ramapo River has also impacted the Village
but to a lesser extent. It should be noted that the
northern part of the Village is at a much higher elevation than the downtown which sits at the lowest point
in Suffern. This contributes to flooding in the Village.

A. Geographic Scope
Defining the physical extent of the area that the NY
Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) planning
process would address, known as the Geographic
Scope, was the key first step taken by the Suffern
NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee). This geographic study area forms the basis for all subsequent
steps in the NYRCR planning process, including the
exercises and analyses that lead to the development
of the asset inventory, list of needs and opportunities,
risk assessment and ultimately strategies, actions and
projects. Committee Members were encouraged to
define the Geographic Scope of their NYRCR Plan to
include locations that are most vulnerable to storm
damage and where assets are most at risk; areas
where future development or redevelopment will be
discouraged and encouraged; and areas where additional economic investment will help the community’s
financial resiliency.

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

“Assets are likely to be most at risk due to future
storms in the extreme, high and moderate risk
areas of the community. But reviewing current and
previous storm damage may indicate that other
areas should be included [in the geographic scope].”
Guidance for New York Rising Community
Reconstruction Plans, A Planning Toolkit for CR
Planning Committees

Although there are areas in Suffern that were not
directly impacted by flooding or wind damage, these
areas contain important recovery and resiliency assets
or have the potential to support redevelopment, providing the Village the ability to move resources out of
the path of future storms.
The Committee agreed that boundaries of the Geographic Scope would be coterminous with the municipal boundaries with the exception of a small area that
extends into Mahwah, NJ. This portion is approximately 15 acres and includes the rail underpass
leading to Ramapo Valley Road, and the intersections
of Ramapo Valley Road with North Ramapo Avenue
and Catherine Avenue. This inclusion of a small portion
of Mahwah is important to the Village as the roads
here provide one of two points of access to the Village’s West Ward residential neighborhood. During
certain storm events including Hurricane Irene, roads
in this area as well as those to the north are inundated,
thereby limiting or eliminating access to this
neighborhood.
Figure I-1 presents the Geographic Scope developed
by the Committee and endorsed by the broader
Suffern community at the first Public Engagement
Event. More information about public outreach can be
found in Section V.C. “Public Engagement Process.”

B. Description of Storm
Damage
Over recent years, the Village of Suffern has suffered
from substantial flood or wind damage as a result of
recurring storm events, including Hurricane Irene
(August 28, 2011) and Superstorm Sandy (October
29, 2012). Significant rainfall during Hurricane Irene
caused the Mahwah and Ramapo Rivers to rise above
their banks and flow into their natural floodplains,
resulting in flooding of the surrounding areas. High
winds damaged buildings, blew down trees, and
knocked out power during Superstorm Sandy.
Although Tropical Storm Lee did not harm the Village,
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy took an enormous toll on this community, damaging housing and
vital infrastructure, impacting business and the Village’s economic vitality, and impacting the quality of
life in Suffern.
To prepare for Hurricane Irene, on August 26, 2011, a
county-wide state of emergency was declared, urging
residents to stay off roads and prepare for power
outages. All Rockland County transportation services,
along with Metro-North, NJ Transit, Amtrak, and New
York City subway service, were suspended. The storm
left over 11,469 Orange and Rockland Utilities (O&R)
customers with service disruptions in Rockland
County. Suffern residents lost power for an average of
two to three days during Hurricane Irene. Superstorm
Sandy, which hit the Village the following fall, brought
extreme winds that caused severe damage. Many
residents were left without power for up to 10 days.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
declared a Major Disaster in Rockland County on
October 30, 2012, as first responders struggled to
repair utilities and clean up debris. The Village coordinated closely with O&R to restore power to its residents. As soon as O&R confirmed the power was cut
in an area, the Village Department of Public Works
(DPW) came in to clear trees and storm debris leading
the way for repairs to the electrical distribution system
and ultimately restoration of power. Superstorm Sandy
also disrupted NJ Transit service for more than two
weeks, preventing many commuters from returning to
work.5
Section I: Community Overview

I–3

Figure I-1
Geographic Scope - Village of Suffern

£
¤
W

ay

n

e

A

ve

202

Lake
Antrim

§
¦
¨
287

59
T
S
Stone Hill
Quarry
Mahwah
River

§
¦
¨

R a m ap o R

287

£
¤
202

Village
Hall

Or

59
T
S

an
Av
e

Ne
w
Yo
Ne
rk
w
Je
r se
y

ge

West
Ward

Ma
hw
ah
R

59 L
A ve
S
T
a f a ye t t e

£
¤
202

0

´

Legend
Study Area (Village of
Suffern, NY & portion
of Mahwah, NJ)

Rivers & Streams

Major Highways

Water Bodies

Railroads

2
I

Rail Station

Wetlands

0.5
Mile

Data Sources
ESRI, NJGIN, NYSITS,
Rockland County,
Village of Suffern

NY
NJ

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Housing in certain neighborhoods across the Village
has been devastated by flooding during recent storms,
stranding residents, damaging, and even destroying
homes. The Squires Gate community in southern
Suffern, built adjacent to the west bank of the Mahwah
River, has experienced regular flooding due to storms
dating back to 1977. During Hurricane Irene, 152
homes were flooded some with as much as eight feet
of water. Decks, ancillary structures, fences, and playground equipment were washed away and large portions of the neighborhood were inundated resulting in
the loss of many vehicles. The area was evacuated
due to the high waters and lack of electricity and the
National Guard arrived to police the area for several
days after the storm. Possessions within the flooded
houses were destroyed and four of the semi-attached
homes in this neighborhood were compromised, the
water lifting the structures off of their foundations.
Since the storm, these two buildings have been razed
as part of the FEMA buyout program. Many residents
impacted by Hurricane Irene continue to feel the
effects over three years after the flood waters
subsided.6
Past flooding in this community has not only damaged
homes, but flooded streets, leaving residents stranded
and without power for days at a time. Boats have
been used to move residents to and from their homes
during and after these flooding events. In addition,
such inundation has caused health impacts. Flooded
basements are plagued with pollutants and mold and
must be entirely gutted and bleached after the water
recedes. Residents have described coming down with
a rash after wading through or otherwise being
exposed to the water in their homes. People living in
Squires Gate have described the recurring flooding
that occured in their neighborhood to be sudden and
extreme. Water entered their homes both from the
saturated ground below and from the Mahwah River
as it flowed into its adjacent floodplains during Hurricane Irene and other past storm events with significant amounts of precipitation. Power was quickly cut
off as distribution lines and transformers are buried
underground in this area.7

Flooding after Hurricane Irene (Robert Kawaski)

The Squires Gate community is not the only residential neighborhood in Suffern affected by flooding. Lake
Antrim and the Mahwah River flowed above their
banks and into their natural floodplains during Hurricane Irene, isolating northern Suffern, including apartment complexes, townhomes and single family residences off of Wayne Avenue, Memorial Drive, and
Montebello Road, from the rest of the Village. Flooding
in this area strands residents and severs access to
vital emergency services. As a result of Hurricane
Irene, residents on Memorial Drive had to be rescued
by boat.
The West Ward residential neighborhood (the area in
the Village west of Orange Avenue) is also a very vulnerable part of Suffern. The few access roads to this
neighborhood flood frequently due to rainfall, excess
stormwater, and the tendency of the Ramapo and
Mahwah Rivers to flow into their floodplains during
storm events. As a result, the West Ward is cut off
from the rest of the Village and the providers of critical
services. Even in good weather, larger emergency
vehicles are only able to enter the West Ward at

Section I: Community Overview

I–5

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Chestnut Street, close to the ball fields. During Hurricane Irene, the flooding was so severe that this
entrance was cut off and residents remained isolated
in their homes as emergency services had difficulty
reaching them. At Boulevard Road Bridge, water from
Hurricane Irene’s drenching rains caused the Mahwah
River to crest three feet above flood stage, flooding
homes on Brook Street.
During Superstorm Sandy, housing stock also experienced damage but, this time from strong winds and
falling trees and limbs. In Squires Gate, the roof of one
semi-attached house was partially blown away. At
another, a tree crashed down through the roof, damaging the attic and top floor. In another location, one
of the homes had the electrical service torn from the
house when a large tree was toppled by a wind gust.

Flooding along Wayne Ave after Hurricane Irene (Robert Kawasaki)

Hurricane Irene also flooded and physically damaged
critical infrastructure throughout the Village. Inundated
roads and bridges prohibited residents from evacuating their homes and emergency services from accessing them. During this storm, the Village wastewater
and drinking water treatment plants, both located in
the 100-year floodplain, in addition to all four of the
Village’s water supply wells, were flooded for three
days. At the wastewater treatment facility, as floodwaters careened down the channel of the Ramapo River,
two Village employees worked quickly to prepare the
wastewater treatment plant for the coming flood. As
water depths increased and filled the basin where

I–6

Section I: Community Overview

Suffern’s plants are located more quickly than
expected, these men had to be rescued by another
Town employee, at risk of his own safety, in the
Highway Department’s front end bucket loader. The
water treatment plant was similarly inaccessible, and
staff had to use a rowboat to get to the facility to
check on the generator after the storm.
Electrical equipment, pumps, and emergency generators at the treatment plants were damaged during the
storm and some service roads behind these facilities
have not yet been restored. In addition to the damage
to the wastewater treatment plant, pump stations in
the Village were also wrecked by the flooding during
Hurricane Irene, including the Lake Antrim pump
station on Wayne Avenue. Recovery of these systems
took weeks. The water treatment plant and well
system were off-line for a full month. The wastewater
treatment facility fared only slightly better; the Village
was able to return it to service after three weeks of
inoperation.
Local businesses also experienced flooding during
Hurricane Irene. Grasskeeper Landscaping and the
businesses located in the Rockland Terrace Building,
including Crystal Carwash along South Street, were
flooded and unable to open for several days. Downtown businesses along Lafayette Avenue, including
Suffern Food Mart, were invaded by floodwaters,
forcing them to close for several days. The building
that housed a local vacuum shop, a two-tiered industrial structure in the West Ward, also experienced
substantial flood damage on the lower level. The business relocated to another municipality since Hurricane
Irene and the property is now vacant. The storms hurt
the Suffern economy as residents were unable to get
to work or patronize unaffected local shops and restaurants. Other businesses were unable to open their
doors to employees and customers for varying periods
of time due to damage sustained during the flood.
Scars of the raging floodwaters are still visible along
the rivers and streams that flow through the Village.
This is especially so for certain reaches of the Mahwah
River where banks were undermined and severely

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Water Treatment Plant during Hurricane Irene (Charles Sawicki)

Flooded Ball Fields after Hurricane Irene (Robert Kawasaki)

eroded by Hurricane Irene, leaving nothing but bare
soil and fallen trees in her wake. The result of this is
most evident in the River reach just upstream of the
NYS Route 59 bridge crossing and specifically in the
vicinity of the Avon property. The volume and velocity
of floodwaters as they rushed through the deep
channel here resulted in the loss of upwards of 10-feet
of lawn owned by the company; it was simply washed
away. Immediately after the storm passed, large
stones were placed on the 15- to 20-foot-high riverbank to provide stability and avoid additional erosion.
Just upstream from this repair and below the railroad
trestle, a staircase that use to lead to the river bank
still hangs in the air with no destination.

adjacent parking lot and the community pool. Water
levels reached five and a half feet at the pool pump
house. The playground at Donna Hallett Park in
Squires Gate has been deconstructed since Hurricane
Irene as it has flooded too many times and some of
the playground equipment was washed away.

Many local amenities, including the ball fields, parks,
and Memorial Pool, were submerged under floodwaters. In the West Ward, the ball fields were drowned
under eight to 10 feet of water during Hurricane Irene,
leaving them unrecognizable but for the tall back
stops and score board that were still visible above the
floodwaters. Flooding at the Suffern Baseball Complex
damaged the fields as well as the Recreational Center.
Not only did the water prevent the use of this important recreational resource for weeks, but access to the
DPW garage, wastewater and water treatment plants
was blocked until the water receded. The nearby NJ
Transit commuter parking lot in this area also flooded,
damaging cars and stranding commuters. In northern
Suffern, overflow from Lake Antrim reached the

Emergency response in Suffern is supported by a
strong team of volunteers. It is not uncommon for residents and emergency responders to go door to door
to get important emergency messages out to their
community, a testimony to the commitment and
resolve of the community and those that serve its residents. When power outages have occurred, the police
and fire departments drove their vehicles through the
neighborhoods using loud speaker systems to alert
residents of safety evacuation plans.

Suffern is home to strong and reliable emergency
communication systems, and the Village continues to
improve their emergency response. The Police Department and Village officials are able to connect with residents through Facebook, Twitter, NY Alert, and NIXLE,
keeping residents updated with emergency response
and evacuation plans.

The Village Shelter is currently located at the Community Center on Washington Avenue. During Hurricane Irene, they offered beds for volunteer emergency
service workers from out of town, supplied power to

Section I: Community Overview

I–7

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

residents for charging phones and laptops, and provided refrigerators for food and medicine. The Village
is working to acquire the Veterans of Foreign Wars
(VFW) building in the West Ward; this building has the
potential to be used as an additional shelter. Although
residents and emergency services are prepared and
ready to help, recurring flood events are taxing and
often require more manpower than is available.
Other acts of good have been spoken of. During Hurricane Irene, Avon Research and Development, which
is located on the north side of NYS Route 59 and on
the west bank of the Mahwah River, allowed residents
to use their parking lot to protect their cars from the
floodwaters.
Although the most severe flooding came with Hurricane Irene, Suffern is regularly affected by flooding in
lesser storms. For example, homes in Squires Gate
have historically flooded, and the intersection of US
Route 202 and NYS Route 59 must be closed in many
storms. High impact, shorter rainfall events have
occurred more frequently, highlighting the various
areas in the Village most susceptible to repeated inundation. The flooding is due to a variety of factors
including topography, development in the watershed,
construction of homes, businesses and infrastructure
within the floodplain, frequent storm events saturating
soils, overwhelmed drainage systems, ageing infrastructure, and stream bank erosion. Suffern has been
and will continue to be susceptible to flooding.
Both Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy exposed
vulnerabilities in the Village. Storms bring challenges
that extend beyond the direct physical damage to
roads, bridges, homes, and essential infrastructure,
threatening economic vitality, emergency recovery
efforts, and the health and well-being of Suffern residents. Suffern continues to learn from its experience
during these storms so that it may become more resilient, limit damage, and build back better from future
natural disasters.

I–8

Section I: Community Overview

C. Critical Issues
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy caused
damage that directly and indirectly impacted homes,
businesses, roads, critical infrastructure systems, and
natural resources throughout the Village. These storms
exposed many vulnerabilities and revealed critical
issues affecting the community and impacting its
ability to respond to and recover from natural
disasters.
The Suffern NYRCR Planning Committee identified
the issues affecting their community. These were then
shared during the first Public Engagement Event,
where attendees were asked to supplement the list
with additional critical concerns. In the aftermath of
these storms, it is crucial that these concerns be
addressed so that Suffern may become more resilient
in the wake of future disasters.
The seven critical issues facing the Village of Suffern
as identified by the Committee and it residents are
described below.

Emergency Access
Both Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene isolated
residents of the Village of Suffern, cutting them off
from their homes and the community. Entire areas of
the Village were inaccessible to emergency vehicles
and services. In the case of Hurricane Irene, flooding
impeded the ability of emergency vehicles to access
residents in northern Suffern as well as in the West
Ward. Areas in northern Suffern, such as those
accessed by way of Wayne Avenue and Memorial
Drive, were only accessible by boat, which had to be
used for rescue purposes after Hurricane Irene. Emergency access was impeded after Superstorm Sandy
by downed trees and power lines that created physical barriers between responders and residents,
resultling in dangerous conditions all across Suffern.

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

There are only two access points to the West Ward,
both of which are underpasses with low clearance,
and only one of which a standard fire truck is able to
navigate. The Village has purchased fire trucks with a
lower clearance height than standard trucks to allow
for access to this neighborhood. When the one access
point for emergency vehicles on Chestnut Street and
Orange Avenue is closed due to flooding or some
physical barrier, larger emergency service vehicles are
precluded from serving this area.

Suffern Police Vehicle (Flaam Hardy, AKRF, Inc.)

To address this issue, the police and fire departments
station emergency vehicles in the West Ward in
advance of a major storm. Although this is helpful in
providing emergency services to this area, during Hurricane Irene, floodwaters became so deep so quickly
that even these vehicles were no longer able to exit
the area to reach critical facilities such as the hospital.
The Village has sought funding through New York
State to provide access to the West Ward neighborhood by way of an at-grade crossing of the NJ Transit
rail line from US Route 202.
This takes a toll on the already limited supply of manpower and equipment in the respective departments.
Stationing services in advance of a flood allows for
some attention to high risk areas, but strains the finite
resources of the community. Improving emergency
access throughout the Village to residents susceptible
to isolation during storm events is critical.

Flooding in Residential Neighborhoods
The primary housing issue identified is the protection
of residential neighborhoods from future flooding and
restricting future development of homes to areas
outside the floodplain and flood prone areas.
Repeated flooding from the Ramapo and Mahwah
Rivers, during Hurricane Irene but also during smaller,
short-duration, high-intensity storms, has damaged
homes in various neighborhoods, including Squires
Gate, Berkeley Square, and the Knolls at Ramapo, as
well as along Memorial Drive. The vast majority of
these homes are located within the 100-year floodplain and a significant number, especially in Squires
Gate are sited in the floodway, making them extremely
vulnerable to flooding. FEMA defines a floodplain as
“Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
floodwaters from any source.” A floodway, which is
located within the floodplain, is defined by FEMA as
“…the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height.” Figure I-2 illustrates the difference between
the floodplain and floodway. In addition to water
damage, large storms put significant stress on the
wastewater systems causing sewers to back up into
homes through basements and washing machines.
After such frequent storm events, selling homes in
these areas presents a challenge due to declining
home values and the costs of rehabilitation of the
structures. Repeated claims to flood insurance lead to
increased premiums, and denial of coverage. Floodproofing homes, as well as rehabilitating waterways
and exploring options for acquisition and relocation
are all necessary to promote the safety, health, and
well-being of Suffern residents.

Section I: Community Overview

I–9

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

http://fema.maps.arcgis.com/home/webmap/print.html

Figure I-2: FEMA’s National Flood Hazard Layer Illustrates the Difference between Floodplain and Floodway (FEMA)

I – 10

Section I: Community Overview

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Inundation of Critical Facilities

Loss of Power

Many critical facilities in Suffern are vulnerable to
inundation and flood damage due to their location in a
floodplain. These include the wastewater treatment
plant, water treatment plant and the DPW garage,
which are located near the ball fields in the western
portion of the Village, and the wastewater pump stations located at South Street, Wayne Avenue and
Orange Avenue. These facilities are key for the day-today functioning of Village services while also playing
an important role in emergency recovery.

Loss of power in the community has consistently been
a critical issue during large storms as it affects homes,
businesses and the day-to-day operations of important Village facilities. This was a significant issue
during Superstorm Sandy when strong winds uprooted
trees and brought down power lines. Superstorm
Sandy is evidence that even without major flooding,
storms can cause significant damage. During Hurricane Irene, electricity to flooded areas of the Village
with underground transmission lines, including
Squires Gate, was shut off to protect residents, their
homes and the electrical systems.
The lack of power threatens residents’ safety. Much of
the emergency communication infrastructure depends
on power as it is conducted through emails, internet,
and texting with Village residents. Without power, residents cannot receive important information from the
Village and emergency services.

Repeated Flooding of Businesses
Flooding at the Wastewater Treatment Plant after Hurricane Irene
(Charles Sawicki)

During Hurricane Irene, the Ramapo River rose above
its banks and into its natural floodplain, inundating the
wastewater treatment plant and water treatment plant.
These Village services were quickly overwhelmed and
unable to provide a safe water supply to Suffern residents or to process wastewater flowing from the
Village. The Village was forced to buy water from
United Water for one month following Hurricane Irene.
The risk of contaminated water from the wastewater
treatment plant infiltrating the Village’s water supply
wells, which are located right next door, is real and
has been a concern in the past. Access to the DPW
garage, the main location for Village equipment and
vehicles, is frequently cut off due to flooding, which
makes transportation of equipment to help emergency
responders and aid in clean up after storms challenging. The vulnerability of these critical facilities in the
Village must be addressed so that the community is
more resilient and able to support its own recovery.

The local Suffern economy is supported by the many
small businesses in the Lafayette Street area and by
Novartis and Avon Research. Throughout the many
storms that have affected the community in recent
years, businesses have been directly damaged from
flooding and downed trees, but have also had to face
power losses for extended periods of time.
Beyond the physical damage that is costly to repair,
such business closures in a community with a small
downtown can result in the inability of residents to
access basic goods and services including food,
banking, gas for generators and medication. In addition, if businesses are not able to recover quickly
enough, this can have lasting consequences on the
local economy by limiting people’s ability to return to
work and discouraging outside enterprises to look for
business opportunities in or relocate to Suffern. After
flooding from Hurricane Irene, a local vacuum
company closed its doors in Suffern permanently and
relocated.

Section I: Community Overview

I – 11

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Over time, many businesses have recovered from
Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene. Avon
Research and Development, on the west bank of the
Mahwah River north of NYS Route 59, helped address
flooding in their back yard by stabilizing the bank of
the Mahwah River. Nonetheless, the repeated flooding
of businesses in Suffern and the lasting effect on the
local economy is a recurring issue that must be
addressed to improve the resiliency, economic and
otherwise, of the community.

Road Closures
Many roads in Suffern are subject to flooding during
major storm events. These roads are particularly vulnerable to flooding as they cross low points in the
landscape and have limited drainage. High use areas
such as the commuter parking lots near the rail station
are subject to severe flooding, making them inaccessible and unusable.
During Hurricane Irene, many road closures isolated
entire parts of the Village and left residents stranded in
the West Ward and northern Suffern. In the West
Ward, residents were unable to get in or out as the
only entrances and exits were flooded. In northern
Suffern, US Route 202 and Wayne Avenue flooded,
preventing access to the entire northern region forcing
residents, and all needing access to the area, to use a
long detour route. In addition, Memorial Drive and

Wayne Avenue after Hurricane Irene (Robert Kawasaki)

I – 12

Section I: Community Overview

Montebello Road flooded, stranding residents in their
homes in the nearby neighborhoods. Not only are residents inhibited from accessing goods and services, or
going to work, but they are also cut off from emergency services. Fire trucks, ambulances, and other
emergency vehicles are unable to access the West
Ward when the roadways are inundated, and residents
in northern Suffern were only accessible by boat for
rescue.
The extreme winds of Superstorm Sandy closed roads
in some cases for days due to numerous downed
power lines throughout the Village. Emergency
responders and the power supply company, O&R, had
to work together to ensure that the wires were not live
in order to safely clear roads and trees before restoring power. As with flooding but on larger scale, roadways closed during Superstorm Sandy trapped residents and created physical obstacles making it
difficult for services to respond to or access those
residents in case of emergency.

Stream Bank Erosion and Stream Bed
Sedimentation
Stress on the Ramapo and Mahwah River banks and
beds from storm-associated flooding results in their
erosion and has the potential to exacerbate future
flood events. Sediment accumulates in Lake Antrim
and in the beds of both the Mahwah and Ramapo

Eroded banks along the Mahwah River (Sue Rivers)

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

rivers due to stream bed and bank erosion and the
sediments washed off of impervious surfaces, reducing the capacity of the river to carry water downstream.
This is of particular concern during significant rainfall
events such as Hurricane Irene. In addition, in large
storm events, both natural and man-made debris
accumulates in the waterbodies, leading to further
erosion, scouring, and weakening of the river banks.
The debris buildup deteriorates the stream banks and
inhibits the river’s ability to take its natural course,
impacting flows downstream.
The erosion process has also been accelerated by
past development along the waterways and throughout the watersheds. A greater volume of stormwater
runoff resulting from development and increased
impervious surface area is conveyed at a higher velocity into the streams and rivers combining with and
increasing the erosive capacity of the water in and
outside of the waterway’s channel. This increase in
erosive capacity is furthered by disturbance to the
surrounding riverbank or riparian areas and loss of
floodplains surrounding the rivers which, when undisturbed, provide a level of natural protection from
advancing floodwaters. The issue of bank erosion was
addressed near Avon Research and Development
with a partial riverbank stabilization of the Mahwah
River. Erosion is further accelerated by culverts and
bridges of inadequate size that result in high velocity
water flows on the downstream end of these structures. In addition, the steep embankment across from
the Squires Gate community, among other areas,
leads to increased stormwater runoff, thereby further
contributing to flooding in the area leading to the devastation of homes in that neighborhood.

D. Community Vision
The Vision Statement for NYRCR Suffern was developed by the Committee with input from the residents.
The Vision Statement relies heavily on Committee
Members’ familiarity with the Village, the needs of the
community relative to the NYRCR study area boundary, and an understanding of the community’s values

Vision and Goals Station at Public Engagement Event #1 July 22, 2014 (Flaam Hardy, AKRF, Inc.)

based on previous planning efforts. A draft of the
Vision Statement was shared with the public at the
first Public Engagement Event; feedback from that
meeting was extremely important in finalizing the
Vision Statement. More information about public outreach can be found in Section V.C. “Public Engagement Process.”
Through the visioning process, the Committee and
the public worked to identify, assess, and conceptualize local and regional opportunities for Suffern. There
was general agreement that the vision statement
needed to not only describe the village of the future,
but also needed to identify specific ways to attain that
vision. Hence, the Committee and the public outlined
short-, medium-, and long-range goals to help Suffern
build back better. These goals were developed to
address infrastructure, emergency preparedness,
stormwater management, resilience, partnerships,
and natural and cultural resource protection.
Residents who provided feedback on the draft Vision
Statement at the Planning Committee Meeting also
emphasized the importance of having the Statement
focus on the unique characteristics of the Village.
Additional feedback provided at the Public Engagement Event underscored the need to focus specifically
on flood recovery and prevention efforts to restore
Suffern to the place they love.

Section I: Community Overview

I – 13

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

The Suffern NYRCR Vision Statement:
Suffern is a quaint, resilient, easily accessible
community dedicated to building back better.
We are a united community that works together
to maintain our quality of life, small town charm,
multi-modal transportation options, educational
framework, and cultural attractions as investments in future generations. Residents are dedicated to restoring, redeveloping, revitalizing and
making more resilient our downtown, infrastructure, storm water systems, natural and cultural
resources, all of which make Suffern a unique,
historic, and vibrant place.

E. Relationship to Regional
Plans

Goals:
To realize the vision, NYRCR Suffern has developed
the following goals:
Build closer working relationships with neighboring
communities and the State of New Jersey to address flooding issues that do not respect municipal
boundaries;
Continue high level of emergency services and enhance physical access to neighborhoods;
Enhance infrastructure and stormwater systems
where needed;
Preserve community character to maintain small
town charm;
Protect and clean Lake Antrim and the Mahwah
and Ramapo Rivers;
Protect, promote, and enhance cultural attractions
that draw people to the village; and
Revitalize downtown businesses and protect from
future storm damage.

I – 14

Breakout Discussion at Public Engagement Event 2 –
September 18, 2014 (Arch Street Communications)

Section I: Community Overview

The storms and resulting damage from Hurricane
Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and Superstorm Sandy
highlighted the need for coordinated planning initiatives and policies that can significantly contribute to
long-term regional resilience. Many regional planning
efforts have been undertaken, both before and after
the storms. In 2013, the Mid-Hudson Regional Sustainability Plan (2013)9 was released, laying out short-,
mid-, and long-term goals and strategic priorities for
the region’s development. The Mid-Hudson Regional
Economic Development Council also released a
5-Year Strategic Plan10 in 2011, which presented specific goals for the regional economy. In addition,
Rockland County developed the Rockland Tomorrow:
Rockland Comprehensive Plan11 in 2011 and a Hazard
Mitigation Plan12 in 2010.
These pre-existing regional planning efforts served as
the genesis for many projects that were identified
though the NYRCR process. Although Committee
Members were tasked with representing the interests
of Suffern, they became increasingly aware of the
importance of planning in a regional context. Community members worked together to create reconstruction and resiliency strategies and then projects
and actions that focused on regional issues and,

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Clockwise: Rockland Tomorrow: County Comprehensive Plan (March 2011), Rockland County
Hazard Mitigation Plan (October 2010), MidHudson Regional Sustainability Plan (May 2013)

Section I: Community Overview

I – 15

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

ultimately, were supportive of regional goals, including
those goals focused on planning for the effects of
severe storms and flooding. Many of the regional
planning documents, including the “Rockland Tomorrow”: Rockland Comprehensive Plan (2011)10 and the
Mid-Hudson Regional Sustainability Plan (2013)8,
identified the need for focused coordination and
cooperation among communities to achieve their
goals. This sentiment is echoed by the Committee
and their willingness to work toward the common goal
of mitigating future flood damage and creating a more
stable and climate resilient local and regional economy.

The challenge for the Suffern NYRCR Planning
Committee was to identify initiatives, policies,
projects and programs that would not duplicate
previously completed plans, but which would
address critical needs, and promote long-term
resilience.

Table I-1 presents a list of available local and regional
planning documents and resources considered. These
documents were reviewed for information and data
pertaining to the NYRCR planning process and to
assist in the identification of potential projects and
strategies that could be implemented to help Suffern
build back better. Regional goals from the plans that
have been incorporated into the NYRCR Plan are
listed along with a brief description of how the NYRCR
Plan relates to or builds upon the regional plans. The
findings are summarized in Table I-1.
There were three goals for comprehensive review of
these existing documents. First, the review would
highlight previously identified initiatives that could
contribute to long-term resiliency. Second, the review

I – 16

Section I: Community Overview

would assess the potential synergies between local
and regional needs and opportunities while considering how the NYRCR Plan might support and incorporate regional goals and perspectives. Third, analyzing
previously completed studies would identify gaps.
Had these planning efforts missed anything? Were
there any policies and programs that would significantly reduce the Village’s or the region’s vulnerability
that had not been identified? Did the impact and
damage of the three storms raise awareness of issues
that had not been previously considered?
Key shared local and regional challenges identified by
the review of existing plans included:
Lack of effective planning for long-term resilience
and the effects of climate change, including severe
storms and flooding, to avoid costly damage to infrastructure, life, and health;
Lack of funding to implement long-term plans by
County, State, and Federal agencies responsible
for infrastructure maintenance, repair, and reconstruction;
Lack of sufficient coordination and cooperation between municipalities and various Local, State, and
Federal agencies; and
Need for additional upgrades and repair of infrastructure to address areas of chronic flooding, reduce roadway and culvert repair costs and limit
road closures.
Throughout the planning process, the Committee
reviewed many ideas for regional projects, all of which
supported goals set forth in the various previously
completed regional plans. Additional information on
these initiatives can be found in Section V.B. “Master
Table of Projects.”

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table I-1: Local and Regional Plans
Key Components for NYRCR
Process

Author

Date Relevance

Town of
Ramapo
Comprehensive
Plan

Town of Ramapo
with assistance
from Frederick P.
Clark Associates,
Inc.

2004

Establishes community vision and
goals for long-term growth and
development, focusing on natural
resources, housing, community
resources, and land use.

Community vision; background data; goals
and objectives for each subject area;
implementation methods and actions.

Village of
Suffern
Emergency
Operations Plan

Village of Suffern

2014

Provides guidelines and operations
plan for planning, managing and
coordinating overall response and
recovery to minimize potential
disasters and their effects, provide
for local responses when disasters
occur and facilitate local recovery.

Standard operating procedure of each
department during emergency and
disaster events; information on the
functioning of the Emergency Operations
Center; list and contact information of
relevant county and outside agencies;
department personnel contact information;
flood management and power outage
management checklist

Rockland
County Hazard
Mitigation Plan

Rockland County
Office of Fire and
Emergency
Services with
assistance from
URS

2010

Extensive analysis of hazards that
threaten the County and ways to
reduce future damages associated
with these hazards.

Demographic data; examples of ideas for
outreach activities; inventory of hazards
and risks including flooding/storm surge,
dam failures, earthquakes, wildfires;
summary of FEMA Flood data; National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Policy
and Claim info; mapping of repetitive loss
clusters; summary of historical flood
events; inventory of critical and emergency
facilities, historical and cultural resources;
annual loss estimates for each hazard;
land use and development trends
questionnaire; regulatory capabilities/
resources; list of prioritized actions

Mid-Hudson
Regional
Economic
Development
Council
Strategic Plan

Mid-Hudson
Region Economic
Development
Council

2011

Regional economic development
strategy and vision for the MidHudson Region that illustrates
regional trends, goals and strategies
for desirable growth in the region.

Regional context, goals, aspirations; no
discussion of impacts of flooding or storm
resiliency; no specific discussion of
Suffern.

Rockland
Tomorrow:
County
Comprehensive
Plan

Rockland County
Technical
Advisory
Committee with
assistance from
BFJ Planning

2011

County-wide trends and priorities
with a focus on development, the
economy, and conservation.
Includes list of County
recommendations and
implementation.

Description of Suffern land use, mapping
of open space, historic resources,
community and emergency resources.
Identification of watershed areas, surface
water issues and regulated streams,
Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
data, flood hazards.

Mid-Hudson
Regional
Sustainability
Plan

Mid-Hudson
Planning
Consortium with
assistance from
Ecology and
Environment, Inc.

2013

Provides a vision for sustainable
development that builds on the
Region’s resources with the goal of
promoting economic development,
environmental sustainability and
enhancing quality of life. Developed
strategies, objectives and priority
initiatives to achieve the vision.

Regional context, goals, initiatives; very
limited discussion of flooding/natural
hazards; no specific discussion of Suffern.

Plan
Local Plans

Regional Plans

Section I: Community Overview

I – 17

2014
NY RISING COMMUNITY
RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
SUFFERN NYRCR

Section II

Assessment of Risk and Needs

II

Assessment of Risk and Needs

A. Description of Community
Assets and Assessment of Risk
i. Description of Community Assets
An important component of the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) process is to assess the risk
posed to community assets and systems that have
been affected by past flood events or may be impacted
by future storms. This evaluation assists in the development of projects and strategies that mitigate risk
and make the community more resilient.
The first step in the risk assessment process is to
inventory and map assets and system components
that provide essential community functions and are
proximate to known flood risk areas. Community
assets and systems may consist of places, services,
groups, facilities or infrastructure networks, and they
can be categorized into five asset classes related to
their role in the community, which are as follows:
Economic;
Health and Social Services;
Housing;
Infrastructure Systems; and
Natural and Cultural Resources.
The Suffern NYRCR Community (Community) asset
inventory was developed by compiling existing digital
datasets from multiple municipal, State, and Federal
agencies. These asset datasets were cross-referenced
and supplemented with aerial imagery and address
locators, and collated into an asset inventory listing.
To streamline the inventory, assets were grouped
together if they served the same community function,
were located close to one another, or had similar site

characteristics. For example, neighborhood businesses could be grouped into a downtown center, or
single-family homes into a neighborhood. Asset
systems were inventoried by enumerating the principal points and components of those systems, such as
pump stations in the wastewater conveyance system
and substations in the electric transmission system.
Information was added for each asset, including
address, geographic coordinates, risk area, asset
class and subcategory, community value, critical facility designation, and whether the asset served socially
vulnerable populations, including children, the elderly,
people with special needs, and low-income community members. Addresses and geographic coordinates
pinpoint the location of assets for mapping, and once
mapped allow for risk area identification. Assets are
grouped by classes and subcategories, community
values rank the overall importance of each asset to
the community, and Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) critical facility designations identify
assets considered essential to recovery following a
storm event. Identifying assets that provide services
for socially vulnerable populations can help to further
enumerate assets that are particularly important both
before and following a storm. In addition, spatial
analysis was used to capture landscape attributes, or
features of the landscape that could either mitigate or
exacerbate the impacts of flooding and erosion on an
asset.
A two-tiered process was developed and utilized to
ensure collection of a comprehensive inventory. The
first tier of the methodology involved culling existing
digital datasets and the second tier used local knowledge to refine the list of assets. The preliminary asset
inventory and asset map were reviewed by the Suffern
NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) for

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 1

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

refinement and by community residents at Public
Engagement Events to gain their input and capitalize
on their intrinsic understanding of their community.
The dataset analysis supplemented the work of the
Committee by identifying assets that may have been
hidden in plain sight—i.e., assets vital to the Community’s health and resilience that go unnoticed on a
day-to-day basis. These assets only become obvious
when they fail or close, such as small roadway bridges
and smaller government service offices. In addition,
assets that may have not been captured in the existing digital datasets or for which digital data did not
exist were identified by the community at Public
Engagement Events. The full asset inventory is shown
in Figure II-1.

Asset Mapping Workstation at Public Engagement Event 1 –
July 22, 2014, (Elizabeth Matamoros, AKRF, Inc.)

Community Value Scoring
As part of their review of the asset inventory, the Committee and the Community identified the importance
of various assets by determining community values.
Committee Members were asked to give special
attention to assets whose loss or impairment would
compromise critical facilities or any essential cultural,
social, economic or environmental functions of the
Community. The values were consolidated and
revealed that assets related to the homes and facilities for vulnerable populations, emergency response,

II – 2

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

healthcare, and infrastructure (storm sewer, sanitary
sewer, electric and gas, communications, and major
roads) received the highest community value ratings.
All housing assets were determined to have a high
community value in relation to community resiliency.
Businesses and parks were listed as having a low
community value. The community value for each asset
is listed in Section V.D, “Community Asset
Inventory”.
Community value was expressed as follows:
A High Value Community Asset is determined by
the Community to be so significant in the support
of that Community’s day-to-day function that the
loss of that asset or extended lack of functioning
would create severe impacts to the Community’s
long-term health and well-being or result in the loss
of life or injury to residents, employees, or visitors.
High Value Community Assets will also generally be
limited in number within a community and be difficult to replace in the short- to mid-term.
A Medium Value Community Asset is determined
by the Community to be important to the functioning of the Community’s day-to-day life and that the
loss of that asset or extended lack of functioning
would cause hardship to the Community’s wellbeing but whose function could be replaced or
duplicated in a mid-term time frame without significant burden to a Community’s long-term health.
Median Value Community Assets are generally
more common than High Value Assets.
A Low Value Community Asset is determined by
the Community to play a role in the functioning of a
community’s day to day life, but whose loss could
be managed and overcome within a community
without substantial impact to that community’s
functioning. These assets can be re-started,
replaced, or temporarily duplicated in a short-term
time frame with limited burden to a community’s
long-term health.

Figure II-1
Asset Inventory - Village of Suffern

£
¤
202

n

e

A

ve

P
!

ay

W

Stone Hill
Quarry

P
!

P
!

P
!

£
¤
202

§
¦
¨

P
!
P
!

Mahwah
River

§
¦
¨
287

P
!
P
!

P
!
Laf

ay

P
!

P
!

!
P
P
!
P
!
!
P
P
!
P
!
P
!
!
P

P
!!
P
59
T
S
P
!
P
P !
!
P !
!
P

e A
ve

!
P
P
!

Or
an

P
!

ett

ge

P
!

P
!

P
!

P
!
P
!

P
!

P
!

P
!

P
!

P!
!
P

Av
e

Ne
w
Yo
Ne
rk
w
Je
r se
y

P
!

Ma
hw
ah
R

R a m ap o R

P
!

P!
!
P
!
P P
!
P
!
P
!

P
!
287

!
P
P
!

59
T
S

P
!

P
!

!
P
P
P !
!

!!
P
P
PLake
!
P Antrim
!

P
!
P
!

P
!
!
!!
P
P P
P
!
P
!
P
!

P
!

P
!

P
!
P
!
!
P
P
!

0

´

Legend

P
!

Economic

P
!

Health & Social
Services

Major Highways

P
!

Housing

Railroads

2
I

Rail Station

Data Sources

Assets

Study Area (Village
of Suffern, NY &
portion of Mahwah,
NJ)

0.5
Mile

P
!

Infrastructure
Systems

P
!

Natural & Cultural
Resources

ESRI, NJGIN, NYSITS,
Rockland County,
Village of Suffern

NY
NJ

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Risk Area Identification
In addition to the asset inventory, a map was also
produced to illustrate the geographic distribution of
risk areas across Suffern. Risk areas in riverine inland
communities such as Suffern are synonymous with
the floodplains delineated by FEMA. Preliminary
FEMA data was utilized for this study because it represented the most-current and best-available flood
zone modeling within the Village. The Risk Areas are
defined as follows:
 Extreme Risk Area: The most frequently flooded
areas are typically found in the 10-year floodplains,
which encompass the Extreme Risk Area. In
Suffern, the 10-year floodplain had not been digitally modeled by FEMA. Input from members of the
Committee and the community as to which places
have been frequently and repetitively inundated
and damaged by flooding was used to approximately identify the Extreme Risk Areas within the
Village. These areas include lands both inside and
outside of the mapped floodplain repeatedly
impacted by past storms in the hardest-hit areas of
the Community.
 High Risk Area: The 100-year floodplains encompass the High Risk Area, and are subject to a 1.0%
chance of flooding in any given year. These flood
zones have been digitally mapped by FEMA in
Suffern, and can be found throughout the community along rivers, streams, and water bodies. High
Risk Areas are the most prevalent of the risk zones
in the Suffern planning area.
 Moderate Risk Area: The 500-year floodplains
encompass the Moderate Risk Area, and are
subject to a 0.2% chance of flooding in any given
year. These flood zones have also been digitally
mapped by FEMA in Suffern, and are typically
found on the fringes of High Risk Areas.
The community assets were analyzed to identify the
risk areas they may be exposed to, and are summarized by Recovery Support Function (RSF) as follows.
Figure II-2 illustrates the Village of Suffern Risk Areas.

II – 4

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Figure II-2
Risk Areas - Village of Suffern

£
¤
W

ay

n

e

A

ve

202

Lake
Antrim

§
¦
¨
287

59
T
S
Stone Hill
Quarry
Mahwah
River

§
¦
¨
287

R a m ap o R

£
¤
202

Or

Ma
hw
ah
R

59 L
A ve
S
T
a f a ye t t e
59
S
T

an
ge
Av
e

Ne
w
Yo
Ne
rk
w
Je
r se
y

£
¤
202

0

´

Legend
Study Area (Village of
Suffern, NY & portion
of Mahwah, NJ)

2
I

Major Highways
Railroads
Rail Station

0.5
Mile

Data Sources
Rivers & Streams
Extreme Risk Area*
(repetitively flooded)
*Extreme Risk Areas identified
by Planning Committee

FEMA Floodzones
High Risk Zone (100year flood)
Moderate Risk Zone
(500-year flood)

ESRI, FEMA,
NJGIN, NYSITS,
Rockland County,
Village of Suffern

NY
NJ

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Economic
Assets in the Economic category include downtown
centers, business clusters, major employers, industrial and manufacturing centers, and tourism destinations. Protecting and enhancing the downtown centers
and commercial areas from flood impacts is important
to the economic health of the Village. There are no
Economic assets considered FEMA Critical Facilities.
Three economic assets are located in the extreme risk
areas including a group of vacant industrial buildings,
a landscaping business and a multi-tenant commercial building.
Figures II-1 and II-2 illustrate the risk areas and assets,
found within the Geographic Scope defined by the
Committee Members and community as the entire
Village. Table II-1 lists the Economic assets, organized
by Asset Subcategories and by Risk Area from
Extreme to Low. The complete community asset
inventory, which includes addresses of asset locations, can be found in Table V-4 in Section V.D, “Community Asset Inventory”.

Economic Asset: Avon Global Research and Development Center
(Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)

Table II-1: Economic Assets
Asset Name

Risk Area

Businesses
Grasskeeper Landscaping, Inc.

Extreme

Rockland Terrace Multi-Tenant Commercial
Building

Extreme

Lafayette Ave Businesses (Malandra's,
Ole-Ole, Suffern Food)

High

Shamrock Hotel

High

Orange Ave Commercial Corridor

Moderate

Avon Research & Development

Low

Industrial, Warehousing and Manufacturing

Economic Asset: Suffern Downtown Business District
(Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)

II – 6

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Vacant Industrial Buildings (former Rainbow
Vacuum)

Extreme

Novartis Pharmaceuticals Parking and
Storage

Moderate

Stone Hill Quarry

Low

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Health and Social Services
Health and Social Services assets include fire protection, police services, hospitals, and emergency operations facilities as well as schools, health treatment
facilities, general purpose shelters, reception centers,
post offices, and Village Office Buildings. During a
storm event, these facilities may potentially serve as
critical disaster response and recovery centers. As
such, their identification is essential to future disaster
management and preparedness. All 12 of the Health
and Social Services assets inventoried are classified
as FEMA Critical Facilities with the exception of the
post office and all are but one are located in low risk
areas.
Figures II-1 and II-2 illustrate the risk areas and assets,
in detail, found within the Suffern Geographic Scope.
Table II-2 lists the Health and Social Services assets,
organized by Asset Subcategories and by Risk Area
from Extreme to Low. The complete community asset
inventory, which includes addresses of asset locations, can be found in Table V-4 in Section V-D, “Community Asset Inventory”.

Table II-2: Health and Social Services
Assets
Asset Name

Risk Area

Emergency Operations/Response
George J. Parness Suffern Community
Center (Shelter)

Low

Suffern Hook & Ladder Company No 1

Low

Suffern Village Hall and Police

Low

Suffern Volunteer Hose Co No 1

Low

Government and Administrative Services, Public Works
Facilities
DPW Garage

Moderate

Post Office

Low

Healthcare Facilities and Hospitals
Good Samaritan Hospital of Suffern

Low

Daycare and Eldercare
Tender Loving Care

Low

YMCA - Y's Beginnings

Low

Schools and Higher Educations Institutions
Richard P Connor Elementary School

Low

Sacred Heart School

Low

Salvation Army College for Officer Training

Low

Health and Social Services Asset: Suffern Hook & Ladder Company
No 1 (Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 7

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Housing

Table II-3: Housing Assets

A significant number of residential assets within the
Village are at risk of future flooding. These assets
include single-family and multi-family residential
neighborhoods as well as senior and affordable
housing. Assets in extreme risk areas include six
multi-family residences and two clusters of singlefamily homes. Affordable and senior housing assets
are considered FEMA Critical Facilities and are located
in the low risk areas of the Village.
Figures II-1 and II-2 illustrate the risk areas and assets,
in detail, found within the Suffern Geographic Scope.
Table II-3 lists the Housing assets, organized by Asset
Subcategories and by Risk Area from Extreme to Low.
The complete community asset inventory, which
includes addresses of asset locations, can be found in
Table V-4 in Section V.D, “Community Asset
Inventory.”

Asset Name

Risk Area

Single-Family and Attached Residences
Squires Gate Attached Homes

Extreme

Single-Family Homes - South St and
Rockland Terrace

Extreme

Single-Family Homes near Lake Antrim

Extreme

Single-Family Homes - Brook St and
Highland Ave

High

Single-Family Homes - Wayne Ave

Moderate

West Ward Residential Neighborhood

Low

Multi-Family Residence
Apartments on South St

Extreme

Berkley Square Apartments & Rockledge
Townhomes

Extreme

Ramapough Cirque Townhomes

Extreme

Single & Multi-Family Homes - Meadow Ave,
Ramapo Ave

Extreme

The Knolls of Ramapo Townhomes

Extreme

Abby Park Lanes Multi-Family Homes

High

Senior Housing
Esther Gitlow Towers

Low

Affordable and Supportive Housing

Housing Asset: Berkeley Square Apartments
(Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)

Housing Asset: Squires Gate Under Water After Hurricane Irene
(Blas Gonzalez)

II – 8

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Rockland ARC Visions

Low

Ross Towers

Low

Venture Group Home

Low

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Infrastructure Systems
Assets in this category include transportation infrastructure, transportation-related facilities and utilities.
Utilities include public water supply, stormwater and
wastewater systems, power supply, and telecommunications; the distribution and operational networks of
which are dispersed through the Village. The distribution of these systems throughout extreme, high, and
moderate risk areas makes the assessment of risk to
the overall systems difficult to categorize. In general, if
a principal component of a system is located in a risk
area, the entire system is vulnerable. As such, it is
more meaningful to assess the risk to specific components (i.e. plants, pump stations, substations, and
other key facilities) that are critical to the functioning
of these networks than to focus on the overall system.

progressed significantly. Outdated or, in the case of
development prior to the 1990s, the lack of stormwater management systems, poses problems for the
vast majority of municipalities including the Village of
Suffern, that have development within a floodplain.
Figures II-1 and II-2 illustrate the risk areas and assets,
in detail, found within the Suffern Geographic Scope.
Table II-4 lists the Infrastructure Systems assets,
organized by Asset Subcategories and by Risk Area
from Extreme to Low. The complete community asset
inventory, which includes addresses of asset locations, can be found in Table V-4 in Section V.D, “Community Asset Inventory”.

Past storms have damaged infrastructure systems in
the Village, causing power outages, road washouts,
and flooding that impeded travel for residents and
emergency service providers. Two transmission
towers, an Orange and Rockland natural gas facility, a
pump station, a water treatment plant, two park- andride lots, two underpasses and three roads and intersections prone to flooding are located within extreme
risk areas. The remaining eight infrastructure assets
inventoried are located in high risk areas. Principal
points of the wastewater, water supply, and power
supply networks inventoried are considered FEMA
Critical Facilities, such as wastewater treatment
plants, water resources, telecommunications facilities, and electric substations.
Aging or nonexistent infrastructure in the Village and
municipalities upstream, in particular stormwater
management and conveyance systems, has contributed to flooding in Suffern. Stormwater management
systems were not required as part of a development
program, for the most part, before the 1990’s. Since
that time practices used to manage stormwater have

Infrastructure Asset: Rail Bridge Over Mahwah River
(Flaam Hardy, AKRF, Inc.)

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 9

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table II-4: Infrastructure Systems Assets
Asset Name

Risk Area

Power Supply
High Voltage Electrical Transmission Tower
off Rockledge Drive

Extreme

High Voltage Electrical Transmission Towers
South of I-287

Extreme

Orange and Rockland Gas Facility

Extreme

Water Supply
Lake Antrim Pump Station

Extreme

Village Water Treatment Plant

Extreme

Wastewater
Village Sewage Treatment Plant

Extreme

Village South Street Wastewater Pump
Station

Extreme

Transportation
Chestnut St Underpass to West Ward

Extreme

Lot A (Park & Ride)

Extreme

Catherine Ave access to West Ward

Extreme

Ramapo Valley Rd Underpass to West Ward

Extreme

Lot F (Park & Ride)

Extreme

N. Ramapo Ave access to West Ward

Extreme

Wayne Ave/NYS Rt. 202 (flood prone area
near Rockledge Drive)

Extreme

Orange Ave / NYS Rt. 59 Thruway
Underpass

High

New Jersey Transit/Suffern Commuter Rail
Station

High

Boulevard Street Bridge Over Mahwah River

High

Lot D (Park & Ride)

High

I-87 Bridge Over Mahwah River

High

Montebello Road Bridge over Mahwah River

High

Rail Bridge over Mahwah River

High

NYS Route 59 Bridge Over Mahwah River

High

II – 10

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Infrastructure Asset: Orange Avenue and Rail Line with Suffern Rail
Museum in the Background (Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Natural and Cultural Resources
Natural and Cultural Resources include natural habitats, wetlands and marshes, recreation facilities,
parks, open space, religious establishments, libraries,
museums, historic landmarks, and performing arts
venues. Hurricane Irene, Superstorm Sandy and frequent high intensity, short duration storm events have
impacted multiple recreational, cultural, and historic
assets in Suffern’s natural and built environment. Four
natural and cultural resources within the Village are
located in extreme risk areas, including: Donna Hallett
Park, Horton Memorial Field and Toddler Park, Suffern
Baseball Complex and Suffern Memorial Pool. Of the

Natural and Cultural Resource Assets inventoried, one
is a FEMA Critical Facility: the Christ Episcopal
Church, which serves as a soup kitchen for vulnerable
populations and has provided emergency services
during past storm events.
Figures II-1 and II-2 illustrate the risk areas and assets,
in detail, found within the Geographic Scope. Table
II-5 lists the Natural and Cultural Resources assets,
organized by Asset Subcategories and by Risk Area
from Extreme to Low. The complete community asset
inventory, which includes addresses of asset locations, can be found in Table V-4 in Section V.D, “Community Asset Inventory”.

Table II-5:
Natural and Cultural Resources Assets
Asset Name

Risk Area

Community Centers
Suffern VFW

Moderate

Rockland County YMCA Dance & Activity
Center

Low

Libraries, Museums, Performing Arts Centers, Stadiums
Suffern Railroad Museum

Moderate

Suffern Free Library

Low

Parks and Recreation
Donna Hallett Park

Extreme

Horton Memorial Field & Toddler Park

Extreme

Suffern Baseball Complex

Extreme

Suffern Memorial Pool

Extreme

Brooklands Park

High

Natural and Cultural Resource Asset: Donna Hallet Park
(Flaam Hardy, AKRF Inc.)

Cultural or Religious Establishments
All Souls Church

Low

Christ Episcopal Church

Low

Masjid Iqra Darul Ehsan

Low

Sacred Heart Church

Low

St. Mary's Indian Orthodox Church of
Rockland

Low

Suffern United Methodist Church

Low

Tagaste Monastery

Low

Natural and Cultural Resource Asset: Sacred Heart Church
(Chris Robbins, AKRF Inc.)

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 11

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

ii. Assessment of Risk to Assets and
Systems
In order to mitigate flood risk associated with local
water resources and improve community resiliency,
the causes and magnitude of that risk must first be
understood. The risk assessment process seeks to
identify and analyze the degree of risk to assets and
systems throughout Suffern by applying a standardized risk assessment procedure to each. In the Village
of Suffern, the Mahwah and Ramapo Rivers are the
prime sources of flood water. The Mahwah River runs
north to south through the center of Suffern and the
Ramapo River borders the western portion of the
Village. Various tributaries to these rivers also run
through Suffern, contributing to flooding problems.
Open water bodies in the Village include Lake Antrim
(an impoundment of the Mahwah River), and Union
Hill Quarry (fed by groundwater).
Flood risk areas are predominantly located along the
Mahwah River, Ramapo River and Lake Antrim. Figure
II-2 depicts the location of the flood risk areas. Assets,
including many of the community’s most important,
are situated within these flood risk areas. The highest
concentration of identified assets in Suffern is along
the southern portion of the Mahwah River, particularly
in the vicinity of Lonergan Drive, South Street and US
Route 202. This area includes the Squires Gate neighborhood, the South Street Wastewater Pump Station,
transportation infrastructure, businesses and other
residential neighborhoods. There are also clusters of
assets along the Ramapo River (near Pat Malone
Drive) and near Lake Antrim located on the northern
portion of the Mahwah River (US Route 202 and
Memorial Drive) including water, electric and wastewater infrastructure and residential neighborhoods.
Preliminary risk assessment results indicate that the
majority of Suffern’s assets located within flood risk
areas are at high risk, with the remainder at severe or
moderate risk. Of the assets evaluated in the preliminary risk assessment, the four that received a severe
risk score include one residential neighborhood and
three infrastructure assets. High risk assets primarily

II – 12

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

include those identified as infrastructure and housing.
All of the natural and cultural resources (5) and health,
and social services (1) assets identified are also in the
high risk category. Economic assets were split
between the high and moderate risk categories.

Background
The Village of Suffern is vulnerable to flooding primarily from the Mahwah and Ramapo Rivers. Both rivers
travel through the Village in a north-south direction.
The Mahwah River bisects the Village and has a
greater impact on Village neighborhoods and homes
during flooding events than the Ramapo River to the
west. In the northern part of the Village, single-family
homes near Utopian Avenue as well as townhomes
and apartments near Rockledge Drive in the vicinity of
Lake Antrim experience frequent flooding. The Suffern
Memorial Pool and Lake Antrim pump station are also
impacted during certain flood events. This entire area
is mapped as High Risk, within the FEMA 100-year
flood zone, the vast majority of which has been subsequently identified by the Committee as Extreme
Risk (frequently flooded) area.
As the Mahwah River travels south through the Village
the topography forces floodwaters into neighborhoods west of the River. The neighborhoods east of
the Mahwah River are at a higher elevation and therefore do not experience flooding. The Mahwah River
frequently rises above its banks, flowing into its natural
floodplain in and near the Squires Gates neighborhood along Lonergan Drive, for example. In this area,
single-family homes, apartments and multi-family
residences west of the Mahwah River are frequently
and severely impacted as are commercial buildings.
Roadway access is a critical issue in the southern
portion of the Village during a flood event; Catherine
Avenue, Ramapo Valley Road, and North Ramapo
Avenue all flood.
The area surrounding the Knolls of Ramapo and
Ramapough Cirque Townhomes in the northeast
corner of the Village can also be affected as Mahwah
River flooding inundates local roadways. This area

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

does not often experience impacts directly from flooding and is therefore not located within a FEMA flood
zone, but has been identified by the Committee as an
Extreme Risk area due to access issues and impacts
from downed trees and wind during storm events.
The Ramapo River traverses the Village west of the
US Route 202 and the NJ Transit commuter rail line.
The area most directly impacted by the Ramapo River
is located within a High Risk area or a 100-year FEMA
flood zone. Recreation fields, a commuter train parking
lot, and key Village infrastructure including the wastewater and water treatment plants are located here.
The Extreme Risk area depicted on the map in this
portion of the Village is a result of the Ramapo River
overtopping its banks. Included in this area are the
DPW garage and the Chestnut Street underpass at
US Route 202. Businesses along the US Route 202
corridor have also been affected by Ramapo River
floodwaters.

Risk Assessment
The standardized risk assessment process strives to
not only identify assets that were damaged during
past storms, but also to identify assets that may be at
risk of damage from future storms. For many Suffern
residents, especially those directly affected by past
storms, such as Hurricane Irene, specific areas of
flood risk within the Village may appear to be obvious.
While experiences during past storms reasonably
indicate areas most susceptible to flooding, they are
not necessarily a good predictor of the level of impact
or the type of damage that may result from future
storms. Furthermore, the relative degree of risk to one
neighborhood or building as compared to another is
not always readily apparent. The risk assessment tool
developed by the NYRCR Program and the New York
State Department of State (NYS DOS) enables quantification and comparison of the identified levels of risk
to different community assets. Improved understanding of the severity and distribution of risk to assets
throughout the community facilitates more effective
resiliency and recovery planning.

As defined in the risk assessment tool, the flood risk
of an asset is a product of its exposure to flood
sources, its vulnerability during flood events, and the
level of hazard associated with a given flood event.
Each of these factors was determined through discussion with the Committee; the public and local officials;
analysis of local, regional and national datasets; and,
examination of maps, aerial imagery, and site imagery.
Based on information from the asset inventory, flood
hazard maps and qualitative exposure assessments,
the risk assessment tool enables the calculation of
Hazard, Exposure and Vulnerability scores. These
factors are further defined below.
Hazard Score: Hazard represents the likelihood
and magnitude of future storm event impacts. Typically, an asset located in an Extreme risk area
experiences hazards with greater frequency and
intensity than assets in a High or Moderate risk
area. The Hazard Score directly corresponds to the
100-year and 500-year storm events.
Exposure: Exposure characterizes the moderating
effect of local topographic and protective features.
If assets are more exposed (e.g., situated in lowlying floodplains), they are more likely to suffer
storm effects than similar assets located at a higher
elevation. The landscape attributes captured during
the asset inventory are quantified and summed in
the Risk Assessment Tool to produce an Exposure
Score.
Vulnerability: Vulnerability expresses the level of
impairment or consequences that assets may
experience from a storm event. If an asset recovers
quickly with limited interruption in service it has low
vulnerability, while extended service loss or permanently reduced capacity would be synonymous
with high vulnerability. Input from Committee
members and at Public Engagement Events was
utilized to assess the Vulnerabilities of assets and
systems across the County.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 13

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

This information is further combined into one quantitative risk score. The risk score is calculated by multiplying the Hazard Score, Exposure Score, and Vulnerability Score:
Hazard Score x Exposure Score x Vulnerability
Score = Risk Score
The derived risk scores help to quantify the associated risk to each asset and can be used to illustrate
and examine the distribution and types of assets least
resilient to flooding.
The first step in applying the risk assessment tool is to
calculate “unmitigated” risk scores, which represent
the risk to assets and systems in their current condition, without proposed mitigation projects in place.
The unmitigated risk scores present a profile of the
current risk to assets identified in Suffern. Analysis of
these results provides insight into the factors driving
flood risk in Suffern and what strategies could be most
effective in improving the long-term resiliency of
assets.
The second step is to prepare “mitigated” risk scores
to reflect the degree to which a mitigation project may
reduce risk to specific assets. This analysis is presented in Section V.

Unmitigated Risk Score Results
In total, 41 assets located within extreme, high, and
moderate flood risk areas were identified in Suffern
and evaluated in the unmitigated risk assessment.
These assets are distributed throughout the community, with the highest concentrations along the Mahwah
River, Ramapo River, and Lake Antrim. Of these
assets, four scored in the extreme risk category and
28 scored in the high risk category, while the remaining nine scored in the moderate risk category. This
outcome is not unexpected, as only those assets in
high and extreme risk areas were considered for risk
assessment. The unmitigated risk score results are

II – 14

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

presented in Table II-6 by RSF and by Risk Score
Level from Severe to Moderate. A severe risk score is
highlighted in red, high in orange, and moderate in
yellow. Risk Score Levels are indicated by the following shading:
Risk Score Level
Severe
High
Moderate

The geographic distribution of high risk assets is generally uniform across the riverine sections of Suffern.
This is consistent with observations of historic flood
events, as both the Mahwah and Ramapo Rivers have
caused significant flooding and damage to surrounding assets.
Key infrastructure systems in the community are at
severe and high risk. Both the wastewater treatment
plant and South Street wastewater pump station
score in the severe risk category while the Lake Antrim
pump station is at a high risk. Given the interconnected nature of the wastewater system, if one component of the system fails, the rest of the system is at
increased risk of failure as well. Suffern’s transportation infrastructure systems serve a critical function not
only within the community, but in the broader regional
transportation network as well. At a severe risk is the
Montebello Road Bridge, which is currently still out of
use due to damage from Hurricane Irene, impeding
access to the Knolls of Ramapo Townhomes and
Ramapough Cirque Townhomes from the east (US
Route 202 and Memorial Drive). A variety of other
bridges and roadways are at a high risk including the
NYS Route 59 Bridge, a commuter lot and many local
roads providing access to neighborhoods. The power
supply system, including a high voltage electrical
transmission tower and the Orange and Rockland Gas
Facility, is at a high risk. Loss of power can negatively
affect the safety and health of residents while also
hindering communication.

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table II-6: Unmitigated Risk Score Results
Asset Name

Recovery Support
Function

Risk Area

Risk Score Level

Montebello Road Bridge over Mahwah River

Infrastructure

High

Severe

Squires Gate Attached Homes

Housing

Extreme

Severe

Village Sewage Treatment Plant

Infrastructure

Extreme

Severe

Village South Street Wastewater Pump Station

Infrastructure

Extreme

Severe

Abby Park Lane Multi-Family Homes

Housing

High

High

Apartments on South St

Housing

Extreme

High

Berkley Square Apartments & Rockledge Townhomes

Housing

Extreme

High

Brooklands Park

Natural and Cultural Resources

High

High

Catherine Ave access to West Ward

Infrastructure

Extreme

High

Chestnut St Underpass to West Ward

Infrastructure

Extreme

High

Donna Hallett Park

Natural and Cultural Resources

Extreme

High

Grasskeeper Landscaping, Inc

Economic

Extreme

High

High Voltage Electrical Transmission Tower

Infrastructure

Extreme

High

Horton Memorial Field & Toddler Park

Natural and Cultural Resources

Extreme

High

Lake Antrim Pump Station

Infrastructure

Extreme

High

Lot F (Park & Ride)

Infrastructure

Extreme

High

N. Ramapo Ave access to West Ward

Infrastructure

Extreme

High

NYS Route 59 Bridge Over Mahwah River

Infrastructure

High

High

Orange and Rockland Gas Facility

Infrastructure

Extreme

High

Ramapo Valley Rd Underpass to West Ward

Infrastructure

Extreme

High

Ramapough Cirque Townhomes

Housing

Extreme

High

Rockland Terrace Multi-Tenant Commercial Building

Economic

Extreme

High

Single-Family Homes - Brook St and Highland Ave

Housing

High

High

Single-Family Homes - South St and Rockland
Terrace

Housing

Extreme

High

Single-Family Homes near Lake Antrim

Housing

Extreme

High

Suffern Baseball Complex

Natural and Cultural Resources

Extreme

High

Suffern Memorial Pool

Natural and Cultural Resources

Extreme

High

The Knolls of Ramapo Townhomes

Housing

Extreme

High

Vacant Industrial Buildings (former Rainbow Vacuum)

Economic

Extreme

High

Village DPW Garage

Health and Social Services

Extreme

High

Village Water Treatment Plant

Infrastructure

Extreme

High

Wayne Ave / NYS Route 202 (floodprone area near
Rockledge Dr)

Infrastructure

Extreme

High

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 15

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table II-6: Unmitigated Risk Score Results
Asset Name

Recovery Support
Function

Risk Area

Risk Score Level

Boulevard Street Bridge Over Mahwah River

Infrastructure

High

Moderate

High Voltage Electrical Transmission Towers

Infrastructure

Extreme

Moderate

I-87 Bridge Over Mahwah River

Infrastructure

High

Moderate

Lafayette Ave Businesses (Malandra's, Ole-Ole,
Suffern Food Mart)

Economic

High

Moderate

Lot A (Park & Ride)

Infrastructure

Extreme

Moderate

Lot D (Park & Ride)

Infrastructure

High

Moderate

Orange Ave / NYS Route 59 Thruway Underpass

Infrastructure

High

Moderate

Rail Bridge over Mahwah River

Infrastructure

High

Moderate

Shamrock Hotel

Economic

High

Moderate

The unmitigated risk scores for several neighborhoods
within the community range from high to severe.
These neighborhoods include a combination of single
family homes, townhomes, apartments and multifamily homes. The neighborhoods on South Street,
Rockledge, Brook Street, Highland Avenue, and near
Lake Antrim are all at a high risk. Squires Gate near
Lonergan Drive is the one neighborhood at severe
risk. This residential area is at direct risk from flooding
but is also at risk due to access issues and infrastructure impacts such as loss of power and road closures
caused by flooding.
Several of the Village’s parks, including Donna Hallett
Park, Horton Memorial Field and Toddler Park, Suffern
Baseball Complex, and Suffern Memorial Pool,
received high risk scores. While these areas are green
space, play equipment (jungle gyms), utility and electrical infrastructure supporting ball fields and courts
as well as the pool and its support systems all sustained damage during Hurricane Irene.

II – 16

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

The geographic distribution of preliminary unmitigated
risk scores is presented in Figure II-3. There are three
locations containing concentrated assets at severe or
high risk: the area near the Village’s southern border
along the Mahwah River, the area near the western
boundary of the Village along the Ramapo River and
the area in the north of the Village proximate to Lake
Antrim and the Mahwah River. The high risk scores in
these areas are driven by the asset’s proximity and
exposure to the primary flood sources in the community and their location within high and or extreme flood
hazard areas as identified by FEMA and the Committee respectively. These areas of concentrated risk
require targeted attention in the evaluation of potential
mitigation measures.

Figure II-3
Risk Assessment - Village of Suffern

£
¤
202

n

e

A

ve

P
!

ay

!
P
P
P !
!

W

!!
P
P
PLake
!
P Antrim
!
59
T
S

P
!

P
!

P
!

§
¦
¨
287

P
!
Stone Hill
Quarry

P
!

P
!

287

P
!
!
P
P
!

P
!

£
¤
202

P
!

P
!
P
!

P
!

59
S
T

P
!

ve
L a f a ye t t e A

P
!

P
!
Ma
hw
ah
R

R a m ap o R

P
!

P!
!
P

Mahwah
River

§
¦
¨

P
!
Or

P
!

an
ge

P!
!
P

Av
e

Ne
w
Yo
Ne
rk
w
Je
r se
y

59
S
T

P
!
P
!
!
!!
P
P P
P
!
!
P
P
!
P
!

P
!

0

´

Legend
Severe Risk

Study Area (Village FEMA Floodzones
of Suffern, NY &
High Risk Zone
portion of Mahwah,
(100-year flood)
NJ)

High Risk

Major Highways

Moderate Risk

Railroads

Assets

!
P
P
!
P
!

Moderate Risk
Zone (500-year
flood)

Extreme Risk Areas* (repetitively flooded)

0.5
Mile

Data Sources
ESRI, FEMA,
NJGIN, NYSITS,
Rockland County,
Village of Suffern

*Extreme Risk
Areas identified by
Planning Committie

NY
NJ

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Assessment of Needs and
Opportunities
The compilation and assessment of Needs and
Opportunities was undertaken to identify the issues
that must be addressed in the Village of Suffern in the
aftermath of Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy,
and to identify the opportunities that are available to
address these issues. For the purposes of the NYRCR
program, Needs and Opportunities can relate to direct
damage caused by the storms, lost opportunities
resulting from the storms, efforts to make existing
assets more resilient, or issues that predate the storms
entirely.
In general, the process for developing a list of Needs
and Opportunities is grounded in the results of the
efforts described in Section I of this NYRCR Plan. Initially, the NYRCR Planning Committee, with input from
residents who attended the first Public Engagement
Event, developed a Vision Statement and Goals to
guide the Committee’s decision-making process and
to serve as a basis for the identification of key Needs
and Opportunities for the Village. The Committee then
developed the asset inventory and map and the list of
critical issues with input from the public and Village
officials. This information helped the Committee focus
on Needs and Opportunities of important resources,
exposed systems and vulnerable uses. By concentrating on the identified challenges and considering
how they may be addressed, numerous opportunities
to develop a more resilient community are revealed.
From this baseline, the first draft of the list of Needs
and Opportunities was generated by the Committee.
The Committee worked to identify successful systems
throughout the municipality while pinpointing deficiencies in existing protective and recovery measures
and procedures. Short-term, mid-range and long-term
needs critical to improving resiliency in the Village
were discussed. After further exploring their community’s needs, the Committee Members identified
opportunities that responded to these needs and that

II – 18

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

can be leveraged to improve preparedness, recovery
and long-term resiliency. The resulting list was refined
further through in-depth discussions with Village officials, community stakeholders, the general public,
and others at Planning Committee Meetings and the
first Public Engagement Event. Through this effort,
key systems that support the community’s storm
preparation, response and recovery, and opportunities to strengthen them were identified.
During and in the aftermath of Hurricane Irene and
Superstorm Sandy, the vast majority of Suffern’s
emergency response systems proved effective. The
emergency service providers, Village staff and dedicated volunteers rely on efficient and timely warning
and response protocols to protect Suffern residents.
When the ability to provide needed services during
these events exceeded the Village’s resources, the
emergency service command network coordinated
directly with regional and Federal agencies to supplement their response capabilities. Even with these
protocols in place, it became evident that challenges
and constraints exist that are beyond the emergency
providers’ control, and that these issues must be
addressed to provide all members of the community
full protection during significant storm events.
As the Committee Members worked to formulate a list
of specific needs, certain issues became the focus of
the discussion. A critical issue was the flooding of the
Mahwah and Ramapo Rivers, and the need to control
the volume and velocity of water through these
systems. Those neighborhoods that remained relatively accessible, but where floodwaters caused significant damage to homes and displaced residents,
were identified as areas of major concern. In addition,
ensuring access to neighborhoods susceptible to
being cut off by floodwaters during storms was also
flagged as an important issue. As flooding was not
limited to residential areas, many businesses had to
be shuttered during and after these storms, driving at
least one to relocate outside of the Village. Also of
critical importance are key Village infrastructure assets

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

such as the wastewater treatment and water supply
plants, which were inundated, causing disruptions in
essential Village services. Moreover, these storm
events highlighted the inadequacies of existing stormwater management systems.
The final Needs and Opportunities identified by the
community and documented on the following pages
are the basis for the strategies, projects, programs
and actions documented in this NYRCR Plan. To summarize, recurring themes of primary concern to the
community include:

The RSFs were designed to “support local
governments by facilitating problem solving,
improving access to resources and by fostering
coordination among State and Federal agencies,
nongovernmental partners and stakeholders.”13

 Repetitive flooding in various residential neighborhoods needs to be addressed;
 Access to residential areas otherwise cut off during
storm events must be provided;
 Aging village infrastructure including stormwater
and drainage systems are contributing to flooding;
and
 As flooding in Suffern is exacerbated by development in municipalities located further up the watersheds, regional coordination with adjacent municipalities and the state of New Jersey regarding
flooding issues on the Ramapo and Mahwah Rivers
should be pursued to better manage flooding.

Flooded Homes after Hurricane Irene (Blas Gonzalez)

In 2011 President Obama established the National
Disaster Recovery Framework (NDRF) including the
six NYRCR Recovery Support Functions (RSFs). The
objective of the Recovery Support Functions is to
facilitate the identification, coordination and delivery
of Federal assistance needed to supplement recovery
resources and efforts by local, State, Tribal, and Territorial governments, as well as private and nonprofit
sectors. The six RSFs and the core recovery capability
of each RSF and the relevance to the Village of Suffern
are described below. The following section also provides an overview of the identified Needs and Opportunities organized by the six RSFs.

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 19

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Community Planning and Capacity
Building Recovery Support Function
This RSF addresses a communities’ ability to respond to and
implement short- and long-term
recovery measures, including:
policy initiatives, laws, regulations, and planning activities, as
well as civic engagement and public education.

Needs:
 Improve regional coordination with State, Federal,
and municipal governments to protect the community and plan for future disasters;
 Develop public education and outreach campaigns
for residents to increase awareness of disaster preparedness, response, and recovery; and
 Update the Village’s Emergency Operations Plan to
be compliant with the National Incident Management System (NIMS).

Opportunities:

have been subject to damage due to repetitive flooding. The ability of a community to recover from disasters is inherently tied to its capacity to return to business-as-usual following these events. Helping
businesses that have suffered irreplaceable losses
and re-opening businesses that have been closed due
to lack of power and/or flood damage as soon as possible is critical to recovery.

Needs:
Protect the business and commercial centers
subject to repetitive flooding from future flood
damage; and
Provide businesses with assistance to improve
recovery time following a storm event.

Opportunities
Ensure stormwater systems are maintained and
operational to alleviate flood impacts to businesses;
Examine various technologies such as portable
flood barrier walls to protect businesses during
storm events; and

 Create a Regional Coordination Committee to
address flooding issues across state and municipal
boundaries;

Examine resources such as low interest loans and/
or grants to help small businesses recover from
storm events.

 Review strategic planning documents annually and
update when needed; and

Housing Recovery Support Function

 Obtain funding and expertise to update the Emergency Operations Plan to be compliant with NIMS.

Economic Recovery Support Function
This RSF looks to identify ways to
fortify the current local and
regional economy to make businesses more resilient during acute
storm events and help them
employ measures to recover
quickly and efficiently after the storms have subsided.
As shown in Figure II-4, the Village has several key
economic and commercial clusters, some of which

II – 20

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

This RSF considers the current
residential (rental and for-sale)
housing stock for all income levels
and evaluates its vulnerability with
regard to storm events. In its evaluation, the community considers:
retrofits and other measures to mitigate flooding and
damage by inundation and winds; revisions to codes
to protect existing and future housing stock; the adequacy of emergency preparedness and evacuation
plans for all residents; measures to reduce the loss of
historic homes and the adequacy of emergency preparedness plans to affect the safe evacuation of residents, especially vulnerable populations.

W

a

yn

e

A

ve

Figure II-4
Economic Land Uses - Village of Suffern

Lake
Antrim

§
¦
¨
287

Stone Hill
Quarry

§
¦
¨
287

Mahwah
River

Ra

R
mapo
Av e

Or

Ma
h

wa

hR

L a f a y et t e

an
ge
Av
e

Ne
w
Yo
Ne
rk
w
Je
r se
y

0

´

Legend

Data Sources

Study Area (Village of
Suffern, NY & portion
of Mahwah, NJ)

Mixed-Use

Industrial

Office

Other Land Use Village of Suffern

Major Highways

Retail

Railroads

2
I

Land Uses

Rail Station

0.5
Mile

ESRI, NJGIN, NYSITS,
Rockland County,
October 2014

NY
NJ

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Needs:
 Educate homeowners regarding pre-storm preparedness, storm protection procedures, and poststorm recovery initiatives;
 Complete the ongoing tree inventory and maintenance plan to prevent tree damage to power lines
and homes and to ensure access is maintained to
neighborhoods during storms;
 Ensure that homeowners are receiving fair and
equitable pricing from licensed contractors during
storm recovery;
 Protect existing residential neighborhoods and
their access points from flooding; and
 Protect key power lines and power sources from
flooding and ensure new power sources are flood
proof.

Opportunities:
 Provide assistance and information to homeowners
and renters regarding mitigation measures, building
elevation, acquisition and relocation programs, and
flood proofing;
 Provide flood related publications and materials
produced by the Village of Suffern, FEMA and NYS
Office Emergency Management (OEM) to homeowners regarding storm event preparedness and
recovery assistance programs;
 As part of the Village’s participation in the Arbor
Day Foundation’s Tree City USA Program, continue
coordination with Orange and Rockland and the
Village’s consulting professional arborist to finalize
the ongoing inventory and assessment of tree
health, size, and number of trees in the public rightof-way and develop a tree maintenance plan for
protection of key Village resources;
 Provide guidance on proper tree maintenance, tree
ownership responsibilities and jurisdiction;

II – 22

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

Work with the contracting community to provide an
annual list of County and/or Village approved contractors with list of appropriate costs for repairs or
wage rates or scales;
Evaluate ingress and egress routes to vulnerable
neighborhoods to develop safe emergency access
and evacuation routes during storm events;
Investigate and pinpoint causes of neighborhood
flooding (i.e., stormwater systems, stream alignment, watershed development, location in mapped
floodplain, etc.); and
Develop guidance on protection of power sources
and backup power supplies (i.e., underground utilities in new construction).

Health and Social Services Recovery
Support Function
This RSF addresses the community’s ability to rebuild and improve
vital health and social services,
particularly those serving vulnerable populations. Restoring such
networks, and making them more
resilient, will promote the well-being of residents, ultimately improving the overall health and independence
of the whole community.

Needs:
Install backup generators at key facilities;
Continue high level emergency services operation
and communication among responders;
Maintain access to health and social service facilities for all residents during storm events;
Provide shelter for residents with pets during storm
events; and
Upgrade shelter(s) (Community Center,
VFW Building).

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Opportunities:

Opportunities:

 Identify key facilities in need of a backup generator
and investigate potential funding sources;

Evaluate the Village’s stormwater system and identify improvements including opportunities for the
implementation of green infrastructure;

 Encourage continued training and education on
cutting edge technologies for emergency service
operations;
 Ensure access by emergency providers to at risk
residents in flooded neighborhoods thereby maintaining uninterrupted access to health and social
service facilities during storm events; and
 Identify pet friendly shelters and develop education
materials to be made available prior to storm events
(through veterinary clinics and the Village office
responsible for dog licensing etc.).

Infrastructure Systems Recovery Support
Function
This RSF seeks to identify the community infrastructure that was
damaged during the storms, components and facilities that have
been patched up until permanent
repair and replacement can occur,
facilities that have been replaced, and those that remain
untouched since the storm events that still require significant improvement.

Needs:
 Develop comprehensive stormwater improvements
to help alleviate flooding, lessen erosion, and
reduce pollutant transport;
 Protect identified road, bridge, and culvert infrastructure assets;
 Safeguard identified water supply and wastewater
conveyance and treatment infrastructure assets
including alternate power sources; and
 Protect transportation infrastructure assets (train
stations, rails, buses, roads).

Inventory infrastructure needs including age and
condition of facilities and prepare a maintenance
and/or replacement/relocation plan;
Secure and install generators at vulnerable infrastructure facilities;
Identify measures to protect water supply and
wastewater conveyance and treatment infrastructure during major storm events; and
Proactively coordinate with New Jersey Transit
Authority and New York State Department of Transportation to ensure rail, bus, and road related transportation assets are protected during storm events
and, if forced offline, return them to operation as
quickly as possible.

Natural and Cultural Resources Recovery
Support Function
This RSF focuses on protecting
and restoring natural systems and
cultural resources for continued
provision of benefits to the community. These benefits can include
stormwater management, recreational opportunities and tourism. Conserving and
rehabilitating natural and cultural resources will contribute to reducing the Village’s vulnerability during
storm events while promoting economic development,
ultimately having lasting benefits on the community’s
environmental and economic well-being.

Needs:
Investigate floodplain protection/restoration and
alternative stormwater management measures (i.e.,
green technology);
Coordinate with New York and New Jersey State
agencies, Rockland and Bergen County agencies

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

II – 23

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

and neighboring communities as well as the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, on flooding and flood
control issues; and
 Protect and clean Lake Antrim and the Mahwah
and Ramapo Rivers; and
 Identify historic resources susceptible to flooding.

Opportunities:
 Identify areas where floodplains can be protected
and/or restored and where green infrastructure
techniques can be used to alleviate flooding from
stormwater runoff;
 Create a Regional Coordination Committee to
address flooding and flood control issues across
state and municipal boundaries and coordinate
with the Rockland-Bergen Bi-state River Commission;
 Prepare a Watershed Protection Plan(s) focused on
Lake Antrim and Mahwah and Ramapo Rivers; and
 Explore options to minimize flood damage and
protect vulnerable historic resources.

II – 24

Section II: Assessment of Risk and Needs

2014
NY RISING COMMUNITY
RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
SUFFERN NYRCR

Section III

Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

III

Reconstruction and
Resiliency Strategies

The Suffern NY Rising Community Reconstruction
(NYRCR) Planning Committee (Committee), with the
help of valuable feedback from the public and discussions with the Consultant Team, developed reconstruction and resiliency strategies that will assist the
Village with building back better. The community’s
vulnerabilities revealed during and after Superstorm
Sandy and Hurricane Irene were considered in the
development of these strategies, including vulnerabilities related to preparation, response, damage and
recovery.
The Vision and Goals, Critical Issues, and Needs and
Opportunities identified and refined by the Committee
with input from the larger Suffern NYRCR Community
(Community) provide the foundation for this list of
strategies.
The reconstruction and resiliency strategies proposed
help resolve the critical issues identified in Section I of
this NYRCR Plan, address risks to assets explored in
Section II, and consider emergency, disaster recovery,
long-term resiliency, and economic development
needs that remain unmet by existing planning and
rebuilding initiatives. The strategies represent statements of action that address how to strengthen the
community against future extreme weather events,
capitalize on valuable reconstruction opportunities,
and meet short-, medium-, and long-term goals identified during the planning process.
The strategies are organized into the six Recovery
Support Functions (RSFs), as defined in Section II.B,
“Assessment of Needs and Opportunities,” of this
NYRCR Plan. The following section presents a
description of each strategy followed by a table listing
and/or text documenting projects that help realize that
strategy.

Strategy A: Broaden services at existing
storm shelter facilities to more fully cover
basic needs and accommodate pets, and
investigate new shelter opportunities
With the increasing frequency of major storm events
in New York State, the Committee expects that the
number of residents requiring access to emergency
shelters will only grow in the coming decades. With
this in mind, increasing the capacity and resilience of
existing storm shelters while building more shelter
capacity is important for the Village.
The George J. Parness Suffern Community Center,
the location of the current storm reception center and
shelter, is in need of additional equipment and supplies to better offer important services. The issue of
backup power will also be considered. In order to
provide a second shelter location and one within the
West Ward, a neighborhood that is historically cut-off
during flood events, the Village and the Committee
indicated that the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW)
building, located in the West Ward could be converted
into a reception center and shelter facility thereby
providing redundancy and offering more options for
residents during storm events. One or both of these
facilities will also be made “pet friendly” to allow those
residents with animals the opportunity to bring their
pets along. This will eliminate the need for pet owners
to decide between riding out the storm in their home
with their pets or leaving them unattended in potentially perilous conditions.
In addition to the Featured Project presented in Table
III-1, the Committee also identified one Additional
Resiliency Recommendation to pursue this strategy;
the procurement and storage of additional storm

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

III – 1

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

shelter equipment and supplies at each of the Villages
designated reception and storm shelter facilities. This
measure is listed with full details in Section V.A, “Additional Resiliency Recommendations.”

Table III-1:
Strategy A: Broaden services at existing storm shelter facilities to more fully cover basic
needs and accommodate pets, and investigate new shelter opportunities
Project Name

VFW Building
Emergency
Power and
Electrical
Upgrades

Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Retrofit the VFW facility to develop it as a
Storm Response Shelter by upgrading the
electrical system and installing back up
power and fuel storage.

Costs to complete this project are
estimated to be $180,000 in total
including $30,000 for engineering
and design and $150,000 for
electrical upgrades, purchase,
and installation of the emergency
power generator and fuel storage.

Strategy B: Assist residents with
preparation for, response to, and recovery
from future storm events through
emergency communication, outreach, and
education initiatives
Developing more resilient homes and a more informed
citizenry in the face of future storms has three key
components: preparation for, response during and
recovery from the storm event. All three are considered in this strategy.
As a result of Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy,
residents’ homes suffered damage including flooded
basements and the destruction of mechanical equipment, holes in and loss of roofs, and compromised
house foundations that required the demolition of four
homes. Residents whose homes suffered damage
had to seek shelter in unfamiliar environs, some with
very few personal belongings in tow, or live in their
damaged homes without services, with inoperable
utilities and, in many cases, with moldy basements.
The stress associated with such a dramatic upheaval

III – 2

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

Proposed
or Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Featured
Project

N

is significant and compounded by many things including the uncertainty associated with when, or worse, if
their homes would be habitable.
With regard to preparation for a storm, it became
clear, based on input received from the Committee
and the community that Suffern will benefit greatly
from the distribution of information on and assistance
with pre-storm preparations. Homeowner education
on flood damage prevention was acknowledged as a
key housing issue and the desire to address the vulnerability of the existing housing stock was identified.
Homeowners require information on planning
upgrades, re-building, and modernizing their homes
to withstand future storm events. Actions could
include education regarding flood-proofing, armoring,
and home elevation to safeguard homeowners and
their most important assets.
While the emergency services providers were exemplary in their response and in their efforts to protect
the Village’s residents during Hurricane Irene and
Superstorm Sandy, improvements to the dissemination of information and the provision of assistance by

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

trained personnel and residents during the storm will
benefit all in the Village. To achieve this goal, the
Committee identified projects and actions that will
improve and build on the Village’s existing emergency
preparedness, response, and communications
systems. The proposed improvements will include
revision of the Village’s Emergency Operations Plan
to be compliant with National Incident Management
System (NIMS).
In the aftermath of the storms, residents were frustrated with a lack of available information and/or the
wait times associated with recovery initiatives and the
release of funds. While some homes have been
repaired and one elevated, four were lost to Hurricane
Irene’s flooding. Residents need to understand all
recovery options to ensure that they will have the
ability to make the most informed decision for the
best path forward. This strategy envisions multiple
pathways for the dissemination of information related
to physical recovery assistance offered by the Village,
information on contractors who can provide needed
rebuilding services as well as information on financial
assistance and incentives offered by County, State,
and Federal agencies.
Although the Committee did not raise any projects for
this strategy to the level of Proposed or Featured,
they did identify Additional Resiliency Recommendations to pursue this strategy including, but not limited
to, the development of a comprehensive Village-wide
education and outreach program for storm preparation, preparedness, and recovery, and the purchase
and implementation of emergency communications
systems upgrades. All “Additional Resiliency Recommendations” are listed in their entirety in Section V.A
of this NYRCR Plan.

Strategy C: Develop storm assistance
programs and provide consolidated
information on financial initiatives that
allow residents and businesses to better
protect themselves and their assets from
future storm damage
To become a more resilient community, the Village of
Suffern’s NYRCR Planning Committee, residents and
elected officials identified and defined details of past
storm impacts on their residences and businesses.
Out of this effort arose an understanding that some
impacts could be minimized, even prevented, through
the installation of permanent protective equipment
and measures. Others, and these are the focus of this
strategy, require a concerted effort to lessen or eliminate impacts by way of short- and long-term planning
for storm events.
Much of the business and residential property losses
were in the form of damage to goods and personal
effects that were stored in areas prone to flooding. It
became evident to the NYRCR Planning Committee
that in the short-term, many of these assets could be
easily moved out of harm’s way with assistance from
a group of volunteers prior to the onset of a storm.
Semi-permanent equipment, that would not be easily
relocated, could be protected by temporary measures
immediately in advance of a storm, including sand
bags and temporary flood walls, or, with the proper
planning, permanently moved to a higher floor or an
area of the building above the flooding. Finally, those
assets that are considered permanent, buildings and
homes, could be protected using portable flood barriers or removed from areas that flood using a longterm, managed retreat approach through a buyout
program coupled with an economic development plan
to offset the potential loss of tax ratables. Projects
developed in support of this Strategy offer solutions to
all of these problems.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

III – 3

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

In addition to the Proposed Projects presented in
Table III-2, the Committee also identified one Additional Resiliency Recommendation to pursue this
strategy; a volunteer storm assistance program that
will help residents and business owners move possessions out of harm’s way prior to the arrival of a
storm. This measure is listed with full details in Section
V.A, “Additional Resiliency Recommendations.”

Table III-2: Strategy C: Develop storm assistance programs and provide consolidated
information on financial initiatives that allow residents and businesses to better protect
themselves and their assets from future storm damage
Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Proposed
or Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Homeowner Buyout
Program Support
and Economic
Development Plan

Provide support to the Village to explore various
buyout and relocation program opportunities, identify
eligible properties, and administer the buyout
program, and prepare an economic development
plan to offset reduction in tax revenues resulting from
a buyout.

Costs are estimated
to be $94,000
including $54,000
for the buyout
program support
and $40,000 for the
Economic
Development Study.

Proposed
Project

N

Homeowner
Support for Raising
Utility Connections
and Mechanicals

Encourage homeowners in areas susceptible to
flooding to move utility and mechanicals from
basements to upper floors. Hire an architect to
develop schematic plan options for raised utility
rooms, facilitate the use of preapproved plans
through the approval process for homeowners and
help identify funding sources for the retrofit of
existing homes.

Costs to have an
architect prepare
plans are estimated
to be $35,000.

Proposed
Project

N

III – 4

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy D: Collaborate with municipal
neighbors in New York and New Jersey
to manage watershed development and
control flooding
Initial responses to damages resulting from a significant storm event typically tend to focus solely on the
local conditions that contributed to the flooding.
However, a broader assessment is necessary to
understand the dynamics of, and to better address,
the problems specific to the overall surface water
system(s). A regional effort that looks at the watershed
or sub-watershed (depending on the area it encompasses) is vital to effective resiliency planning.
The assessment and modelling of a watershed is a
key first step to documenting existing conditions and
understanding the stressors in place that can be
addressed to reduce impacts of future storms. The
Mahwah River runs roughly 11 miles from its source
north of Suffern to its confluence with the Ramapo
River just south of the Village in New Jersey. The Planning Committee and Village Officials have indicated
their desire and willingness to participate in a consortium of Mahwah River Watershed communities to
coordinate efforts and manage development, assess
stormwater impacts, and reduce flooding in the watershed. The Village of Suffern will reach out to its neighbors in the Mahwah River watershed to initiate this
discussion and begin to build an inter-municipal group
that could benefit from a broader, more regional perspective. The proposed “Mahwah River Watershed
Management Group” will use a holistic approach to
planning for resiliency.
Coordination with County, State and possibly Federal
agencies to set forth the requirements of a watershed
management plan and better understand the constraints of permitting required for projects derived
from a comprehensive watershed assessment will be
undertaken by the proposed “Management Group.”
Recommendations for improving stormwater management, mitigating flooding and managing development will focus on a suite of improvements with

varying costs that could be implemented in both the
short- and long-term.
In 2012, recognizing the need for comprehensive
flood prevention approaches to ensure the preservation of the environmental benefits of various watersheds, the State of New Jersey endorsed and passed
legislation to create a bi-state organization and framework for regional coordination of potential flood
hazards along the Hackensack River, Sparkill Brook/
Creek, Saddle River, Ramapo/Mahwah River, and their
tributaries. Similar legislation was passed by New
York State in 2013 and in April, 2014, the NYS legislature included $100,000 in the 2014-2015 Budget to
realize the Rockland-Bergen Bi-state River Commission (Commission). The Commission is mandated to
issue a report by June 2016 to include recommendations for legislation, administrative action, and local
government action. This legislation furthered a long
history of cooperation among State and local governmental entities and various private organizations and
individuals in the vicinity of these water bodies and
watersheds.
The Village of Suffern and the proposed “Mahwah
River Watershed Management Group” will reach out
to the Rockland-Bergen Bi-state River Commission to
develop a collaborative working relationship between
the two groups from the outset to ensure a comprehensive and coordinated approach to watershed
management and flood control.
Although the Committee did not raise any projects for
this strategy to the level of Proposed or Featured, they
did identify an Additional Resiliency Recommendation
that will establish an inter-municipal organization for
the management of the Mahwah River Watershed,
which will coordinate with the Bi-state River Commission. This action, along with all other “Additional Resiliency Recommendations,” is listed in their entirety in
Section V.A of this NYRCR Plan.

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

III – 5

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy E: Improve stormwater
management and drainage systems
throughout the Village to improve resiliency
When considering the causes of flooding in a community, it becomes evident that stormwater runoff
plays a significant role. Stormwater infrastructure and
drainage systems, or the lack thereof, are usually
identified as a source for the discharge of water into
already stressed surface water systems; this added
volume then contributes to the inundation of certain
areas downstream. Existing stormwater conveyance
systems can be old, unmaintained, nonfunctioning or,
in the case of older development, nonexistent. Options
for improving the management of runoff are varied
and include structural systems like pipes and storage
vaults as well as green infrastructure practices such
as vegetated bioswales, rain gardens, and porous
pavement to name a few. Green infrastructure, which
also includes the enhancement of natural systems
such as stream buffers, wetlands, and floodplains, not
only delays runoff discharged into the receiving
surface waters, thereby lessening its contribution to

flooding, but also improves water quality. To provide
stormwater management where it does not exist and
improve it where it does, but is inadequate, requires
an assessment of the existing systems as well as
determining the viability of various stormwater management practices across the Village.
The Committee and community identified a suite of
projects to address stormwater issues in Suffern
including the preparation of a comprehensive digital
inventory of the Village’s infrastructure, which will
document the size, date of installation, inspection and
maintenance schedules of stormwater infrastructure.
This effort will result in the identification of stormwater
management and drainage infrastructure that needs
to be updated, upgraded, resized or replaced as well
as identification of those areas not now served where
drainage infrastructure should be constructed. Other
projects chosen to manage stormwater include the
assessment of the feasibility of installing subsurface
storage below, pervious pavement on top and bioswales in or around existing municipal parking lots as
well as in other locations throughout the Village.

Table III-3: Strategy E: Improve stormwater management and drainage systems throughout
the Village to improve resiliency
Proposed
or Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Costs are estimated to be $225,000,
including software upgrades, data
collection, and analysis.

Proposed
Project

N

Conduct a feasibility study to
determine appropriate locations to
implement green infrastructure
practices and stormwater storage
systems throughout Suffern.

Costs to complete this project are
estimated to be $900,000 including
$30,000 for the study; $135,000, for
engineering and design; and
$735,000 for construction of porous
pavement and rain gardens.

Proposed
Project

N

Assess the feasibility of the
installation of underground
stormwater storage systems with
controlled flow orifices at Village
Parking Lots A and B. Evaluate
Green Infrastructure elements to
further improve stormwater
management in the parking lots.

Costs to complete this project are
estimated to be $1,920,000 in total
including $25,000 for the study;
$270,000 for engineering and design;
and $1,625,000 for construction of
porous pavement.

Featured
Project

N

Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Inventory of Existing
Stormwater
Management
Infrastructure

Supplement the existing data
within the County GIS database
with information on condition and
location of critical stormwater
infrastructure.

Village-wide
Stormwater
Management: Green
Infrastructure and
Storage Systems
Feasibility Study

Stormwater
Management
Facilities in Village
Parking Lots A and
B

III – 6

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy F: Promote resilience and flood
management practices through land-use
planning, policy, and regulation
In the face of storm damages and with a significant
number of municipal assets, homes and business in
vulnerable locations, changes to land-use planning
regulations, policies, and documents can be used to
increase storm resiliency in Suffern. The Committee is
interested in exploring opportunities to reduce or
avoid the impacts of natural disasters by revisiting its
existing planning regulations with an eye toward sustainability and resilience. The Committee feels that a
review of the building, zoning, tree and flood protection ordinances and codes, will be required.
Revisions will be expected to codify the use of the
latest flood resistant materials and building techniques
to ensure more resilient housing. Building and zoning
codes will be updated to facilitate the redesign, retrofit, and rebuilding of damaged homes, buildings and
infrastructure in a more resilient and protective way.
Language maximizing flood protection, increasing the
requirements for stormwater management, and limiting development and redevelopment in flood zones
will be considered. A comprehensive management
and maintenance plan for trees within public rights of
way will also be assessed. Finally, the Village can
assess revisions that will enhance the protection of
open space and natural resources including surface
waters and surrounding lands in the Village.
Although the Committee did not raise any projects for
this strategy to the level of Proposed or Featured, they
did identify an Additional Resiliency Recommendation
that will improve flood protection and resiliency
through revisions to the Village Code. This, along with
all other “Additional Resiliency Recommendations,” is
listed in its entirety in Section V.A of this NYRCR Plan.

Strategy G: Repair, protect, and improve
resiliency of critical infrastructure and
transportation assets such as water and
wastewater systems, utilities, roads,
culverts, and bridges
Suffern’s critical infrastructure—including roadways,
wastewater and water treatment facilities, electricity,
and stormwater management—was adversely
affected by Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy.
With these damages in mind, the visioning process
established the goal to “enhance infrastructure and
storm water systems where needed.” Repairing and
fortifying critical infrastructure to better withstand
future storm events and protecting transit and the
electrical supply network are important priorities for
the Committee and the community.
Resiliency initiatives that enable Suffern’s infrastructure systems to continue operating with minimal interruptions during and after future storm events are
essential to the ongoing viability of the Village. Of the
critical infrastructure systems seriously affected by
Hurricane Irene and Superstorm Sandy, most notable
were the wastewater and water treatment systems.
Roads, culverts, and utilities, electric in particular,
were also impacted by these disasters. Repairing,
upgrading, and fortifying these infrastructure systems
is imperative, as is the development of new and
enhanced capabilities including new back-up power
supplies for the DPW garage and the South Street
pump station. Projects proposed to address this strategy focus on protecting, and making more resilient,
key infrastructure assets in the Village.
In addition to the Proposed Projects presented in
Table III-4, the Committee also identified an Additional
Resiliency Recommendation to pursue this strategy.
This project is listed with full details in Section V.A,
“Additional Resiliency Recommendations.”

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

III – 7

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table III-4: Strategy G:
Repair, protect, and improve resiliency of critical infrastructure and transportation assets such
as water and wastewater systems, utilities, roads, culverts and bridges
Proposed
or Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Costs are estimated to be
$125,000 including $90,000 to
purchase and install a generator
at the DPW Garage and $35,000
to replace and elevate the
generator at the South Street
Pump Station.

Proposed
Project

N

Provide access to the West Ward by way
of an at-grade Emergency Railroad
Crossing over the NJ Transit Commuter
Rail Line.

Costs to design and construct
this project are estimated at
$250,000.

Proposed
Project

N

Install drainage improvements at the
Chestnut Street underpass, along Orange
Ave and along US Route 202 to better
protect these transportation assets and to
ensure that emergency services have
access to these areas.

Costs are estimated to be
$1,500,000 including $700,000
for the Chestnut Street
underpass; $750,000 for Orange
Avenue; and $50,000 for the US
Route 202 feasibility study.

Proposed
Project

N

Hardening of
Wastewater
Treatment Plant
and Facilities
through Physical
Protective
Measures

Protect the wastewater treatment plant
and related facilities through installing
appropriate physical protective measures
such as flood doors, windows and vents
and installing new electrical equipment at
a higher location within the plant.

Costs to complete this project
are estimated to be $450,000
including $20,000 for the
engineering assessment;
$300,000 for design and
installation of the floodproof
windows and doors; and
$130,000 for design and
construction of the electrical
modifications and
recommendations of the
engineering assessment.

Proposed
Project

N

Hardening of Water
Treatment Plant
and Facilities
through Physical
Protective
Measures

Protect the water treatment plant and
related facilities, including wells, by
installing appropriate physical protective
measures such as new pumps and
emergency generators, floodproof doors,
windows and vents in the plant and well
houses. Install aerial electric service to the
well and raise the well heads above the
FEMA BFE.

Costs to complete this project
are estimated to be $625,000
including $20,000 for the
engineering assessment;
$90,000 for the design and
installation of aerial power
supply; $190,000 to elevate the
three wells; $325,000 for
floodproof doors and windows.

Proposed
Project

N

Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated Cost

Backup Power for
Critical Community
Facilities

Provide permanent emergency power
generators at the DPW Garage to maintain
operation of the fuel pumps and at the
South Street Pump Station to allow for
uninterrupted service of the facility.

Emergency
Railroad Crossing
into the West Ward

Drainage
Improvements to
Transportation
Assets

III – 8

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Strategy H: Restore, preserve, and
augment natural resources, including
floodplains, streams, rivers, lakes and
wetlands, to help mitigate flooding and
support flood resiliency
The visioning process in Suffern identified a strong
desire in the Village to “Protect and clean Lake Antrim
and the Mahwah and Ramapo Rivers” and to “…
restore, redevelop, revitalize and make more resilient...
natural resources” in Suffern. The Committee recognized the importance of Suffern’s natural resources,
especially their role in managing stormwater and providing opportunity for passive recreation.
The Committee acknowledged the potential options
to limit future damage through enhancement and augmentation of the Village’s natural resources such as
wetlands, rivers, lakes, and floodplains. The preservation and restoration of these natural systems will allow
them to serve as flood banking systems and buffer
zones during storms and otherwise protect the people
and assets of Suffern. Such a strategy will offer

numerous co-benefits depending on the means used.
Stream bank restoration to prevent erosion and
protect nearby roads and buildings will also provide
passive recreation and a more aesthetically pleasing
upland environment for residents; restored wetlands
and expanded floodplains along the rivers will clean
the water and provide habitat while reducing flooding
by storing stormwater.
To determine all potential opportunities to improve the
rivers and lake with an eye toward flood control,
habitat restoration and flood mitigation, the Community has determined that a watershed study should be
conducted to better understand the existing conditions and develop a holistic approach to improving
these systems.
In addition to the Proposed Projects presented in
Table III-5, the Committee also identified Additional
Resiliency Recommendations to pursue this strategy
including the cleaning and maintenance of the river
channels and restoration of Lake Antrim. These projects are listed with full details in Section V.A, “Additional Resiliency Recommendations.”

Table III-5: Strategy H:
Restore, preserve, and augment natural resources, including floodplains, streams, rivers, lakes
and wetlands, to help mitigate flooding and support flood resiliency
Project Name

Short Project Description

Estimated
Cost

Flood Mitigation
Assessment
– Mahwah and
Ramapo River
Watersheds

Conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the Mahwah River
Watershed in conjunction with the Ramapo River Watershed
to identify mitigation goals and associated performance
metrics, assess existing conditions with respect to erosion
and deposition patterns, identify local and watershed-scale
stressors, understand patterns of channel evolution, and
make recommendations regarding flood mitigation.

Costs are
estimated to be
$1,000,000.

Proposed
or Featured
Project

Regional
Project
(Y/N)

Proposed
Project

Y

Section III: Reconstruction and Resiliency Strategies

III – 9

2014
NY RISING COMMUNITY
RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
SUFFERN NYRCR

Section IV

Implementation – Project Profiles

IV

Implementation – Project Profiles

The Village of Suffern, through the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program, is eligible
to receive up to $3 million in U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community
Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery (CDBGDR) funds to implement reconstruction and resiliency
projects. While developing projects for inclusion in
this NYRCR Plan, the Planning Committee took into
account alignment with reconstruction and resiliency
strategies, cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses, the
effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to residents and critical assets, feasibility, and community
support. The projects listed in the NYRCR Plan are not
ranked nor listed in order of priority.
This section presents a complete project profile for
each Proposed and Featured Project identified by the
Committee throughout the six-month planning
process. The NYRCR Plan also includes “Additional
Resiliency Recommendations” presented in Section
V.A.
Proposed Projects are proposed for funding
through a Community’s allotment of CDBG-DR
funding.
Featured Projects are innovative projects where an
initial study or discrete first phase of the project is
proposed for CDBG-DR funding or other identified
funding; and regulatory reforms and other programs
that do not involve capital expenditures.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations are resiliency projects and actions the Committee would
like to highlight and are not categorized as Proposed or Featured Projects.

Risk Mitigation Analysis
Projects with potential flood risk reduction benefits
were analyzed through a mitigated risk assessment
process. The project location, geographic area of the
particular project, and anticipated effects were examined to assess the potential risk mitigation to nearby
flood-prone assets.
Projects with potential flood risk reduction benefits
were analyzed through a mitigated risk assessment
process. Project locations were mapped using available documentation, designs, and plans to establish
the geographic area to be analyzed for each project
and the proximity to assets. Additional data including
aerial imagery, flood risk areas, and topography were
also utilized to gain a more complete understanding of
the surrounding site characteristics. After the project
locations were mapped, project documentation was
reviewed to identify how proposed project actions
may decrease flood risks to nearby assets through
improvements to stormwater conveyance systems
and flood mitigation measures.
Once projects were reviewed, asset locations mapped
previously in the Asset Inventory and Unmitigated
Risk Assessment tasks were analyzed to locate and
evaluate those assets that will be affected by each
project. The Mitigated Risk Assessment task builds on
the Unmitigated Risk Assessment by analyzing how
proposed projects may decrease flood risks to assets.
Assets are entered into the New York State Department of State (NYS DOS) Risk Assessment Tool;
however the flood risk areas, landscape attributes,
and vulnerability rankings are modified to reflect
anticipated effects of proposed projects. For example,
localized flooding on a poorly-drained street could be
remedied with a proposed catch basin and culvert
pipe; thereby reducing risk to assets or eliminating an

Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles

IV – 1

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

existing flood risk area. In the Risk Assessment Tool,
removing that flooding hazard will result in a Mitigated
Risk Score lower than the original Unmitigated Risk
score. By generating and comparing the Mitigated /
Unmitigated Risk Scores, the potential risk reduction
benefits of projects can be assessed.

cost estimates, which included evaluation, design
and/or construction where appropriate. Due to various
uncertainties, the estimates are just that—estimates:
they provide the community with a practical understanding of the potential estimated costs of project
implementation.

The Project Profiles provide an overview of Anticipated Reduction of Risk. For details on the Mitigated
Risk Assessment results, see Section V.D, “Community Asset Inventory.”

The following three factors were used to evaluate
costs and benefits:

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Methodology
The Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) developed the benefits and costs associated with Proposed and Featured Projects. The CBA provides the anticipated cost
of implementation and an evaluation of the benefits of
the various Proposed and Featured Projects. The
purpose of the CBA is to inform the Suffern NYRCR
Planning Committee as they formulate and identify
projects for implementation, and to help the community prepare grant applications for CDBG-DR funds
and other funding opportunities identified in the future.
The effectiveness of each project in reducing risk to
residents and critical assets, feasibility, and community support were taken into account as well as discussions with Committee members, community
members and Village staff. Based on this, the costeffectiveness of a project was assessed.
The costs and benefits used to evaluate projects
through the CBA are explained further below.

Project Costs
The Proposed and Featured Project Profiles include a
summary of anticipated project costs. For some Proposed and Featured Projects, estimated costs were
provided by the municipal staff and/or consultants.
For instances where information was not available,
the Consultant Team developed preliminary project

IV – 2

Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles

Capital Cost;
Life-Cycle Cost – annual maintenance cost for
upkeep and operations for the useful life of the
project (if applicable); and
Useful Life of Strategy – number of years before
replacement is required (if applicable).
The CBA not only provides an assessment of the cost
of implementing the projects, but also provides a
description of the future costs of not implementing the
Proposed and Featured Projects. If projects are not
implemented, long-term viability of municipalities to
withstand and rebound following significant storm
events may be negatively impacted. The costs of not
implementing projects are more difficult to quantify,
but are nonetheless critical to the analysis and are
therefore addressed qualitatively. These costs include:
repetitive damage to personal property and public
infrastructure resulting from frequent recurring flooding and storm events; economic loss to residents,
local and regional employers as a result of the inability
to work; and inability to access areas of the community, resulting in obstacles or limitations to the provisions of life safety and emergency services.

Project Co-Benefits
The types of benefits evaluated in the CBA are summarized below:
Risk Mitigation: The extent to which a Proposed or
Featured Project mitigates the risk of damage to an
identified community asset from a future storm event.

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Economic Impacts: The potential for a Proposed or
Featured Project to minimize costs and reduce the
time required for the local economy to rebound from a
storm event. Economic assessment data included,
where applicable: an estimate of jobs secured/added;
relationship to, and/or furtherance of, plans in the
Mid-Hudson Regional Economic Development
Council Strategic Plan9 (2011) and the Mid-Hudson
Regional Economic Development Council’s Progress
Report14 (2014); potential for additional economic
activity; and the net effect on local municipal
expenditures.
Environmental Benefits: The potential for a Proposed
or Featured Project to protect critical environmental
assets, high-priority habitat, threatened and endangered species, migration or habitat connectivity; any
clean-up resulting from the action; creation of open
space or a new recreational assets.
Health and Social Benefits: The potential for a Proposed or Featured Project to benefit the overall population due to improved access to health and social
service facilities and public safety services; type and
size of socially vulnerable population secured; and
degree to which essential health and social service
facilities are able to provide services to a community
during a future storm or weather event as a result of
the implementation of a Proposed or Featured Project.

Section IV: Implementation – Project Profiles

IV – 3

Project Description:
Electric supply to critical community facilities has been lost during past storm events,
including Superstorm Sandy and Hurricane Irene. Two facilities, the Department of
Public Works (DPW) garage and the South Street Pump Station are the focus of this
project. Loss of power at the DPW Garage has rendered the fuel pumps for gasoline
and diesel tanks inoperable. These fuel sources are critical to the operations of the
Village’s response and recovery vehicle fleet. The South Street Wastewater Pump
Station lost power, causing wastewater to back up. Had this condition persisted, the
wastewater would eventually have flooded out of the pump station into the surrounding area including the wetlands behind. This condition could have also lead to the
backup of the effluent in the conveyance system forcing it out of manholes as well as
into residents’ basement. This project will (1) Install an emergency generator at the
DPW Garage to allow for continued operation of the fuel pumps during all interruptions in electrical service; and (2) Replace and elevate the generator at the South
Street Pump Station, a key component in the wastewater conveyance system, to
prevent the impacts associated with the loss of power.

Proposed Project

Backup Power for Critical Community Facilities

Project Location
DPW Garage, South Street Wastewater Pump Station

Estimated Cost
DPW Garage and Pump Station Project Area
(MJ Engineering and Land Surveying, P.C.)

Costs are estimated to be $125,000 including $90,000 to purchase and install a
generator at the DPW Garage and $35,000 to replace and elevate the generator at
the South Street Pump Station.

Installation of permanent generators at the DPW Garage and the upgrade/installation
of the generator at the South Street pump station will allow for continued operation
of these facilities during storm events. Economic benefits are realized when DPW
crews can continue to provide services such as clearing roads during the storm and
assist with cleanup post storm thereby reducing the initial impact and shortening the
time to full recovery for residents and businesses. By raising the generator, damage
to it and interruption of the pump station’s operation will be avoided resulting in a

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Economic Benefits

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 4

reduction in repair cost and avoidance of potential fines from New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC) for the release of
wastewater into the environment.

Proposed Project

Backup Power for Critical Community Facilities (cont’d)

Environmental Benefits
This project will protect the wastewater pump station and ultimately the treatment plant from the effects of power outages associated with flooding, thereby
reducing the potential for failure of the plant and the release of of untreated
sewage leading to potential degradation of the adjacent Ramapo River and all
other connected surface waters in the immediate vicinity as well as those
downstream.

Health and Social Service Benefits
Village of Suffern Department of Public Works Garage (Elizabeth Matamoros, AKRF, Inc.)

Installation of generators at the DPW Garage and the South Street pump
station will allow for continued operation during storm events, thereby protecting these critical facilities and the important operations of the DPW. Maintaining a fuel source for Village DPW vehicles and equipment will allow continued
operation of vehicles so that roads can be cleared and access to healthcare
facilities can be maintained or restored quickly. Public health is further protected by ensuring continued pumping of wastewater, which may help reduce
the possibility of effluent from backing up into streets and homes. This both
limits the threat to public health from diseases carried by wastewater and helps
maintain water quality within the Village and downstream.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Suffern NYRCR Plan

South Street Pump Station (Elizabeth Matamoros, AKRF, Inc.)

The purchase and installation of fixed power generators is a low cost measure,
where the benefits considerably outweigh the costs of not having this essential
power source during an emergency. This project will allow both the DPW
Garage and South Street Pump Station to operate and provide vital services
uninterrupted to the Village during emergencies. In addition, the generators
used for the wastewater supply system will help decrease the vulnerability of
the system. This will create savings in local government expenditures by reducing emergency efforts and repair costs needed at the DPW Garage and Pump

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 5

Station. According to the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) Economics
and Statistics Administration (ESA) report, Economic Impact of Hurricane
Sandy Potential Economic Activity Potentially Lost and Gained in New Jersey
and New York15, the estimated job creation from recovery spending on infrastructure projects in New York reported 7.15 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) construction jobs per $1,000,000 in construction spending. Using this methodology the project will create an estimated 0.9 (FTE) construction jobs. This is
based on an assumption that approximately 80% of the total cost ($125,000)
will be construction cost ($100,000).

Government Regulatory Requirements
No permits will be necessary to implement this project.

Entity with Jurisdiction

Proposed Project

Backup Power for Critical Community Facilities (cont’d)

Village of Suffern

The generators have a useful life of 10 to 20 years. The anticipated routine
maintenance of these improvements will be scheduled within the existing
maintenance programs of the community and are anticipated to be covered
within existing or future operating budgets without a specific cost increase
required. Based on this analysis, the potential benefits of this project are
believed to outweigh the financial investment of implementation.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk

Suffern NYRCR Plan

The Backup Power for Critical Community Facilities project involves two key
community assets at which power has been lost during past storm events:
the DPW Garage located off Pat Malone Drive and the South Street Wastewater Pump Station. The DPW Garage is located within an extreme risk area
identified by the Suffern NYRCR Planning Committee, while the Pump
Station lies within a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) highrisk flood zone. The project will install an emergency generator at the DPW
Garage and replace and elevate the generator at the Pump Station.
Risk mitigation analysis anticipates that this Project will reduce the Vulnerability conditions of the DPW Garage and South Street Wastewater Pump
Station to power outages, resulting in a mitigated risk score for these assets.

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions
The Community anticipates this to be a short-term project, which will take
approximately 14 months. Once the project is approved, design and construction can begin.

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 6

Project Description

Economic Benefits

In past storm events, including Hurricane Irene, access to the West Ward
neighborhood was severed completely
by flooding of the surrounding road
network. The project will provide emergency service providers access to the
West Ward (which includes upwards of
150 residences) by constructing a
minimum 20-foot wide and approximately 120-foot long Emergency Railroad Crossing over the New Jersey
Transit (NJT) Commuter Rail Line Right
of Way from Orange Avenue to Ramapo
Avenue by way of Dunnery Court. This
at-grade railroad crossing will be gated
with use restricted to emergency service
vehicles during times when flooding or
other disasters prevent access to the
West Ward neighborhood over the existing roadway network.

During large storm events, major ingress
and egress points for the West Ward
become impassable. By creating an
emergency access into this neighborhood, responders and emergency
service personnel will be able to aid and
assist residents in a timely fashion,
reduce response time, and reduce
potential loss of property should a fire or
other similar type emergency occur.

Project Location
Railroad Crossing Project Area (MJ Engineering and Land Surveying, P.C.)

Estimated Cost
Costs to design and construct this
project are estimated at $250,000.

Health and Social Service Benefits
By creating an emergency access to the
West Ward neighborhood, responders
and emergency service personnel will be
able to provide medical aid as necessary
and assist residents in an area which has
traditionally been cut off from emergency
help during storm events.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Implementation of this project will result
in long-term sustainable benefits by
greatly reducing the risk to the West
Ward neighborhood during severe storm
events. Uninterrupted and unimpeded
access to this residential area will allow
emergency vehicles to efficiently reach
residents, including vulnerable populations in need of services, thereby
increasing the Village’s resiliency and
ability to recover more quickly. Emergency response efforts will also be made
more efficient.
Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Emergency Railroad Crossing, Orange
Avenue (US Route 202) and Dunnery
Court in Suffern

Proposed Project

Emergency Railroad Crossing into the West Ward

IV – 7

According to the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) Economics and
Statistics Administration (ESA) report15, the project will create an estimated 1.8 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) construction jobs. This is based on
an assumption that approximately 80% of the total cost ($250,000) will
be construction cost ($200,000).

Proposed Project

Construct an Emergency Railroad Crossing into the West Ward (cont’d)

The anticipated maintenance and operations of this improvement will be
coordinated with NJT. It is anticipated costs to the community will be
covered within existing or future operating budgets without a specific
cost increase required. Based on this analysis, the potential benefits of
this project are believed to outweigh the financial investment of
implementation.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
It is anticipated that this project will reduce risk to residents in the West
Ward by providing safe access of emergency vehicles to the neighborhood during severe weather events through improved Vulnerability
conditions.
Emergency Railroad Crossing
Sketch Plan (Suffern DPW)

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions
This is anticipated to be a short-term project, which will take approximately 22 months. Once the project is approved, design and construction can begin.

Government Regulatory Requirements

Entity with Jurisdiction
Location for Emergency Vehicle
Crossing on Train Racks
(Susan Rivers)

Village of Suffern, New Jersey Transit, possibly NYS DOT or US FHWA.

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

The railroad tracks to be crossed are located on land owned by NJT and
will require compliance with their regulations. This project may also
require permitting from New York State Department of Transportation
(NYS DOT) or the U.S. Federal Highway Administration (US FHWA) for
the connection to Route 202.

IV – 8

Project Description

Estimated Cost

This project will include three components to better protect transportation
assets within the Village and ensure that
residents do not get cut off from emergency service response during flood
events:

Costs are estimated to be $1,500,000
including $700,000 for the Chestnut
Street underpass; $750,000 for Orange
Avenue; and $50,000 for the US Route
202 feasibility study.

1) Chestnut Street underpass – install a
larger storm sewer directed to a new
underground concrete vault detention
system in Parking Lot “F,” which will
also service Ramapo Avenue and
various side streets;
2) Orange Avenue stormwater, including
all side streets from Chestnut Street
to the New Jersey line – direct storm
sewer flow by utilizing a series of new
catch basins and a new storm sewer
conveyance system to an underground concrete vault detention
system in Parking Lot “F”; and
Orange Avenue, Route 202, Chestnut Street Underpass Project Areas
(MJ Engineering and Land Surveying, P.C.)

Project Location

Economic Benefits
By maintaining vehicle access to all
areas in the Village, residents and nonresidents alike will have uninterrupted
access to local businesses and those
who work in the Village will be able to get
to their jobs. Without these improvements, residents who are cut off by flood
waters will not be able to patronize local
businesses.

Environmental Benefits
This project will reduce flooding of these
heavily used roads by capturing and
storing stormwater in these areas using
underground storage systems. By managing runoff through storage and processing it, water volume and velocity in
the receiving waters will be reduced,
limiting erosion. Additional environmental benefits are derived from an improvement in the quality of the water that is
released from these areas.

Chestnut Street Underpass, Orange
Avenue, US Route 202

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

3) US Route 202 elevation – produce an
engineering feasibility study raising
US Route 202 and/or upgrading/
replacing the stormwater drainage
system along the roadway near Lake
Antrim and along Memorial Drive.

Proposed Project

Drainage Improvements to Transportation Assets

IV – 9

Health and Social Service Benefits
During large storm events, several areas of the Village were inundated with
storm water, which flooded streets, making them impassable and inaccessible to emergency services personnel and preventing residents from leaving
those areas. This project will protect/improve transportation assets within
the Village and ensure that emergency service providers have access to all
residents during flood events. It will also allow residents in those areas to
travel freely to access or to leave their homes. Implementation of drainage
and roadway improvements will significantly improve the conveyance of
stormwater around the roadways identified by the community as being at
extreme risk, thereby maximizing efficiency of the surrounding municipal
infrastructure, protecting homes, businesses and residents, and maintaining
emergency vehicle access to vulnerable neighborhoods.

Although final design has not been completed, with the large geographic
scope of the project, it can be expected that many assets such as dense
residential neighborhoods, infrastructure, businesses, and community facilities will experience a reduction in risk through improved Vulnerability conditions. Risk to the transportation system and roadway network will especially
be mitigated. The useful life of these projects will vary but 40 years can be
expected for storm sewer piping and 80 years can be expected for the concrete vault detention system. The anticipated routine maintenance of these
improvements will be scheduled through the existing maintenance programs
within the community, and is anticipated to be covered within existing or
future operating budgets without a specific cost increase required. Based on
this analysis, the potential benefits of this project are believed to outweigh
the financial investment of implementation.

Proposed Project

Drainage Improvements to Transportation Assets (cont’d)

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Using the methodology of the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) Economics and Statistics Administration (ESA) report15, the project will create an
estimated 8.3 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) construction jobs. This is based on
an assumption that approximately 80% of the cost for the Chestnut St. and
Orange Ave. projects ($1,450,000) will be construction cost ($1,160,000).

Chestnut Street Underpass at Route 202 (Elizabeth Matamoros, AKRF, INc.)

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Implementation of this project will result in long-term, sustainable benefits
by reducing the risk of flooding of many roadways in the Village including US
Route 202 (Wayne Avenue and Orange Avenue), which is a primary corridor
through the Village, Chestnut Street, and the side streets of Orange Avenue
from Chestnut Street to the Village boundary. Risk will not only be reduced
to the roadways, but also to adjacent infrastructure components and
systems, homes and other property for the foreseeable future. In addition,
the reduction in flooding on roadways, infrastructure and property will result
in more efficient emergency response to residential areas that would be otherwise cut off during flooding events, increasing the Village’s resiliency and
ability to recover more quickly.

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 10

Anticipated Reduction of Risk

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions

The proposed improvements are located within an extreme risk area identified by the Planning Committee and within the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) high- and moderate-risk flood zones. Flooding of the
roadways in these areas during past storm events hindered emergency
responder’s and residence’s mobility. The Project aims to increase the resiliency of the Village’s transportation system against flooding by reducing the
likelihood of inaccessibility to and from residences and emergency services
during storm events. Proposed actions involve a preliminary study of US
Route 202 in the Lake Antrim area and design of improvements to the stormwater conveyance system including installation of storm sewers, detention
infrastructure, and roadway redesign.

This is anticipated to be a mid-term project, which will take approximately
28 months. Once the project is approved, design and construction can
begin.

Orange Avenue and Wayne Avenue (both US Route 202) are key transportation arteries for accessing the western and northern portions of the Village.
This includes a multitude of assets such as numerous densely populated
residential areas off Orange Avenue, downtown businesses on Lafayette
Avenue, and public works facilities. Given the large project area and design
of improvements yet to be completed, the risk mitigation effects of the
project are anticipated to be Village wide. By reducing Vulnerability conditions to flooding of key components of the Village’s transportation network
and infrastructure, the system as a whole experiences a reduction in risk. A
more resilient transportation system holistically benefits the Village, allowing
emergency personnel and citizens greater mobility during severe storm
events.

Proposed Project

Drainage Improvements to Transportation Assets (cont’d)

Government Regulatory Requirements
Work on a State or Federal roadway/highway within the Village will likley
require a highway work permit(s) from New York State Department of Transportation (NYS DOT) and U.S. Federal Highway Administration (US FHWA).
Drainage improvement work may require permits from the Village Department of Public Works (DPW). Depending on the location and the specific
details of the project there is potentially a need for an Article 15 Permit from
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC),
for disturbance to any protected streams as well as potential referral to U.S.
Army Corp of Engineers (USACE) should the project result in disturbance of
federally regulated resources.

Entity with Jurisdiction
Village of Suffern, NYS DOT, US FHWA, NYS DEC, USACE

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Example of a Sub-Surface Storage
Cross-Section (Stormwater
Management Practice Operation &
Maintenance Manual)

IV – 11

Project Description
This Flood Mitigation Assessment will result in a comprehensive evaluation
of the Mahwah River Watershed in conjunction with the Ramapo River
Watershed and its contribution to flooding at the confluence of the two
rivers. This evaluation will identify mitigation goals and associated performance metrics, assess existing conditions with respect to erosion and
deposition patterns, identify local and watershed-scale stressors, understand patterns of channel evolution, and determine and diagnose rootcauses of observed problems. The assessment will use hydrologic modeling and analysis to develop a mitigation plan which will describe and locate
specific projects and preliminary cost estimates to improve resiliency and
the health of the waterway. Coordination with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) and the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC) will be paramount.

Proposed Project

Flood Mitigation Assessment – Mahwah and Ramapo River Watersheds

A full range of potential solutions to flood related problems will be investigated. Structural and nonstructural alternatives as well as combinations of
these measures will be reviewed and considered including, but not limited
to, channel and floodplain restoration or redesign, bank stabilization, instream flow modification, water storage, bridge redesign or modification,
and/or watershed restoration activities. Recommendations will include
engineering feasibility, costs, benefits, community compatibility and environmental impact. The assessment will also look at the broader effects on
neighboring communities, such as Mahwah, NJ and the Town of Ramapo,
NY.
The assessment will recommend measures that are effective, economical,
and environmentally appropriate for substantially reducing or preventing
flooding and the attendant damage to public and private property. A
detailed implementation strategy for the recommended mitigation measures will also be described, including preliminary design and cost benefit
analysis.

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 12

Mahwah River and Ramapo River Watersheds Project Area
(MJ Engineering and Land Surveying, P.C.)

Project Location
Mahwah River and Ramapo River Watersheds, including their confluence. The specific
project boundaries will be determined as part of the initial scoping of the assessment.

Proposed Project

Flood Mitigation Assessment – Mahwah and Ramapo River Watersheds (cont’d)

Estimated Cost
Costs are estimated to be $1,000,000.

Economic Benefits

Lake at Suffern Quarry, Mahwah River Watershed
(Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)

This comprehensive project seeks to understand the functioning of the Mahwah and Ramapo
Rivers. With this understanding, actions could be taken to address flooding and thus lessen
economic impacts of storm events in the watersheds. One mechanism could be minimizing
the impact of existing development or prohibiting new development in streamside and riparian buffer areas to secure the natural flood control offered by these natural features. When
natural flood control is ensured, the need for man-made infrastructure is minimized. This is
economically more cost effective than repairing damaged businesses, residences and infrastructure after flood events all of which requried repair after Hurricane Irene.

Environmental Benefits
Flooding associated with the Mahwah and Ramapo Rivers has long been a problem in the
Village and beyond. This comprehensive project will evaluate these river systems and make
recommendations on how to restore, preserve, and augment natural resources, including the
rivers themselves, Lake Antrim, and associated floodplains and wetlands located with the
watersheds. This will help to mitigate flooding and support flood resiliency thus lessening
adverse environmental impacts of storm events.

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Example of Erosion on Stream Bank along the Mahwah River
(Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)

By examining the health of the system and restoring the natural flood control provided by the
floodplains along the Mahwah and Ramapo Rivers, a balance will be restored with the watersheds, enhancing the diversity of flora and fauna located within the rivers and in riparian
buffers. Deer and other terrestrial animals use streams as water sources and for safe passage
away from exposed fields and urban developments. Birds, insects and aquatic organisms
rely on streams for food, nesting and protection. Riparian vegetation is critically important to
the organisms living within the stream. Protective measures, which will minimize development in and disruption to stream banks and corridors, will result in significant environmental
benefits throughout the ecosystem of the rivers and their associated floodplains. The project

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 13

also has the potential to stabilize the river channels which will reduce erosion
and sedimentation in the systems.

Health and Social Service Benefits
Human health benefits will be derived from healthy functioning riverine
systems in at least two ways: (1) the river/waterbody will be less likely to
flood, decreasing risk of injury, illness or death, and enabling greater access
to emergency responders; and (2) water quality will be improved.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Depending on the scale of projects to be implemented, improvements will
reduce the risk of flooding throughout the Village and watersheds with the
goal of providing long-term flood mitigation. The watershed modeling
included in this project will identify and allow for a comprehensive understanding of the critical areas affected by flooding. The knowledge gained
from this project will be invaluable, ultimately making the Village and neighboring communities significantly more resilient to flooding and severe
weather events. A long-term reduction in flooding throughout the community will decrease the need for emergency response efforts (e.g., evacuation), reduce vulnerability of public facilities and infrastructure, and lower
reconstruction and rehabilitation costs following future storm events, all of
which result in local government expenditure savings.

Floodwater damage can be devastating to a community—destroying assets,
property, and infrastructure. It is imperative for communities at risk, such as
Suffern, to implement projects that reduce the risk of floodwater damage to
important assets and to increase the resiliency and vitality of the community.
This project will evaluate and recommend the most effective and context
appropriate mitigation measures to reduce flooding and Vulnerability, thereby
reducing risk to the entire Village and its residents.
Although specific projects to be implemented are yet to be determined by
the study, it is expected the Village will experience a significant reduction in
risk through dramatically improved Vulnerability and Exposure factors.

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions
This project is the first step in understanding the options available, both
short- and long-term, for improving stormwater management and flood
control in the Village and beyond. This is estimated to be a 24-month project
that will commence upon project approval.

Government Regulatory Requirements
A comprehensive evaluation of the Ramapo and Mahwah Rivers and watersheds will not require permitting. However, implementation of potential solutions to address flooding may require a Wild, Scenic, Recreational Rivers,
Part 666 and/or additional local, State and Federal agency approvals including from the Village of Suffern Department of Public Works (DPW), Rockland
County Drainage Agency (RCDA), NYS DEC Article 15 and/or 24 permits,
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) authorization for work in
the floodplain and USACE nationwide or individual permit, depending on the
action.

Entity with Jurisdiction
Village of Suffern

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Projects will likely benefit numerous assets and systems including residential neighborhoods such as Squires Gate, infrastructure, businesses, natural
resources, and community facilities by mitigating associated flood risk. The
anticipated useful life and maintenance and operation costs of these
improvements will be determined once the assessment and specific projects are recommended for implementation. Based on this analysis, the
potential benefits of this project are believed to outweigh the financial investment of assessment and implementation.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk

Proposed Project

Flood Mitigation Assessment – Mahwah and Ramapo River Watersheds (cont’d)

IV – 14

Project Description

Project Location

The Village’s wastewater treatment plant
flooded during Hurricane Irene and other
large precipitation events. This project
proposes to protect the wastewater treatment plant and related facilities through
appropriate physical protective measures
such as installing flood doors and other
flood-proofing to help prevent water intrusion. The project will include two phases:

Wastewater Treatment Plant, at the end
(north) of Ridge Avenue as shown in the
location map

1) Conduct an engineering assessment of
the facilities to assess the opportunities
to harden against future flooding and
recommend protective measures; and
2) Implement recommendations from the
engineering assessment, as well as the
following
previously
identified
improvements:
a) the design and installation of electrical modifications, and
Wastewater Treatment Plant Project Area (MJ Engineering and Land
Surveying, P.C.)

Electrical equipment in the Village’s wastewater treatment plant has been damaged
or destroyed during past flood events
including Hurricane Irene. An electrical
switch gear and a breaker for the plant will
be replaced with new equipment that will
be relocated/elevated to safe height above
finished floor in the process building.

Estimated Cost
Costs to complete this project are estimated to be $450,000 including $20,000
for the engineering assessment; $300,000
for design and installation of the floodproof windows and doors; and $130,000
for design and construction of the electrical modifications and recommendations
of the engineering assessment.

Economic Benefits
This comprehensive project will protect
the Village of Suffern wastewater treatment plant during heavy precipitation
events. When flooding occurs, service is
interrupted which can affect businesses
and residences in the Village depending
on the severity of the damage and the
duration of inoperability. In addition, if
untreated sewage is released into the
Ramapo River, it leaves the Village subject
to fines by the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation (NYS
DEC). By evaluating what is needed to
reduce or eliminate the effects of flooding
and implementing protective measures
such as the installation of flood doors and
windows, the plant will be able to continue
to function without disruption in service

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

b) the design and installation of six flood
doors, including a garage door, three
windows and three vents.

Proposed Project

Hardening of Wastewater Treatment Plant and Facilities through Physical
Protective Measures

IV – 15

which will lessen the potential of adverse economic impacts associated with
plant shutdown, damage repair and the clean up raw sewage.

Environmental Benefits
When flooding of the wastewater treatment plant occurs, service is interrupted and the potential exists for raw and/or partially treated sewage to
spill into waterways. This will adversely affect the health of the water system
including the flora and fauna of the area and their habitats. By evaluating
what is needed to ensure continuity of operation and implementing “hardening” protective measures, the plant will be able to continue to function
without disruption and thus preclude the contamination of waterbodies and
the surrounding environment.

Health and Social Service Benefits

Using the methodology of the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) Economics and Statistics Administration (ESA) report15, the project will create an
estimated 2.5 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) construction jobs. This is based on
an assumption that approximately 80% of the total cost less the engineering
assessment ($430,000) will be construction cost ($344,000).

Proposed Project

Hardening of Wastewater Treatment Plant and Facilities through Physical
Protective Measures (cont’d)

This project will mitigate the risk to the wastewater system and infrastructure
through improved Vulnerability conditions, thereby also reducing the risk to
the Village and residents. The anticipated routine maintenance of these
improvements will be scheduled within the existing maintenance programs
within the community and are anticipated to be covered within existing or
future operating budgets without a specific cost increase required. Based on
this analysis, the potential benefits of this project are believed to outweigh
the financial investment of implementation.

Operation of the wastewater treatment plant is interrupted during flooding
events resulting in the potential contamination of surrounding surface waters
as waste bypasses the plant and enters the adjacent waterbodies. This is
dangerous for both workers at the wastewater treatment plant and nearby
residents. By evaluating what is needed to ensure continuous operation and
implementing protective measures, the plant will be able to continue to function without disruption in service which will lessen the potential of adverse
health impacts associated with plant malfunction.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Wastewater Treatment Plant Facilities (Elizabeth Matamoros, AKRF, Inc.)

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Implementation of this project is expected to increase resiliency and durability of the facility in the long-term, without any negative effects on natural
resources. A properly functioning and protected wastewater treatment
system will benefit the community by providing services essential for daily
activities while reducing the risk of damage, contamination and disease.
Savings in local government expenditures are expected because the installation of protective measures will reduce the potential for equipment to
sustain damage during flood events limiting the need for future repairs and
the replacement of damaged/destroyed equipment.

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 16

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
This project will reduce the risk of sewer overflow during storm events. By
providing properly controlled and treated sanitary sewage, the risk to public
health, residents, the community and the environment will be reduced. It can
be expected this project will reduce Vulnerability and Exposure conditions
within the Village.

Proposed Project

Hardening of Wastewater Treatment Plant and Facilities through Physical
Protective Measures (cont’d)

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions
This project is anticipated to take approximately 24 months. Once the project
is approved, the engineering assessment, facility improvement design and
construction can begin.

Government Regulatory Requirements

Flooding at the Wastewater Treatment Plant during Hurricane Irene
(Charles Sawicki)

Improvements to the wastewater treatment plant may require an approval
from the New York State and/or Rockland County Department of Health
(DOH) depending on the changes proposed for the system. According to the
NYS DEC, this project may also require an amendment to the FEMA (Federal
Emergency Management Agency) Maps, depending on the work proposed.

Entity with Jurisdiction
Village of Suffern, NYS and/or Rockland County DOH

Suffern NYRCR Plan
Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 17

Project Description
The water treatment plant and water wells flooded during Hurricane Irene and other
large precipitation events. This project proposes to protect the water treatment plant
and related facilities through appropriate physical protective measures such as installing new pumps and emergency generators to remove water from basements and
installing flood-proof doors and windows to prevent water from entering into the plant
and the well houses. This project includes two phases:

Proposed Project

Hardening of Water Treatment Plant and Facilities through
Physical Protective Measures

1) Conduct an engineering assessment of the facilities to determine opportunities to
harden against future flooding and recommend protective measures; and
2) Implement recommendations from the engineering assessment. It is anticipated
that these recommendations will address issues with the power supply and three
underground wells and include but not be limited to:
a) The design and installation of an aerial power supply, located at considerable
height above the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)’s base flood
elevation (BFE), to supply electricity to three water supply wells currently located in
the floodplain (existing power service of these water wells is buried, resulting in the
supply of electricity being interrupted during significant rainfall events);
b) The elevation of the three wells that become submerged and rendered inoperable
during significant rainfall events such as Hurricane Irene, to a minimum height of
three feet above the FEMA-designated BFE;
Water Treatment Plant Project Area (MJ Engineering and Land Surveying, P.C.)

d) The installation of one (1) flood-proof door and two (2) flood-proof windows in
Well House #1;
e) The installation of one (1) flood-proof door and two (2) flood-proof windows in
Well House #2; and
f) The installation of one (1) flood-proof door and one (1) flood-proof vent in Well
House #4.

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

c) The installation of six (6) flood-proof doors and two (2) flood-proof garage doors
in the plant; and

IV – 18

Project Location

Environmental Benefits

Water Treatment Plant, Wells and Related
Facilities, located on Pat Malone Drive.

The Village of Suffern’s water treatment
plant and water supply wells flood during
significant precipitation events. When
flooded, service is interrupted and the
potential exists for the water supply for the
Village to be contaminated by floodwaters.
By implementation of physical protective
measures that will help prevent interruptions
in operation, the Water Treatment Plant will
be able to continue to function and protect
the drinking water supply.

Estimated Cost
Costs to complete this project are estimated
to be $625,000 including $20,000 for the
engineering assessment; $90,000 for the
design and installation of aerial power
supply; $190,000 to elevate the three wells;
$75,000 for floodproof doors and windows
on the three wells houses; and $250,000 for
the floodproof doors and windows for the
plant facility.
Village of Suffern Water Treatment Plant
(Elizabeth Matamoros, AKRF, Inc.)

Economic Benefits

Health and Social Service Benefits
During Hurricane Irene and other large precipitation events, the water treatment plant
and water wells flooded forcing the Village
to shut down the system. The interruption in
service creates hardship by prohibiting
people from using their baths and kitchens
in their homes and causes business owners
hardship especially those heavily reliant
upon the supply of potable water. Potential
contamination of the wells could lead to
adverse health effects and the need to purchase boil water. Implementing these protective measures will ensure that residents
are provided with an uncontaminated water
supply thus protecting public health.

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

During Hurricane Irene and other large precipitation events, the water treatment plant
and water wells flooded interrupting service
for 23 days. During this time, the Village purchased potable water to supply to its residents and businesses. The project will
protect the water treatment plant and related
facilities through appropriate physical measures thereby ensuring that the facility
remains viable during storm events and thus
decreases potential for the Village to incur
additional costs associated with the purchase of water and repair/replacement of
failed system components. This project will
also ensure that the many restaurants in the
Village have a reliable and accessible source
of potable water.

Proposed Project

Hardening of Water Treatment Plant and Facilities through
Physical Protective Measures (cont’d)

IV – 19

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Implementation of this project is expected to increase resiliency and durability of the facility in the long-term, without any negative effects on natural
resources. Properly functioning and protected water systems will benefit the
community by providing services essential for daily activities while reducing
the risk of damage, contamination, and disease. Savings in local government expenditures are expected because the installation of protective measures will reduce the potential for equipment to sustain damage during flood
events, limiting the need for future repairs and replacement of damaged/
destroyed equipment.
Using the methodology of the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) Economics and Statistics Administration (ESA) report15, the project will create an
estimated 3.5 Full Time Equivalent (FTE) construction jobs. This is based on
an assumption that approximately 80% of the total cost less the engineering
assessment ($605,000) will be construction cost ($484,000).
This project will mitigate the risk to the water system and infrastructure
through improved Vulnerability conditions, thereby also reducing the risk to
the Village and residents. The anticipated routine maintenance of these
improvements will be scheduled within the existing maintenance programs
within the community and are anticipated to be covered within existing or
future operating budgets without a specific cost increase required. Based on
this analysis, the potential benefits of this project are believed to outweigh
the financial investment of implementation.

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions
This project is anticipated to take approximately 22 months. Once the
project is approved, design and construction can begin.

Government Regulatory Requirements
Improvements to the water supply and treatment system may require an
approval from the New York State and/or Rockland County Department of
Health. According to New York State Department of Environmental Control
(NYS DEC), this project may also require an amendment to the FEMA Maps,
depending on the work proposed.

Entity with Jurisdiction
Village of Suffern, NYS and/or Rockland County DOH, FEMA

Both the plant and wells are located within an extreme risk area identified by
the Committee and a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
high-risk flood zone. Flooding and flood-related power outages during past
storm events have rendered both the plant and wells inoperable.

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Anticipated Reduction of Risk

Risk mitigation analysis anticipates that the protective measures preliminarily identified by this project will reduce the risk of power outages and interruption in service at the three Village Water Wells off Pat Malone Drive,
resulting in lowered risk to assets due to the reduced Vulnerability and Exposure conditions of these assets to power outages, and safer site conditions
by raising the well structures and electrical supply above the base flood
elevation. By providing continuous service of clean water, the risk to public
health, residents, and the community as a whole will also be reduced. Risk
is not entirely mitigated, however, because the wells will still be located
within the floodplain of the Ramapo River (an area principally at-risk), and
access to these sites during a flood event will likely remain an issue.

Proposed Project

Hardening of Water Treatment Plant and Facilities through
Physical Protective Measures (cont’d)

IV – 20

Schematic of Flood Risk to Residences within the Floodplain (USGS)

Project Description

Project Location

Individual homeowners in Suffern who
have experienced losses and damage
due to flooding have expressed interest
in participating in a homeowner buyout
program. In support of the Village as the
potential applicant for buyout funding
and the residents who might choose to
participate in such a program, this
project will include hiring a consultant to
(1) research various buyout and relocation program opportunities available at
the State, and Federal level applicable to
Suffern residents and identify eligible
properties; and (2) administer the buyout
program including coordination of document submission from interested property owners and the preparation of
materials needed to support a grant
application(s).

Village-wide

The costs to complete this project are
estimated to be $94,000 in total. This
includes $54,000 for Items 1) and 2)
based on the buyout of 20 homes. The
cost of the project may increase if the
number of homeowners participating in
the buyout increases. The Economic
Development Study is estimated at
$40,000.

Economic Benefits
Homes that are repetitively flooded and
meet certain criteria are eligible to participate in State and Federal recovery
and buyout programs. This project will
facilitate participation in these programs.
Removing the physical structure from
harm’s way will reduce the chance of
insurance claims and loss of property.
Also, new development opportunities
identified by the economic development
study may potentially offset the loss of
tax base in the Village.

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

This project also includes conducting an
economic development study to explore
economic development opportunities
and generating an economic development plan following the homeowner
buyout program. This economic development plan will identify potential development opportunities within the Village
to offset the loss of tax revenues resulting from home acquisitions in the Village
of Suffern.

Estimated Cost

Proposed Project

Homeowner Buyout Program Support and Economic Development Plan

IV – 21

Environmental Benefits

Anticipated Reduction of Risk

If the homes are purchased and razed through funding provided from Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) through the Hazard Mitigation
Grant Program (HMGP), restrictions on future use are placed on the property
prohibiting any new development. Because no new development is allowed
on the “buyout” parcels, this project will increase the amount of land available for flood storage in the neighborhood and increase open space within
the Village. It will also eliminate the source of pollution and debris that comes
with the flooding of homes and vehicles.

This project will support and be an integral component of a buyout program
for homes located within the floodway and floodplain. The support proposed
will assist the Village, as the applicant for the buyout funds, and the residents that choose to participate, in moving their homes and possessions out
of harm’s way. As homes are taken out of the flood zones, the land on which
they were sited could be made available for stormwater storage or other
hazard mitigation measures that can be designed to help protect properties
in adjacent streets and neighborhoods, thereby increasing community
resiliency.

Health and Social Service Benefits
By participating in a homeowner buyout program, people and homes are
physically removed from at-risk areas and the possibility of physical harm by
storm-related activities is greatly reduced.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
The recommendations from the research and economic development plan
could eliminate flooding to residences by removing them from the floodway
and the floodplain. This will lead to savings in local government expenditures by reducing the level of emergency response needed during storm and
flood events. This project will also take a proactive approach to offset potential loss of tax revenues from the buyout of homes through identification of
new economic development opportunities.

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions
Within the past year, the Village completed the buyout of four homes in
Squires Gate damaged during Hurricane Irene. That effort took roughly two
years. Based on this experience, the Village estimates that the project will
require 24 months. Once the project is approved, research on available programs and preparation of the Economic Development Plan can begin.

Government Regulatory Requirements
The application will be made to the appropriate entity (e.g., the New York
State Office of Emergency Management (NYS OEM) or the HMGP) on behalf
of the residents interested in pursuing the buyout program. Review by FEMA
may be required, as work will be performed within mapped flood zones.

Entity with Jurisdiction

Suffern NYRCR Plan

The risk to homes in the buyout area will be eliminated as they are removed,
and risk to adjacent assets will decrease as parcels are returned to greenspace, aiding in flood mitigation. Based on this analysis, the potential benefits
of this project are believed to outweigh the financial investment of
implementation.

Proposed Project

Homeowner Buyout Program Support and Economic Development Plan (cont’d)

Village of Suffern, FEMA

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 22

Project Description

Health and Social Service Benefits

During storm events such as Hurricane Irene, flooded basements cause the
loss of utility connections and mechanical equipment (furnaces, hot water
heaters, electrical panels, washers/dryers, etc.). To limit these types of
losses in the future, the Village will encourage homeowners in areas susceptible to flooding (Squires Gate, Lake Antrim area, etc.) to consider raising
utility rooms and mechanicals out of the basement. It is anticipated that this
project will be laid out in three steps: (1) Village hires an architect to provide
various schematic plan options for raised utility rooms within structures or
appended to main structure of a home; (2) Homeowners that use preapproved schematic plans can fast forward through the approvals process;
and (3) Village helps identify funding sources for the retrofit of existing
homes.

Having the Village be proactive by offering schematic design and an expedited approvals process will help encourage homeowners to raise utilities
and mechanicals within their homes. This will help to alleviate the immediate
need to pump out flooded basements after storm events and will allow
emergency service providers to distribute limited pumps and resources to
locations in the community with the most immediate need. Raising utilities
and mechanicals will ensure uninterrupted heat, electricity, and water and
sewer connections, which will permit residents, including the elderly and
children, to return to their homes more quickly after a flood. It will also reduce
the number of residents who are exposed to potentially contaminated water
in their basements, as they will not need to enter that area of their home to
restore it to full operation. This project may also reduce the number of residents that are forced to leave their homes or need to be rescued on account
of the loss of utilities.

Project Location

Proposed Project

Homeowner Support for Raising Utility Connections and Mechanicals

Village-wide in areas where homes are at risk of flooding

Estimated Cost
Costs to have an architect prepare plans and the Village to identify funding
sources for upgrades are estimated to be $35,000.

Economic Benefits

A Home with Relocated Utilities (FEMA P-312)

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Providing support to homeowners to help raise utilities and mechanical
equipment offers the homeowners a proactive way of avoiding damage
within their homes. This will help limit damage and loss of property, reduce
the need to replace damaged mechanicals and utilities, and reduce the time
needed for a full recovery after storm events.

IV – 23

Cost-Benefit Analysis
This project will result in long-term resilient and sustainable benefits. By
elevating utilities and mechanical equipment in homes, there will be less
damage, demolition, material debris removal, and repair necessary after
storm events. This will lead to savings for residents and in local government
expenditures by reducing the risk of flooding to residences and the level of
needed emergency response during and after storm and flood events.

Proposed Project

Homeowner Support for Raising Utility Connections and Mechanicals (cont’d)

Residences who participate in raising utility and mechanical connections will
experience a lower flood risk through improved Vulnerability and Exposure
conditions. Maintenance costs will fall to the homeowner but will likely not
be an additional cost to existing home maintenance expenses. Based on
this analysis, the potential benefits of this project are believed to outweigh
the financial investment of implementation.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
Floodproofing assistance will reduce Vulnerability and Exposure factors and
thereby flood damage to residences in the Village.

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions
Short-term, 0 to 2 years. Once the project is approved, the architectural
design and construction can begin.

Government Regulatory Requirements
Suffern NYRCR Plan

Work on homes will require review by the Village Code Enforcement Officer
or Building Inspector.

Entity with Jurisdiction
Village of Suffern

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 24

Project Description

Economic Benefits

The Village of Suffern has no comprehensive database or map of stormwater related infrastructure. The Suffern Department of Public Works (DPW)
currently uses the Rockland County Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
database that maps only existing catch basins; no other information such as
size, date of installation, inspection, and maintenance schedules for replacement or upgrades has been documented. In addition, manhole covers, outfalls, and other connections with the conveyance system are not stored
electronically or mapped. This project will provide funding to supplement the
existing Village data within the County GIS database with information on
condition and location of critical stormwater management infrastructure,
such as manholes, culverts, detention basins, pipes and other storage,
detention, retention and conveyance systems. A vendor will be hired to
conduct the inventory and develop a monitoring system. The data will be
provided to the County for incorporation into its database. The system will
also be used to track the status of individual projects through final design,
permitting, construction, inspection, maintenance, and performance monitoring, as well as used track various funding initiatives and grant programs
to evaluate success. It is important to note that an assessment of individual
culverts/bridges as they relate to flooding was suggested by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC) as a result of
their review of this project.

This database will help better track infrastructure and maintenance/management schedules, thereby automating the process and ultimately reducing financial costs of stormwater infrastructure management and upkeep by
the DPW and the Village. Mapping manhole covers, outfalls and other components of the conveyance systems will help simplify emergency repairs to
the systems, ultimately reducing costs for emergency services and the DPW.
Appropriate inspection, maintenance and management of these systems
will reduce the frequency and costs of replacing the infrastructure. Also, as
a result of tracking maintenance, repair and replacement, businesses and
homes will be protected from economic loss due to flooding related to
improper drainage resulting from unmaintained or failed stormwater management features. Once the comprehensive database of stormwater management infrastructure is complete, the ongoing costs to update and maintain the system will be minimal.

Proposed Project

Inventory of Existing Stormwater Management Infrastructure

Project Location
Village-wide

Examples of GIS-based Inventory of Stormwater Management Infrastructure
(MJ Engineering and Land Surveying, P.C.)

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 25

Estimated Cost
Costs to inventory the existing stormwater management infrastructure are
estimated to be $225,000, including software upgrades, data collection and
analysis.

Environmental Benefits

Anticipated Reduction of Risk

A digital inventory makes scheduling easier for maintenance of stormwater
infrastructure across the Village resulting in systems functioning at a level
closer to their original designs. A properly functioning stormwater system
will reduce the volume and velocity of water discharged into the streams and
rivers resulting in a potential decrease in erosion in river beds and banks and
commensurate disruption and potential loss of habitat.

This project is anticipated to reduce risk to assets by providing a comprehensive stormwater infrastructure inventory to utilize for regular maintenance
and in emergency events.

Health and Social Service Benefits
This database will allow for improved management and maintenance of
stormwater infrastructure in the Village; help reduce flooding throughout the
Village and surrounding areas, thereby reducing the burden on emergency
services and protecting the general public from injury, including being
trapped by or caught in fast moving stormwater.

Proposed Project

Inventory of Existing Stormwater Management Infrastructure (cont’d)

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions
Short-term, 0 to 2 years for the initial inventory and ongoing updates as
necessary. Once the project is approved, the inventory and development of
a monitoring plan can begin.

Government Regulatory Requirements
Survey work on a State or Federal roadway within the Village may require a
permit from the New York State Department of Transportation (NYS DOT) or
US Federal Highway Administration (FHWA).

Cost-Benefit Analysis

Entity with Jurisdiction

This project will save time and resources when locating, assessing, maintaining and repairing infrastructure throughout the Village, thereby providing
significant cost savings. Village personnel and emergency responders will
have the resources necessary to pinpoint infrastructure problems and
address them efficiently and accurately. Post-storm damages will likely be
diminished and where repairs are warranted they could be done in a costefficient manner.

Village of Suffern, NYS DOT, US FHWA

Suffern NYRCR Plan

This project will have a very long useful life with inventory updates as needed,
likely annually. Risk to the Village’s stormwater management system and
infrastructure will be reduced through improved Vulnerability conditions. The
anticipated maintenance and performance monitoring of the inventory will
likely be a joint effort with the County’s ongoing GIS system and the Village’s
DPW. Some costs involved in obtaining GIS software updates for the Village
and training for Village staff may be required. Based on this analysis, the
potential benefits of this project are believed to outweigh the financial investment of implementation.

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 26

Project Description

Estimated Cost

The existing stormwater management and conveyance systems, and the
lack thereof in certain areas, exacerbated flooding during Hurricane Irene
along the rivers in the Village by discharging large volumes of uncontrolled
and untreated stormwater runoff directly into the already taxed surface
waters. To minimize the flow of uncontrolled stormwater in the Village during
future storm events, this project proposes to conduct a feasibility study to
determine appropriate locations to implement green infrastructure practices
and other stormwater storage systems throughout Suffern. The study will
recommend specific measures such as infiltration beds, rain barrels, green
roofs, green streets, vegetated bioswales, rain gardens, bio-retention curb
extensions, stream buffer enhancement, and porous pavement to better
manage stormwater. The focus will be on areas where stormwater runoff is
not currently being managed adequately, to reduce runoff in the Village and
to the adjacent rivers and lakes. This will include downtown areas, parks,
public parking lots (other than Lots A and B), older residential neighborhoods, and Village-owned properties. The goal of this project is to provide
storage, infiltration, and treatment of stormwater, as well as to intercept and
reduce the volume and velocity of stormwater discharge to the Mahwah and
Ramapo Rivers. Once completed, the Village will look to implement the
study’s recommendations beginning with: 50,000 SF of porous pavement,
1,000 SF of rain gardens, and 500 SF of bioretention.

The capital costs to complete this project are estimated to be $900,000 in
total. This includes $30,000 for the study; $135,000, for engineering and
design; and $735,000 for construction as follows:

Proposed Project

Village-wide Stormwater Management: Green Infrastructure and
Storage Systems Feasibility Study

50,000 SF Porous Pavement @ $12.50/SF = $625,000
1,000 SF Rain Gardens @ $75/SF = $75,000
500 SF bioretention $70/SF = $35,000

Project Location

Porous Pavement Cross-Section
(Stormwater Management Practice Operation & Maintenance Manual)

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Village-wide

IV – 27

Economic Benefits
In many cases, green infrastructure improvements are more cost effective to
install and maintain than traditional “gray” stormwater infrastructure. This
project will reduce flooding and associated storm damage to nearby businesses and homes, thereby lessening costs to repair and rebuild. In addition, green infrastructure projects provide both direct and indirect energyrelated benefits. By increasing urban green spaces, heating and cooling
demands, and energy consumption are decreased, which, in turn, decreases
the amount of money households, businesses, and local government spend
on energy. Subsurface storage also has the potential to lessen the impacts
of stormwater runoff on downstream residences, businesses and infrastructure, thereby reducing the cost to repair and time to recover and improve
business retention in the Village.

Environmental Benefits
Using natural hydrologic features to manage stormwater results in significant environmental benefits. Preserving and reclaiming open space, requiring the planting of native (non-invasive) species, maximizing the use of pervious surfaces, and installing rain gardens and bioswales, all improve overall
water quality, while protecting existing and reintroducing lost habitats. This
project will reduce flooding and associated storm damage and lessen
erosion, and sedimentation which degrade water quality.

Utilizing the green infrastructure practices of porous pavement, rain gardens,
and bioretention will result in environmental benefits, such as reduced
erosion and runoff rates, as well as higher quality stormwater discharge.
With proper design, green infrastructure can provide more benefits at lesser
costs than single-purpose gray infrastructure. Local government will realize
a reduction in reconstruction and rehabilitation costs following storm events
because public facilities and infrastructure will be less vulnerable.

Proposed Project

Village-wide Stormwater Management: Green Infrastructure and
Storage Systems Feasibility Study (cont’d)

Risk to adjacent assets such as homes, businesses, roadways, and infrastructure will be mitigated as a result of this project. The existing stormwater
system will also experience a reduction in risk through less runoff entering
the system. The useful life of the pervious pavement will be over a period of
15 to 20 years. The anticipated maintenance of the pervious pavement
includes biannual vacuum sweeping to maintain infiltration rates and is estimated to be $1,000 per year. Based on this analysis, the potential benefits
of this project are believed to outweigh the financial investment of
implementation.
Using the methodology of the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) Economics and Statistics Administration (ESA) report15, the $735,000 for construction of the project will create an estimated 5.3 Full Time Equivalent
(FTE) construction jobs.

Health and Social Service Benefits

Cost-Benefit Analysis
This project will reduce the risk of flooding in areas of the Village identified in
the feasibility study by providing long-term, sustainable flood mitigation.
Example of Schematic Design of a Rain Garden (NYS DEC Stormwater Design Manual)

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Green infrastructure improvements reduce discharge of pollutants to receiving waters which contributes to improved water quality and overall health and
well-being of the population. Increased vegetation will improve air quality
which will benefit overall health. Additionally, increased green space inspires
people to walk and exercise benefiting both physical and mental well-being.

IV – 28

Anticipated Reduction of Risk

Entity with Jurisdiction

Stormwater management and green infrastructure have the ability to
decrease the extent and severity of localized flash flooding throughout the
Village while reducing the risk to drainage systems and adjacent land from
erosion and flooding. The project will also reduce the risk of flood damage
to assets, property, and infrastructure by controlling the flow of excess
stormwater with strategically-placed green infrastructure that has a high
saturation and retention capacity. The use of subsurface storage systems
will increase the volume of stormwater runoff captured and stored for release
after the storm event. Vulnerability conditions to adjacent assets and the
stormwater infrastructure system will be improved.

Village of Suffern and possibly NYS DEC

Proposed Project

Village-wide Stormwater Management: Green Infrastructure and
Storage Systems Feasibility Study (cont’d)

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions
Mid-term, 2 to 5 years. Once the project is approved, the feasibility study
can begin, followed by the siting, design and finally construction/installation
of the stormwater management practices.

Government Regulatory Requirements
This project will require review by the Village Department of Public Works
(DPW) and may require Village permits. A New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYS DEC) stormwater general permit may be
required depending on the amount of land disturbance required to implement this project.

Suffern NYRCR Plan
Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 29

Project Description
This project will reduce stormwater runoff and associated flooding by assessing the
feasibility of the installation of underground stormwater systems with controlled flow
orifices and/or green infrastructure practices at Village parking lots A and B. Parking
Lot A is on the west side of the intersection of Wayne Avenue and Orange Avenue
and is approximately 50,000 square feet. Parking Lot B is located on the east side of
Chestnut Avenue, north of Lafayette Avenue (New York State (NYS) Route 59) and is
approximately 80,000 square feet. Green infrastructure measures such as porous
pavement, vegetated swales and rain gardens will be evaluated along with the potential for an underground storage system. This project will include two phases:

Featured Project

Stormwater Management Facilities in Village Parking Lots A and B

1) An engineering feasibility analysis; and
2) Design and Implementation of recommended stormwater management facilities.

Project Location
Village Parking Lots A and B. Parking Lot A is on the west side of the intersection of
Wayne Avenue (US Route 202) and Orange Avenue (US Route 202/NYS Route 59).
Parking Lot B is located on the east side of Chestnut Avenue, north of Lafayette
Avenue (NYS Route 59).
Lot A and Lot B Project Area (MJ Engineering and Land Surveying, P.C.)

Estimated Cost
Costs to complete this project are estimated to be $1,920,000 in total. This includes
$25,000 for the study, $270,000, for engineering and design, and $1,625,000 for
construction as follows:

Portions of Village Parking Lots A and B experience flooding during storm events.
Runoff from these lots also contributes to downstream flooding. This project will
reduce flooding by capturing, storing, and infiltrating stormwater in Lots A and B by
installing underground storage and green infrastructure measures. These measures
will significantly reduce damage to vehicles parked in these lots and will provide

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Lot A 50,000 SF Porous Pavement @ $12.50/SF = $625,000

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 30

Lot B 80,000 SF Porous Pavement @ $12.50/SF = $1,000,000

Economic Benefits

much needed flood storage capacity to alleviate flooding in this area and downstream. By
reducing flooding in this area, patrons wanting
to access the adjacent downtown business
district will be less affected.

Environmental Benefits

Parking Lot B (Elizabeth Matamoros, AKRF, Inc.)

This project will reduce flooding by capturing
and storing stormwater by way of underground
storage and green infrastructure measures,
including porous pavement and bioswales.
Runoff from flash flood events will be better
managed through storage and processing
using green infrastructure. Water volume and
velocity in the receiving waters will be reduced,
limiting erosion and sedimentation, which can
damage habitats along the Ramapo and
Mahwah Rivers. This will attenuate the impacts
of flash flooding.

Health and Social Service Benefits
Green infrastructure improvements reduce
discharge of pollutants to receiving waters
which contributes to overall health and well
being of the population. No longer subject to
flooding, these parking lots will also be able to
be used as vehicle, equipment, and personnel
staging areas in case of an emergency.
Parking Lot A (Elizabeth Matamoros, AKRF, Inc.)

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Implementation of the project will reduce the
risk of flooding in Parking Lots A and B as well

Using the methodology of the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) Economics and
Statistics Administration (ESA) report15, the
$1,625,000 for construction of the project will
create an estimated 11.6 construction jobs.
Risk to adjacent assets, such as homes, businesses, roadways, and infrastructure, will be
mitigated as a result of this project. The existing stormwater system will also experience a
reduction in risk through less runoff entering
the system. The useful life of the pervious
pavement will be over a period of 15-20 years.
The anticipated maintenance of the parking
lots includes biannual vacuum sweeping to
maintain infiltration rates and is estimated to
be $1,500-$2,000 per year. Based on this
analysis, the potential benefits of this project
are believed to outweigh the financial investment of implementation.

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Additional environmental benefits are derived
from an improvement in the quality of the
runoff from the parking lots.

as adjacent areas by providing long-term and
sustainable flood mitigation. With proper
design, green infrastructure can provide more
benefits at lesser costs than single-purpose
gray infrastructure. Utilizing porous pavement
(a green infrastructure practice) will result in
environmental benefits, such as reduced
erosion and runoff rates as well as higher
quality stormwater discharge. Economic benefits will be realized through more efficient
emergency vehicle response efforts and
reduced vulnerability to public facilities and
infrastructure, thereby reducing local government reconstruction and rehabilitation costs
following storm events.

Featured Project

Stormwater Management Facilities in Village Parking Lots A and B (cont’d)

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 31

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
Green infrastructure and subsurface storage systems have the
ability to decrease the extent and severity of localized flash
flooding in the Village while reducing the risk of damage to drainage systems from being overwhelmed or washed away and to
adjacent land from erosion and flooding. The project will also
reduce the risk of flood damage to assets, property, and infrastructure by controlling the flow of excess runoff. Vulnerability
conditions to adjacent assets and the stormwater infrastructure
system will be improved.

Featured Project

Stormwater Management Facilities in Village Parking Lots A and B (cont’d)

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions
Short-term, 0 to 2 years. Once the project is approved, the engineering assessment, design and construction can begin.

Government Regulatory Requirements
This project will require review by the Village Department of
Public Works (DPW) and may require a Village permit. A New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYS
DEC) stormwater general permit may be required depending on
the amount of land disturbance required to implement this
project.

Entity with Jurisdiction

Cross-Section of Storm Detention System (AKRF, Inc)

Section IV: Project Profiles

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Village of Suffern and possibly NYS DEC

IV – 32

Project Description
The Village is working to acquire the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) facility located at 16
Ramapo Avenue in the West Ward neighborhood. The building will act as a storm
response and short-term shelter, cooling center and reception area for Village residents.
Residents in the West Ward neighborhood are vulnerable to isolation when access roads
are inundated by flood waters. During Hurricane Irene, residents were not able to access
the existing shelter at the Suffern Community Center. Providing an accessible shelter and
appropriate community services to West Ward residents during storms is critical due to
this neighborhood’s susceptibility to isolation from the rest of the Village during flood
events. This project will fund the design services for and the installation of a permanent
generator, associated fuel storage tank, and related upgrades to the electrical system.

Featured Project

VFW Building Emergency Power and Electrical Upgrades

Project Location
Veterans of Foreign Wars Building, 16 Ramapo Avenue, Suffern, NY

Estimated Cost
Costs to complete this project are estimated to be $180,000 in total including $30,000 for
engineering and design and $150,000 for electrical upgrades, purchase, and installation
of the emergency power generator and fuel storage.

Economic Benefits
VFW Facility Project Area
(MJ Engineering and Land Surveying, P.C.)

This project serves an area generally isolated from the rest of the Village during flood
events. This project will allow the Village to offer a reception area to these residents who
otherwise are cutoff from access to the Suffern Community Center, currently the main

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Providing a reception area within the West Ward will allow residents to access a power
source to recharge phones, laptops, tablets, etc. thereby helping residents resume work
more quickly. In a society that depends on these tools to for everyday live, without power
they are rendered useless. A small business could continue to maintain operations and/
or communicate with their customers and a large corporation could stay connected with
their employees to let them know when it is safe to return to work. By providing shelter
during storm events residents will have the ability to resume various aspects of everyday
life thereby helping them reintegrate into the workplace more quickly and efficiently.

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 33

Health and Social Service Benefits

emergency shelter in the Village. The improvements proposed will serve an
area that is isolated from the rest of the Village by flood waters. In addition,
residents needing assistance with medications and those with electrical
medical equipment will have a place to receive assistance and access to
electricity.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
The community’s storm response capabilities will be enhanced through
conversion of the VFW into an emergency storm shelter, as it will provide a
reception areas to residents who lack power in their homes and ensure their
safety. The benefits of having a generator and fuel storage outweigh the
costs of not having power which is vital during an emergency. The emergency power generator will also improve the resiliency of the electrical distribution system, enabling it to properly function as an emergency operations facility and shelter. Maintaining electrical power in an emergency
shelter that serves a vulnerable neighborhood will benefit flood victims in
need of refuge until the floodwaters recede.
Using the methodology of the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) Economics and Statistics Administration (ESA) report15, the $150,000 for construction of the project will create an estimated 1.1 Full Time Equivalent
(FTE) construction jobs.

Anticipated Reduction of Risk
This project will reduce risks to the community, including socially vulnerable
populations and an at-risk neighborhood, by providing uninterrupted emergency shelter, services, and power. The Vulnerability conditions of the Village’s residents will be improved.

Featured Project

VFW Building Emergency Power and Electrical Upgrades (cont’d)

General Timeframe for Implementing Actions
This is anticipated to be a short-term project, which will take approximately
22 months. Once the project is approved, design of the electrical system
and installation of the generator and fuel storage can begin.

Government Regulatory Requirements
The Village Code Enforcement Office and Building Inspector will need to
review the proposed improvements to the building. This project may require
VIllage permits. No State or Federal permits will be necessary to implement
this project.

Entity with Jurisdiction
Village of Suffern

Suffern NYRCR Plan

Risk to Village residents, the emergency shelter, and the electrical system
will be mitigated as a result of this project through improved Vulnerability
conditions. The generators have a useful life of 10 to 20 years. The anticipated routine maintenance of these improvements will be scheduled within
the existing maintenance programs within the community and are anticipated to be covered within existing or future operating budgets without a
specific cost increase required. Based on this analysis, the potential benefits
of this project are believed to outweigh the financial investment of
implementation.

VFW Building (Elizabeth Matamoros, AKRF, Inc.)

Section IV: Project Profiles

IV – 34

2014
NY RISING COMMUNITY
RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
SUFFERN NYRCR

Section V

Additional Materials

V

Additional Materials

A. Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Throughout the NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Planning process, the NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee) developed the Additional Resiliency Recommendations listed in Table V-1. These recommendations were developed as projects and actions that the Committee would like to highlight but are not categorized as
Proposed Projects or Featured Projects. Additional Resiliency Recommendations are not ranked or prioritized, and
they are presented in no particular order of importance.

Table V-1 Additional Resiliency Recommendations
Strategy

Assist residents with
preparation for,
response to, and
recovery from future
storm events through
emergency
communication,
outreach, and
education initiatives

Project Name

Short Description

Estimated
Cost

Comprehensive
Village-wide
Education and
Outreach Program
for Storm
Preparation,
Preparedness, and
Recovery

Develop a comprehensive Village-wide education and
outreach program for storm preparation, response and
recovery. The project involves a series of outreach
mechanisms including proactive homeowner and
business registration for event communications,
education, and outreach on storm preparedness and
evacuation protocols, and Emergency Preparedness
Community Meetings to be held annually by the
Village.

$20,000

N

Emergency
Communications
Systems Upgrades

Upgrade the Village’s NIXLE system to notify residents
and businesses during Village-wide emergencies.
Update the Village’s Emergency Operations Plan to
comply with the National Incident Management
System (NIMS).

< $50,000

N

Flood Hazard
Signage

Purchase and install signage in commuter lots
(including Lots A, B, F, and Lake Antrim/Memorial Pool
parking) to warn about flooding risk to cars and help
educate residents and commuters about the risks of
flooding in the area.

< $50,000

N

Village CERT Team

Develop a Community Emergency Response Team
(CERT) to educate people about disaster
preparedness and train citizen volunteers to assist
their community when professional responders are not
immediately available to help. The CERT is an initiative
sponsored by the Federal Emergency Management
Administration.

< $50,000

N

Volunteer Storm
Assistance Program

Develop and maintain a volunteer roster to help
homeowners and businesses that may need
assistance in moving valuable resources out of harm's
way before predicted storms move into the region and
update the Village's Emergency Operations Plan.

< $50,000

N

Section V: Additional Materials

Regional
(Y/N)

V–1

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-1 Additional Resiliency Recommendations (cont’d)
Strategy

Project Name

Short Description

Estimated
Cost

Broaden services at
existing storm shelter
facilities to more fully
cover basic needs and
accommodate pets,
and investigate new
shelter opportunities

Shelter/Reception
Area Equipment
and Supplies

Develop emergency kits, purchase materials to
accommodate pets, and install kitchen equipment,
where needed, at shelters in the Village.

< $50,000

N

Collaborate with
municipal neighbors in
New York and New
Jersey to manage
watershed
development and
control flooding

Intermunicipal
Organization for the
Management of the
Mahwah River
Watershed.

Establish a Mahwah River Watershed Management
Group that will collectively address development
pressures, stormwater runoff issues and flood control
mitigation projects at a watershed (regional) scale.
Coordination with the Rockland-Bergen Bi-state River
Commission will be part of the group’s tasks.

< $50,000

Y

Promote resilience and
flood management
practices through
land-use planning,
policy, and regulation

Flood Protection
and Increased
Resiliency through
Zoning Code and
Ordinances

Conduct a diagnostic review of the existing Village
zoning code and other ordinances and provide
recommendations to maximize flood protection and
stormwater management, promote green
infrastructure practices and protect surface water
resources and flood plains. Assess the potential for
revisions to further protect surface water resources
and floodplains in the code.

< $50,000

N

Repair, protect, and
improve resiliency of
critical infrastructure
and transportation
assets such as water
and wastewater
systems, utilities,
roads, culverts, and
bridges

Flood Protection
Equipment for
Village Facilities

Research options and purchase portable flood barrier
walls for protection of Village facilities.

$50,000
- $500,000

N

Maintenance of
Lake Antrim,
Mahwah and
Ramapo Rivers

Coordinate between the Village, County, and State to
develop an environmentally sensitive program to (1)
clear the channels of the Mahwah and Ramapo Rivers
by removing debris and detritus from their bed and
banks as well as from the shores of Lake Antrim; (2)
develop a program for the ongoing maintenance of
these the rivers.

$1,000,000
+

Y

Lake Antrim
Restoration and
Improvements

Restore Lake Antrim by designing and installing
improvements to the surrounding bank and floodplain.

$50,000
- $500,000

N

Restore, preserve, and
augment natural
resources, including
floodplains, streams,
rivers, lakes and
wetlands, to help
mitigate flooding and
support flood resiliency

V–2

Section V: Additional Materials

Regional
(Y/N)

S U FFE R N N Y R IS IN G Community Reconstruction Plan

B. Master Table of Projects

Proposed Projects are proposed for funding through a Community’s
allotment of CDBG-DR funding.

Table V-2 presents all projects developed by the Suffern NYRCR Planning
Committee throughout the planning process. This comprehensive list
includes Proposed Projects, Featured Projects, and Additional Resiliency
Recommendations. Projects are listed by Reconstruction and Resiliency
Strategy. Projects are not ranked or prioritized, and they are presented in
no particular order of importance.

Featured Projects are innovative projects where an initial study or discrete first phase of the project is proposed for CDBG-DR funding or
other identified funding; and regulatory reforms and other programs that
do not involve capital expenditures.
Additional Resiliency Recommendations are resiliency projects and
actions the Committee would like to highlight and are not categorized
as Proposed or Featured Projects.

Table V-2 Master Project Table
Strategy

Assist residents with preparation for, response to, and
recovery from future storm
events through emergency
communication, outreach, and
education initiatives

Project Name

Short Description

Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Comprehensive
Village-wide Education
and Outreach Program
for Storm Preparation,
Preparedness, and
Recovery

Develop a comprehensive Village-wide education and
outreach program for storm preparation, response and
recovery. The project involves a series of outreach
mechanisms including proactive homeowner and
business registration for event communications,
education, and outreach on storm preparedness and
evacuation protocols, and Emergency Preparedness
Community Meetings to be held annually by the Village.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$20,000

N

Emergency Communications Systems
Upgrades

Upgrade the Village’s NIXLE system to notify residents
and businesses during Village-wide emergencies.
Update the Village’s Emergency Operations Plan to
comply with the National Incident Management System
(NIMS).

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

< $50,000

N

Flood Hazard Signage

Purchase and install signage in commuter lots (including
Lots A, B, F, and Lake Antrim/Memorial Pool parking) to
warn about flooding risk to cars and help educate
residents and commuters about the risks of flooding in
the area.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

< $50,000

N

Section V: Additional Materials

Regional
(Y/N)

V–3

S U FFE R N N Y R IS IN G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy

Assist residents with preparation for, response to, and
recovery from future storm
events through emergency
communication, outreach, and
education initiatives (cont'd)

Broaden services at existing
storm shelter facilities to more
fully cover basic needs and
accommodate pets,
investigate new shelter
opportunities

Collaborate with municipal
neighbors in New York and
New Jersey to manage
watershed development and
control flooding

Project Name

Short Description

Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Regional
(Y/N)

Village CERT Team

Develop a Community Emergency Response Team
(CERT) to educate people about disaster preparedness
and train citizen volunteers to assist their community
when professional responders are not immediately
available to help. The CERT is an initiative sponsored
by the Federal Emergency Management
Administration.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

< $50,000

N

Volunteer Storm
Assistance Program

Develop and maintain a volunteer roster to help
homeowners and businesses that may need assistance
in moving valuable resources out of harm’s way before
predicted storms move into the region and update the
Village’s Emergency Operations Plan.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

< $50,000

N

N

VFW Building
Emergency Power and
Electrical Upgrades

Retrofit the VFW facility to develop it as a Storm
Response Shelter by upgrading the electrical system
and installing back up power and fuel storage.

Featured Project

Costs to complete this
project are estimated to
be $180,000 in total
including $30,000 for
engineering and design
and $150,000 for
electrical upgrades,
purchase, and installation
of the emergency power
generator and fuel
storage.

Shelter/Reception Area
Equipment and
Supplies

Develop emergency kits, purchase materials to
accommodate pets, and install kitchen equipment,
where needed, at shelters in the Village.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

< $50,000

N

Intermunicipal
Organization for the
Management of the
Mahwah River
Watershed.

Establish a Mahwah River Watershed Management
Group that will collectively address development
pressures, stormwater runoff issues and flood control
mitigation projects at a watershed (regional) scale.
Coordination with the Rockland-Bergen Bi-state River
Commission will be part of the group’s tasks.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

< $50,000

Y

Section V: Additional Materials

V–4

S U FFE R N N Y R IS IN G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy

Develop storm assistance
programs and provide
consolidated information on
financial initiatives that allow
residents and businesses to
better protect themselves and
their assets from future storm
damage

Improve stormwater
management and drainage
systems throughout the Village
to improve resiliency

Project Name

Short Description

Homeowner Buyout
Program Support and
Economic
Development Plan

Provide support to the Village to explore various
buyout and relocation program opportunities, identify
eligible properties, and administer the buyout program,
and prepare an economic development plan to offset
reduction in tax revenues resulting from a buyout.

Homeowner Support
for Raising Utility
Connections and
Mechanicals

Encourage homeowners in areas susceptible to
flooding to move utility and mechanicals from
basements to upper floors. Hire an architect to develop
schematic plan options for raised utility rooms,
facilitate the use of preapproved plans through the
approval process for homeowners and help identify
funding sources for the retrofit of existing homes.

Inventory of Existing
Stormwater
Management
Infrastructure

Supplement the existing data within the County GIS
database with information on condition and location of
critical stormwater infrastructure.

Village-wide
Stormwater
Management: Green
Infrastructure and
Storage Systems
Feasibility Study

Conduct a feasibility study to determine appropriate
locations to implement green infrastructure practices
and stormwater storage systems throughout Suffern.

Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Proposed Project

Costs are estimated to be
$94,000 including
$54,000 for the buyout
program support and
$40,000 for the Economic
Development Study.

N

Proposed Project

Costs to have an
architect prepare plans
are estimated to be
$35,000.

N

Proposed Project

Costs are estimated to be
$225,000, including
software upgrades, data
collection, and analysis.

N

Proposed Project

Costs to complete this
project are estimated to
be $900,000 including
$30,000 for the study;
$135,000, for engineering
and design; and $735,000
for construction of porous
pavement and rain
gardens.

N

Section V: Additional Materials

Regional
(Y/N)

V–5

S U FFE R N N Y R IS IN G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy

Improve stormwater
management and drainage
systems throughout the Village
to improve resiliency (cont’d)

Promote resilience and flood
management practices through
land-use planning, policy, and
regulation

Repair, protect, and improve
resiliency of critical
infrastructure and
transportation assets such as
water and wastewater
systems, utilities, roads,
culverts, and bridges

Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Stormwater
Management Facilities
in Village Parking Lots
A and B

Assess the feasibility of the installation of
underground stormwater storage systems
with controlled flow orifices at Village
Parking Lots A and B. Evaluate Green
infrastructure elements to further improve
stormwater management in the parking
lots.

Featured Project

Costs to complete this project are
estimated to be $1,920,000 in total
including $25,000 for the study;
$270,000 for engineering and design;
and $1,625,000 for construction of
porous pavement.

N

Flood Protection and
Increased Resiliency
through Zoning Code
and Ordinances

Conduct a diagnostic review of the
existing Village zoning code and other
ordinances and provide
recommendations to maximize flood
protection and stormwater management,
promote green infrastructure practices,
and protect surface water resources and
flood plains. Assess the potential for
revisions to further protect surface water
resources and floodplains in the code.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

< $50,000

N

Backup Power for
Critical Community
Facilities

Provide permanent emergency power
generators at the DPW Garage to
maintain operation of the fuel pumps and
at the South Street Pump Station to allow
for uninterrupted service of the facility.

Proposed Project

Costs are estimated to be $125,000
including $90,000 to purchase and
install a generator at the DPW Garage
and $35,000 to replace and elevate the
generator at the South Street Pump
Station.

N

Emergency Railroad
Crossing into the West
Ward

Provide access to the West Ward by way
of an at-grade Emergency Railroad
Crossing over the NJ Transit Commuter
Rail Line.

Proposed Project

Costs to design and construct this
project are estimated at $250,000.

N

Project Name

Short Description

Section V: Additional Materials

Regional
(Y/N)

V–6

S U FFE R N N Y R IS IN G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy

Repair, protect, and improve
resiliency of critical
infrastructure and
transportation assets such as
water and wastewater
systems, utilities, roads,
culverts, and bridges (cont’d)

Project Name

Short Description

Drainage
Improvements to
Transportation Assets

Install drainage improvements at the Chestnut
Street underpass, along Orange Ave and along US
Route 202 to better protect these transportation
assets and to ensure that emergency services have
access to these areas.

Hardening of
Wastewater Treatment
Plant and Facilities
through Physical
Protective Measures

Protect the wastewater treatment plant and related
facilities through installing appropriate physical
protective measures such as flood doors, windows
and vents and installing new electrical equipment at
a higher location within the plant.

Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Proposed Project

Costs are estimated to be
$1,500,000 including
$700,000 for the Chestnut
Street underpass; $750,000
for Orange Avenue; and
$50,000 for the US Route
202 feasibility study.

N

Proposed Project

Costs to complete this
project are estimated to be
$450,000 including $20,000
for the engineering
assessment; $300,000 for
design and installation of the
floodproof windows and
doors; and $130,000 for
design and construction of
the electrical modifications
and recommendations of the
engineering assessment.

N

N

N

Hardening of Water
Treatment Plant and
Facilities through
Physical Protective
Measures

Protect the water treatment plant and related
facilities, including wells, by installing appropriate
physical protective measures such as new pumps
and emergency generators, floodproof doors,
windows and vents in the plant and well houses.
Install aerial electric service to the well and raise the
well heads above the FEMA BFE.

Proposed Project

Costs to complete this
project are estimated to be
$625,000 including $20,000
for the engineering
assessment; $90,000 for the
design and installation of
aerial power supply;
$190,000 to elevate the three
wells; and $325,000 for
design and installation of
floodproof doors and
windows.

Flood Protection
Equipment for Village
Facilities

Research options and purchase portable flood
barrier walls for protection of Village facilities.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$50,000 - $500,000

Section V: Additional Materials

Regional
(Y/N)

V–7

S U FFE R N N Y R IS IN G Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-2 Master Project Table (cont’d)
Strategy

Restore, preserve, and augment
natural resources, including
floodplains, streams, rivers,
lakes and wetlands, to help
mitigate flooding and support
flood resiliency

Project Name

Short Description

Project
Category

Estimated Cost

Flood Mitigation
Assessment – Mahwah
River and Ramapo
River

Conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the Mahwah
River Watershed in conjunction with the Ramapo
River Watershed to identify mitigation goals and
associated performance metrics, assess existing
conditions with respect to erosion and deposition
patterns, identify local and watershed-scale stressors, understand patterns of channel evolution, and
make recommendations regarding flood mitigation.

Proposed Project

Costs are estimated to be
$1,000,000.

Y

Maintenance of Lake
Antrim, Mahwah and
Ramapo Rivers

Coordinate between the Village, County, and State to
develop an environmentally sensitive program to (1)
clear the channels of the Mahwah and Ramapo
Rivers by removing debris and detritus from their bed
and banks as well as from the shores of Lake Antrim;
(2) develop a program for the ongoing maintenance
of these the rivers.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$1,000,000 +

Y

Lake Antrim Restoration
and Improvements

Restore Lake Antrim by designing and installing
improvements to the surrounding bank and floodplain.

Additional
Resiliency
Recommendation

$50,000 - $500,000

N

Section V: Additional Materials

Regional
(Y/N)

V–8

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

C. Public Engagement Process
The goal of the public engagement process of the
NYRCR Program was to involve a representative
cross-section of the public and garner input from
community members, stakeholders, and local governments and agencies, to advance the key components
of the Suffern NYRCR Plan. A broad public engagement outreach process was developed as an essential
component of the NYRCR Program for the Village.
The public and stakeholder engagement process
incorporated a range of techniques to involve as many
of the Village’s residents in the shaping of their NYRCR
Plan as were willing to participate. Public Engagement
Events provided an opportunity for the community to
learn about the NYRCR Planning process and to
provide input that informed the final elements of the
NYRCR Plan. Opportunities for the public to hear
about and provide their thoughts included 10 biweekly
Planning Committee Meetings, to which the public
was invited, and four Public Engagement Events at
which public input on all aspects of the NYRCR Plan
was directly solicited. Details of meetings and events,
as well as materials produced for them, were posted
on the NYRCR Program website (www.stormrecovery.
ny.gov/nyrcr).
A list of the meetings and events held throughout the
Suffern NYRCR Planning process is presented in
Table V-3.

Suffern NYRCR Planning Committee
The Suffern NYRCR Planning Committee (Committee)
initially was composed of eight voting members (it
finished with seven) representing past and present
public sector employees (fire department, department
of public works) and residents from the Village, some
of whom have experienced repetitive loss due to
flooding. Two non-voting members, the mayor, and
the deputy mayor of the Village, were invited and participated in the process.
The Committee met approximately every other week
at the George J. Parness Suffern Community Center

from late June 2014 through December 2014. In
advance of each meeting, the Committee received a
reminder email, an agenda with explanatory information, worksheets, and summary notes from previous
meetings. The notice for the meeting was also provided by Constant Contact directly to attendees of all
previous meetings. Each Planning Committee Meeting
was also advertised on the Village’s and State’s
NYRCR websites.
Committee meetings generally involved a presentation that summarized progress made since the previous meeting and an outline of the goals for the current
meeting. This was followed by a work session on
specific NYRCR Program tasks during which members
provided input on every aspect of the NYRCR Plan.
Tasks included: providing a description of storm
damage; formulating a vision; identifying goals and
objectives; creating a list of community assets and
associated map; compiling and developing a list of
Needs and Opportunities; formulating strategies; and
developing specific projects and actions. Work sessions typically took the form of group conversations,
with key points and decisions recorded in meeting
summaries.
Speakers were invited to address the Committee to
educate them on the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) Community Development
Block Grant–Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) Program
and the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP).
The Committee also participated in a joint meeting
with the Town of Clarkstown NYRCR Planning Committee in Clarkstown to learn about green infrastructure practices and how they could be utilized. In addition, Committee Members and the public heard from
the engineer who designed a siphon project on the
Mahwah River that would utilize a closed quarry for
flood water storage during storm events. For years
this project has been seen as a way to alleviate, if not
eliminate, flooding in the Squires Gate neighborhood
and beyond. The presentation allowed all in attendance to better understand the project, its benefits,

Section V: Additional Materials

V–9

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

costs and limitations. This information was used by
the Committee in developing their list of projects.
Summaries and PowerPoint presentations for all
Committee Meetings were made available in a timely
fashion on the NYRCR website at www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcr.

Planning Committee Meeting 1 – June 30, 2014
(Flaam Hardy, AKRF, Inc.)

residents, business owners, and stakeholders of each
Public Engagement Event used a variety of formats
including; a stakeholder email list which was updated
after each Planning Committee Meeting and Public
Engagement Event; posting of press releases on the
Village website; distribution of a tri-fold brochure to
public places (Village Library, Village Hall, Police
Station, public schools) around the Village; flyers, and
posters hung and handed out throughout the community; display of information regarding the NYRCR
Program at Suffern Day; notices sent home with
school children; and direct outreach through phone
calls, social media and email by the Committee
Members to their contacts and neighbors in the
Village. Details of all events were also posted on the
NYRCR Program website at www.stormrecovery.
ny.gov/nyrcr/meetings. This multi-pronged outreach
approach brought a cross-section of interested individuals to each of the meetings.
All Public Engagement Events were held at the George
J. Parness Suffern Community Center at 41 Washington Avenue in the Village.

Public Engagement Event 1 (July 22, 2014)
At Public Engagement Event 1 citizens learned about
the NYRCR Program, its funding source, the planning
process, the program schedule and milestones, as
well as what had been accomplished by the Planning
Committee to date. The presentation also included
information on how to get involved outside of the
Public Engagement Events.

Suffern NYRCR Planning Committee – November 6, 2014
(Arch Street Communications)

Public Engagement Events
Four Public Engagement Events were held at key
milestones during the six month planning process.
Interested residents, public and private agencies,
community organizations, and local businesses were
invited to participate in and attended these events.
The outreach campaign developed to inform

V – 10

Section V: Additional Materials

Attendees were encouraged to visit each of the three
breakout stations to learn more about the NYRCR
Program and to provide input on the Committeedeveloped vision statement and asset inventory, as
well as critical issues and storm damage. Maps of
Suffern with critical assets identified by the Committee were displayed around the event space. Residents
were informed about the mapping process and
encouraged to add information directly to maps. The
public provided comments by filling out the handouts
at each station, drawing on the maps, and sticking

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Post-its to the boards with their thoughts and comments. The Consultant Team, Planning Committee,
and Governor’s Office of Storm Recovery (GOSR) and
NYS Department of State (NYS DOS) representatives
discussed the process, the information presented,
and other related storm and resiliency issues with
members of the public at each of the stations. Participants were also encouraged to capture the essence of
Suffern in one word via a “photo booth.” General
information on the NYRCR Program and how to stay
involved was provided at the welcome table.

Station #3 – Asset Inventory: The public was encouraged to view the Suffern asset map and to provide
further clarification on identified assets and to provide
information on additional assets. Attendees were also
asked to assess the community value of each of the
assets listed.
Station #4 – Photo Booth: A photo booth was set up
where attendees could answer one of the questions
listed below on a white board and have their photograph taken holding the board. This provided a visual
representation of the community values and vision for
the future.
— One word that describes Suffern…
— My Vision for Suffern is…
— What does “Building Back Better” mean to you?

Public Engagement Event 1 – July 22, 2014
(Arch Street Communications)

Details related to the break-out stations are as follows:
Station #1 – Vision Statement: The public was asked
to fill out a worksheet to provide comments on the
vision statement and list of goals for the NYRCR planning process to ensure that the community’s values
and vision for the future are accurately portrayed.
Station #2 – Storm Damage & Critical Issues:
Members of the public were invited to provide input
on the list of critical issues and areas susceptible to
storm damage and flooding already developed by the
Committee. They were asked to describe how the
storms affected them, their families, and their
neighbors.

“One Word that describes Suffern… Charming/Elegant” - Trustee
Frank Hagen at the Photo Booth at Public Engagement Event 1
– July 22, 2014 (Arch Street Communications)

Input received at this event was compiled by the Planning Firm and used by the Committee to revise their
Vision and Goals, the list of Critical Issues, description
of Storm Damage, and the Asset Inventory.

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 11

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

— One word that describes Suffern…
— What are Suffern’s Greatest Needs?
— My vision for Suffern is…
General information on the NYRCR Program and how
to stay involved was provided at the welcome table.

Asset Inventory Mapping at Public Engagement Event 1 –
July 22, 2014 (Elizabeth Matamoros, AKRF, Inc.)

Input received at this event was used by the Planning
Committee to revise their needs, opportunities, and
strategies. Public feedback solicited at this event
established the baseline for identifying and developing resiliency projects.

Public Engagement Event 2
(September 19, 2014)
As with Public Engagement Event 1, citizens learned
about the NYRCR program, its funding source, the
planning process and, the program schedule and
milestones, as well as what had been accomplished
by the Committee to date. The six FEMA Recovery
Support Functions (RSFs)— Community and Capacity
Building, Economic Development, Health and Social
Services, Housing, Infrastructure Systems, and
Natural and Cultural Resources—were outlined and
explained. The presentation concluded with a description of the difference between a critical issue, need,
opportunity, strategy, and potential project.
Members of the public then gathered at a breakout
station to learn more about these important aspects
of the NYRCR planning process and to express their
thoughts on materials drafted by the Committee.
Attendees provided input by filling out handouts and
engaging in round table discussion about each of the
critical issues, needs, opportunities, strategies and
potential projects assigned to the six RSFs. On their
way in or out of the event, attendees were encouraged
to stop by the “Photo Booth” where they could answer
one of the questions listed below on a white board,
and have their photograph taken.

V – 12

Section V: Additional Materials

Public Engagement Event 2 – September 19, 2014
(Arch Street Communications)

Suffern Day 2014 (September 22, 2014)
The Village of Suffern holds an annual community
celebration, Suffern Day, featuring samplings of free
food from local restaurants, drink, music, entertainment, inflatables, hay rides, and an emergency services vehicle display. The day concludes with a fireworks display. Committee Members set up display
boards and a table from which they handed out materials about the NYRCR Program, answered questions,
provided information on upcoming meetings, and
gathered names and contact information from the
public. All were encouraged to participate in an
upcoming meeting or provide their thoughts by way of
the NYRCR Program website.

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Richard P. Connor Elementary School Parent
Teacher Association Meeting
(November 5, 2014)
One Committee Member gave a presentation on the
NYRCR Program, planning process, and timeline to
the PTA of the Richard P. Conner Elementary School.
Tri-fold brochures were handed out at this meeting
and all in attendance were encouraged to participate
in Public Engagement Event 3 to be held the following
night.

Public Engagement Event 3
(November 6, 2014)

Example of Project Poster at Public Engagement Event 3 –
November 6, 2014

Attendees Discuss Projects at Public Engagement Event 3 –
November 6, 2014

Public Engagement Event 3 – November 6, 2014
(Arch Street Communications)

Public Engagement Event 3 was advertised using
many of the same outlets and approaches utilized for
Public Engagement Events 1 and 2. The primary focus
of Public Engagement Event 3 was to solicit community input on projects, programs and actions developed by the Committee. The format for this event
included a brief presentation about the NYRCR

Program, after which meeting attendees were provided a “passport” that detailed project information
and provided space for comments. Attendees were
encouraged to circulate throughout the room and view
posters and maps, upon which information on the
Proposed and Featured Projects as well as the Additional Resiliency Recommendations was displayed.
Meeting attendees filled out the “passports” indicating their thoughts and concerns regarding Committeedeveloped projects, and providing suggestions on
other projects to be considered in the NYRCR
Program. The passport also provided respondents the
opportunity to indicate their level of support (high or
low) for each of the 23 projects.

Public Engagement Event 4 (January 2015)
The fourth and final Public Engagement Event will be
held on January 14, 2015 to present the final NYRCR
Plan to the Suffern Community.

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 13

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Additional Outreach Efforts
The Suffern NYRCR Planning Committee worked to
develop many opportunities for community participation and public engagement, an important piece of the
planning process.
The Consultant Team developed a tri-fold brochure
that provided an overview of the NYRCR process.
Committee Members left these brochures throughout
the community in key locations, including Village Hall,
the Suffern Free Library, and local businesses. They
were also handed out at Suffern Day and a PTA
meeting. These brochures provided general information on the NYRCR Program, the Committee, program
progress, contact information for the GOSR and links
to the NYRCR Program website. The brochures were
also distributed at the three Public Engagement
Events.
In order to involve Suffern’s diverse community in the
planning process, flyers were developed for the Public
Engagement Events in both Spanish and English.
Committee Members, Village representatives, and the
Consultant Team posted and handed out hard-copies
of the flyers throughout the Village to encourage participation by all populations. The Spanish language
materials were developed and distributed to invite an
important, but traditionally underrepresented sector,
of the community to participate. The Consultant Team
also provided flyers to the School District in order to
reach the Community’s youth as well as a more diverse
range of parents. Age-appropriate worksheets were
prepared for younger attendees at the Public Engagement Events to promote youth engagement in the
NYRCR planning process.
The use of a wide variety of public engagement
methods helped solidify the community outreach
process for the NYRCR Plan and allowed residents to
share their opinions through many different methods.

V – 14

Section V: Additional Materials

Tri-fold Brochure for Public
Engagement (AKRF, Inc.)

Online Survey
To reach a wider audience of Suffern residents, the
Committee and Consultant Team prepared an online
survey to gauge community support for projects
developed throughout the NYRCR planning process.
This enabled residents otherwise unable to attend
community meetings to provide valuable feedback.
The survey listed the projects developed by the
Suffern NYRCR Planning Committee and asked
survey participants to express their preference for
each project by selecting “high” or “low,” thereby
gauging community support for each project. A
comment box was also provided next to each project.
The survey was distributed via email to the NYRCR
email list, posted on the Suffern NYRCR webpage,
distributed via handout at the Public Engagement
Event 3 and available to the public on the Village
website from November 3, 2014 to November 24,
2014. The survey responses were combined with the
feedback gathered at the third Public Engagement
Event on November 6, 2014.
This successful public outreach method enabled the
Planning Committee to incorporate the perspectives
of residents in Suffern who may not have been able to
attend Public Engagement Events.

S U FFE R N N Y RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

D. Community Asset Inventory
Table V-4 Community Asset Inventory
Asset Information
Asset Name

Address

Asset Class

Landscape Attributes

Asset Subcategory

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Risk Area

Lack of
Occupied
Defensive
Elevation
<= 2 ft.
Flood
Below BFE
above
Protection
BFE
Measures

Risk Assessment

At
Confluence
of Two or
More
Streams

Flood Risk
from Storm
Water

Lack of
Vegetated
Stream
Bank Buffer

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Exposure Vulnerability
Score
Score

Risk
Score

Abby Park

Abby Park, Suffern, NY 10901

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

High

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

All Souls Church

81 Washington Ave, Suffern,
NY 10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

No

Medium

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Apartments on South St

1-7 South St, Suffern, NY
10901

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Avon Research &
Development

1 Avon Place, Suffern, NY
10901

Economic

Large Business

No

No

Low

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Berkley Square
Apartments & Rockledge
Townhomes

Berkley Cir, Suffern, NY 10901

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Boulevard Street Bridge
Over Mahwah River

Boulevard Rd, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

High

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

2.5

1

7.5

Brooklands Park

7 Brooklands Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Low

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Catherine Ave access to
West Ward

Catherine Ave, Mahwah, NJ
07430

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

Medium

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Chestnut St Underpass
to West Ward

Chestnut Street, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

No

No

No

No

Yes

1

3

3

3

27

Christ Episcopal Church

65 Washington Ave, Suffern,
NY 10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

Yes

Yes,
FEMA

Medium

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Donna Hallett Park

Lonergan Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

No

No

Low

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

DPW Garage

Ridge Ave, Suffern, NY 10901

Health and Social
Services

Public Works Facilities

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

Extreme

Yes

No

No

No

No

Yes

1

3

3

3

27

Esther Gitlow Towers

200 Lafayette Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Housing

Senior Housing

Yes

Yes,
FEMA

High

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

George J. Parness
Suffern Community
Center (Shelter)

41 Washington Ave, Suffern,
NY 10901

Health and Social
Services

Emergency Operations/
Response

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Good Samaritan Hospital
of Suffern

255 Lafayette Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Health and Social
Services

Primary/Regional
Hospitals

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Grasskeeper
Landscaping, Inc

212 Orange Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Economic

Small Business

No

No

Low

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

High Voltage Electrical
Transmission Tower

Off Rockledge Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Power Supply

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4

2

24

High Voltage Electrical
Transmission Towers

Between Brook Ave and I-87
on-ramp

Infrastructure
Systems

Power Supply

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

1

13.5

*Assets in Extreme and High Risk Areas were advanced through the Risk Assessment Process and had Landscape Attributes analyzed to produce Risk Scores. Assets within Moderate and Low Risk Areas were not evaluated by the Risk Assessment.

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 15

S UFFERN NY RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-4 Community Asset Inventory (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name

Address

Asset Class

Asset Subcategory

Horton Memorial Field &
Toddler Park

50 Memorial Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

I-87 Bridge Over Mahwah
River

I-87, Suffern, NY 10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Lafayette Ave Businesses
(Malandra's, Ole-Ole,
Suffern Food Mart)

Lafayette Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Economic

Small Business

Lake Antrim Pump
Station

Route 202, Suffern, NY 10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

Lot A (Park & Ride)

Orange Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Lot D (Park & Ride)

Rt 59, Suffern, NY 10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Lot F (Park & Ride)

Pat Malone Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Masjid Iqra Darul Ehsan

6 Suffern Pl, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

Montebello Road Bridge
over Mahwah River

Montebello Rd, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

N. Ramapo Ave access
to West Ward

N Ramapo Ave, Mahwah, NJ
07430

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Novartis Pharmaceuticals
Parking and Storage

25 Old Mill Rd, Suffern, NY
10901

Economic

Industrial, Warehousing
and Manufacturing

Orange and Rockland
Gas Facility

Brook Ave, Suffern, NY 10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Power Supply

Orange Ave / Rt. 59
Thruway Underpass

Orange Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Orange Ave Commercial
Corridor

Orange Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Economic

Small Business

Post Office

15 Chestnut St, Suffern, NY
10901

Health and Social
Services

Government and
Administrative Services

Rail Bridge over Mahwah
River

Mahwah River, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Ramapo Valley Rd
Underpass to West Ward

Ramapo Valley Rd, Mahwah,
NJ 07430

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Ramapough Cirque
Townhomes

Ramapough Cirque Blvd,
Suffern, NY 10901

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

Richard P Connor
Elementary School

17 Dunham Ln, Suffern, NY
10901

Health and Social
Services

Schools

Rockland ARC Visions

19 Yorkshire Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Housing

Affordable Housing

Landscape Attributes
Lack of
Occupied
Defensive
Elevation
<= 2 ft.
Flood
Below BFE
above
Protection
BFE
Measures

Risk Assessment

At
Confluence
of Two or
More
Streams

Flood Risk
from Storm
Water

Lack of
Vegetated
Stream
Bank Buffer

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

3

40.5

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

1.5

3

2.5

1

7.5

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

1.5

3

13.5

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

3

40.5

Medium

Extreme

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

2.5

3

22.5

No

Medium

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

1.5

2

9

No

No

Medium

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

No

No

Medium

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

No

No

Low

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

3

3

4

5

60

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

2

24

No

No

Low

Moderate

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

0

3

0.5

0

0

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

No

No

Medium

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

1.5

2

9

No

No

Low

Moderate

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

0

3

0.5

0

0

No

No

Low

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

No

No

Medium

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

2.5

1

7.5

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

2

24

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

3

31.5

Yes

Yes,
FEMA

Medium

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Yes

Yes,
FEMA

High

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Risk Area

No

No

Low

Extreme

Yes

Yes

No

No

High

High

Yes

No

No

Low

High

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

No

No

No

*Assets in Extreme and High Risk Areas were advanced through the Risk Assessment Process and had Landscape Attributes analyzed to produce Risk Scores. Assets within Moderate and Low Risk Areas were not evaluated by the Risk Assessment.

V – 16

Section V: Additional Materials

Exposure Vulnerability
Score
Score

Risk
Score

S U FFE R N N Y RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-4 Community Asset Inventory (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name

Address

Asset Class

Asset Subcategory

Rockland County YMCA
Dance & Activity Center

91 Washington Ave, Suffern,
NY 10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Community Centers

Rockland Terrace
Multi-Tenant Commercial
Building

2 South St, Suffern, NY 10901

Economic

Small Business

Ross Towers

198 Lafayette Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Housing

Affordable Housing

Route 59 Bridge Over
Mahwah River

Route 59, Suffern, NY 10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Sacred Heart Church

60 Washington Ave, Suffern,
NY 10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

Sacred Heart School

60 Washington Ave, Suffern,
NY 10901

Health and Social
Services

Schools

Salvation Army College
for Officer Training

201 Lafayette Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Health and Social
Services

Higher Education
Institutions

Shamrock Hotel

86 Orange Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Economic

Small Business

Single-Family Homes
- Brook St and Highland
Ave

5-11 Brook St & 3-7 Highland
Ave , Suffern, NY 10901

Housing

Single-Family Residence

Single-Family Homes
- South St and Rockland
Ter

23-33 Rockland Ter, Suffern,
NY 10901

Housing

Single-Family Residence

Single-Family Homes
- Wayne Ave

103-107 Wayne Ave, Suffern,
NY 10901

Housing

Single-Family Residence

Single-Family Homes
near Lake Antrim

1-8 Utopian Ave and Memorial
Dr, Suffern, NY 10901

Housing

Single-Family Residence

South Street Wastewater
Pump Station

South Street, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

Squires Gate

Lonergan Dr & Temple Ln,
Suffern, NY 10901

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

St. Mary's Indian
Orthodox Church of
Rockland

66 E Maple Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

Stone Hill Quarry

Stone Hill Quarry, Suffern, NY
10901

Economic

Industrial, Warehousing
and Manufacturing

Suffern Baseball
Complex

Ramapo Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

Suffern Free Library

210 Lafayette Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Libraries

Suffern Hook & Ladder
Company No 1

143 Lafayette Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Health and Social
Services

Emergency Operations/
Response

Landscape Attributes
Lack of
Occupied
Defensive
Elevation
<= 2 ft.
Flood
Below BFE
above
Protection
BFE
Measures

Risk Assessment

At
Confluence
of Two or
More
Streams

Flood Risk
from Storm
Water

Lack of
Vegetated
Stream
Bank Buffer

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

2

27

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

High

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

3

3

27

Medium

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Yes,
FEMA

Medium

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

No

No

High

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

No

No

Low

High

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

0.5

3

1.5

3

13.5

No

No

High

High

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

3

4

36

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

No

No

High

Moderate

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

0

3

0.5

0

0

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

5

52.5

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

2.5

3

4.5

4

54

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

5

60

No

No

Medium

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

No

No

Low

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

No

No

Low

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

No

No

Low

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Risk Area

Yes

Yes,
FEMA

Low

N/A

N/A

N/A

No

No

Low

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes,
FEMA

High

N/A

No

No

High

No

No

Yes

Exposure Vulnerability
Score
Score

Risk
Score

*Assets in Extreme and High Risk Areas were advanced through the Risk Assessment Process and had Landscape Attributes analyzed to produce Risk Scores. Assets within Moderate and Low Risk Areas were not evaluated by the Risk Assessment.

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 17

S UFFERN NY RISING Community Reconstruction Plan

Table V-4 Community Asset Inventory (cont’d)
Asset Information
Asset Name

Address

Asset Class

Asset Subcategory

Landscape Attributes
Lack of
Occupied
Defensive
Elevation
<= 2 ft.
Flood
Below BFE
above
Protection
BFE
Measures

Risk Assessment

At
Confluence
of Two or
More
Streams

Flood Risk
from Storm
Water

Lack of
Vegetated
Stream
Bank Buffer

Landscape
Attribute
Score

Hazard
Score

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

0

3

0.5

0

0

Socially
Vulnerable
Populations

Critical
Facility

Community
Value

Risk Area

No

No

Low

Extreme

Yes

Yes

No

No

High

Moderate

N/A

Exposure Vulnerability
Score
Score

Risk
Score

Suffern Memorial Pool

1 Memorial Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Parks and Recreation

Suffern Commuter Rail
Station

96 W Park Pl, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

Suffern Railroad Museum

Orange Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Museums, Performing
Arts Centers, Stadiums

No

No

Low

Moderate

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

0

3

0.5

0

0

Suffern United Methodist
Church

18 Parkside Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

No

Medium

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Suffern VFW

16 Ramapo Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Community Centers

No

No

Low

Moderate

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

0

3

0.5

0

0

Suffern Village Hall and
Police

61 Washington Ave, Suffern,
NY 10901

Health and Social
Services

Emergency Operations/
Response

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Suffern Volunteer Hose
Co No 1

35 Washington Ave, Suffern,
NY 10901

Health and Social
Services

Emergency Operations/
Response

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Tagaste Monastery

220 Lafayette Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Natural and Cultural
Resources

Cultural or Religious
Establishments

No

No

Medium

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Tender Loving Care

40 Park Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Health and Social
Services

Daycare and Eldercare

Yes

Yes,
FEMA

Low

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

The Knolls of Ramapo

Pawnee Ct, Suffern, NY 10901

Housing

Multi-Family Residence

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

4

42

Vacant Industrial
Buildings (former
Rainbow Vacuum)

1 Ramapo Ave, Suffern, NY
10901

Economic

Industrial, Warehousing
and Manufacturing

No

No

Low

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

Venture Group Home

13 Willow Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Housing

Supportive Housing

Yes

Yes,
FEMA

High

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Village Water Wells (3) off
Pat Malone Drive

Pat Malone Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

2

3

4

4

48

Wastewater Treatment
Plant

Ridge Ave, Suffern, NY 10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Wastewater

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

2

3

4

5

60

Water Treatment Plant

Pat Malone Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Water Supply

No

Yes,
FEMA

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

1.5

3

3.5

4

42

Wayne Ave / Rt. 202
(floodprone area near
Rockledge Dr)

Wayne Ave, Suffern, NY 10901

Infrastructure
Systems

Transportation

No

No

High

Extreme

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

2

3

4

3

36

West Ward Residential
Area (access issue only)

Maltbie Ave and Meadow Ave,
Suffern, NY 10901

Housing

Single-Family Residence

No

No

High

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

YMCA - Y's Beginnings

18 Parkside Dr, Suffern, NY
10901

Health and Social
Services

Daycare and Eldercare

Yes

Yes,
FEMA

Low

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

*Assets in Extreme and High Risk Areas were advanced through the Risk Assessment Process and had Landscape Attributes analyzed to produce Risk Scores. Assets within Moderate and Low Risk Areas were not evaluated by the Risk Assessment.

V – 18

Section V: Additional Materials

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

E. Endnotes
Photo Credits
Cover Page:
Welcome to Village of Suffern
(Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)

Dividers:
Section I

Section V
Mahwah River by Lonergan Drive
(Flaam Hardy, AKRF, Inc.)
Damaged Household Items for Trash (Blas Gonzalez)
Road to Quarry (Flaam Hardy, AKRF, Inc.)
Beth Barone (Arch Street Communications)
Frank Hagen (Arch Street Communications)
Robert Waiter (Arch Street Communications)

Flooding in Squires Gate (Blas Gonzalez)

Methodology

Planning Committee Meeting
(Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)

Cost-Benefit Analysis Full Time Equivalent
(FTE) Job Projections

Suffern Utilities Flooded (Charles Sawicki)
Flooded Ball Field (Robert Kawasaki)

Section II
Flooding in Residential Street (Alex Co)
Suffern Planning Committee
(Arch Street Communications)
Mahwah River (Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)
Wastewater Treatment Plant Flooding
(Charles Sawicki)

Section III
Lake Antrim (Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)
Public Engagement Event 1
(Arch Street Communications)
Flooding in Squires Gate (Blas Gonzalez)
Wastewater Treatment Plant Flooding
(Charles Sawicki)

Section IV
Flooded Ball Fields (Charles Sawicki)
Planning Committee Meeting 1
(Flaam Hardy, AKRF, Inc.)
Flooding on Wayne Avenue (Robert Kawasaki)
Mahwah River by Squires Gate Park
(Chris Robbins, AKRF, Inc.)

Backup Power for Critical Community Facilities
According to the U.S. Department of Commerce
(DOC) Economics and Statistics Administration (ESA)
report, Economic Impact of Hurricane Sandy Potential
Economic Activity Potentially Lost and Gained in New
Jersey and New York15,the estimated job creation from
recovery spending on infrastructure projects in New
York reported 7.15 construction jobs per $1,000,000
in construction spending . Using this methodology the
project will create an estimated 0.9 FTE construction
jobs. This is based on an assumption that approximately 80% of the total cost ($125,000) will be construction cost ($100,000).
Emergency Railroad Crossing into the West Ward
Using the methodology from the U.S. DOC ESA
report15, the project will create an estimated 1.8 FTE
construction jobs. This is based on an assumption
that approximately 80% of the total cost ($250,000)
will be construction cost ($200,000).
Drainage Improvements to Transportation Assets
Using the methodology from the U.S. DOC ESA
report15, the project will create an estimated 8.3 FTE
construction jobs. This is based on an assumption
that approximately 80% of the cost for the Chestnut
St. and Orange Ave. projects ($1,450,000) will be construction cost ($1,160,000).

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 19

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

Flood Mitigation Assessment – Mahwah River and
Ramapo River

Homeowner Support for Raising Utility
Connections and Mechanicals

N/A

N/A

Hardening of Wastewater Treatment Plant and
Facilities through Physical Protective Measures

Inventory of Existing Stormwater Management
Infrastructure

Using the methodology from the U.S. DOC ESA
report15, the project will create an estimated 2.5 FTE
construction jobs. This is based on an assumption
that approximately 80% of the total cost less the engineering assessment ($430,000) will be construction
cost ($344,000).

N/A

Hardening of Water Treatment Plant and Facilities
through Physical Protective Measures
Using the methodology from the U.S. DOC ESA
report15, the project will create an estimated 3.5 FTE
construction jobs. This is based on an assumption
that approximately 80% of the total cost less the engineering assessment ($605,000) will be construction
cost ($484,000).
Homeowner Buyout Program Support and
Economic Development Plan
N/A

V – 20

Section V: Additional Materials

Village-wide Stormwater Management: Green
Infrastructure and Storage Systems Feasibility
Study
Using the methodology from the U.S. DOC ESA
report15, the $735,000 for construction of the project
will create an estimated 5.3 FTE construction jobs.
Stormwater Management Facilities in Village
Parking Lots A and B
Using the methodology from the U.S. DOC ESA
report15, the $1,625,000 for construction of the project
will create an estimated 11.6 FTE construction jobs.
VFW Building Emergency Power and Electrical
Upgrades
Using the methodology from the U.S. DOC ESA
report15, the $150,000 for construction of the project
will create an estimated 1.1 FTE construction jobs.

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

Sources
1.

“A Guide for Suffern Business Owners.” Small Business Guide. (n. d.): Suffern Village. Web. 29 July 2014.
<http://www.suffernvillage.com/forms/small_business_guide.pdf>

2.

“Suffern Railroad Museum.” (n.d.): Suffern Village. Web. 30 July 2014. <http://www.suffernvillage.com/
forms/SUFFERN%20RAILROAD%20MUSEUM%20INFO.pdf>.

3.

Buncher, Ryan. “Closing Suffern Novartis Plant To Impact Rockland County.” Pearl River, New York Patch.
New York Patch, 22 Jan. 2014. Web. 12 Dec. 2014. < http://patch.com/new-york/pearlriver/
closing-suffern-novartis-plant-to-impact-rockland-county_515f5de4>.

4.

United States Census Bureau / American FactFinder. “DP05 ACS Demographic and Housing Estimates:
Suffern village.” 2008 – 2012 American Community Survey. U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community
Survey Office, 2012. Web. 12 November 2014 <http://factfinder2.census.gov>.

5.

Frassinelli, Mike. “More NJ Transit Rail Lines to Resume Monday, 2 Weeks after Sandy.” NJ.com. The Star
Ledger, 10 Nov. 2012. Web. 30 July 2014. <http://www.nj.com/news/index.ssf/2012/11/
more_nj_transit_rail_lines_to.html>.

6.

“Suffern Still Suffers From Irene, One Year Later - CBS New York.” CBS New York. N.p., 28 Aug. 2012. Web.
30 July 2014. <http://newyork.cbslocal.com/2012/08/28/suffern-still-suffers-from-irene-one-year-later/>.

7.

Matsuda, A. “Irene Damaged Homes in Suffern to be Taken Down.” Retrieved June 27, 2014, from The
Journal News: lohud: 1 Dec. 2013. Web. 30 July 2014. <http://www.lohud.com/story/news/local/rockland/2013/12/01/irene-damaged-homes-in-suffern-to-be-taken-down/3799635/>

8.

Baird, Bob. “Irene May Drive out Longtime Suffern Business.” The Journal News. N.p., 31 Aug. 2011. Web.
30 July 2014. <http://archive.lohud.com/article/20110831/NEWS03/108310346/
Irene-may-drive-out-longtime-Suffern-business>.

9.

New York State Energy Research and Development Authority. Cleaner Greener Communities Program.
Mid-Hudson Regional Sustainability Plan. By Mid-Hudson Planning Consortium. Ecology and Environment
Inc., May 2013. Web. 9 Dec. 2014.

10. Mid-Hudson Regional Economic Development Council. Mid-Hudson Region Economic Development
Council Strategic Plan. Governor Andrew Cuomo, Nov. 2011. Web. 9 Dec. 2014.
11. Rockland County. Rockland County Technical Advisory Committee. Rockland Tomorrow: Rockland County
Comprehensive Plan. Rockland County Executive and County Legislature, 1 Mar. 2011. Web. 9 Dec. 2014.
12. Rockland County Office of Fire and Emergency Services. Rockland County Multi-Jurisdictional Natural
Hazard Mitigation Plan. Rockland County, Oct. 2010. Web. 9 Dec. 2014.

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 21

S UFFERN NY RISI NG Community Reconstruction Plan

13. Department of Homeland Security. “Recovery Support Functions.” Federal Emergency Management
Agency, 24 July 2014. Web 12 Nov. 2014. <http://www.fema.gov/recovery-support-functions>.
14. Mid-Hudson Regional Economic Development Council. Accelerating Growth, Spearheading Success 2014
Progress Report. 2014. Web. 10 Dec 2014. http://regionalcouncils.ny.gov/themes/nyopenrc/rc-files/midhudson/MHREDC-2014PRa.pdf
15. U.S. Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics Administration Office of the Chief Economist.
Economic Impact of Hurricane Sandy Potential Economic Activity Potentially Lost and Gained in New
Jersey and New York, September 2013.

V – 22

Section V: Additional Materials

SU FFER N N Y R I SI N G Community Reconstruction Plan

F. Glossary
BFE

Base Flood Elevation

CBA

Cost-Benefit Analysis

CDBG-DR

Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery

DOH

Department of Health

DPW

Department of Public Works

EOC

Emergency Operations Center

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency

FTE

Full Time Equivalent

GIS

Geographic Information Systems

HMGP

Hazard Mitigation Grant Program

HUD

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

NDRF

National Disaster Recovery Framework

NFIP

National Flood Insurance Program

NIMS

National Incident Management System

NJT

New Jersey Transit

NYRCR

New York Rising Community Reconstruction

NYS

New York State

NYS DEC

New York State Department of Environmental Conservation

NYS DOS

New York State Department of State

NYS DOT

New York State Department of Transportation

NYS OEM

New York State Office of Emergency Management

O&R

Orange & Rockland Utilities Inc.

RCDA

Rockland County Drainage Agency

RSF

Recovery Support Function

USACE

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

US FWHA

U.S. Federal Highway Administration

VFW

Veterans of Foreign Wars

Section V: Additional Materials

V – 23

