Lower Manhattan

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Plan
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Members of the Lower Manhattan NYRCR
Planning Committee

Daniel Ackerman (Co-Chair)
Catherine McVay Hughes (Co-Chair)
Wellington Chen

Betty Cohen

Hope Cohen

George Cominskie

Kerri Culhane

Robin Forst

Timur Galen

David Gruber

Tessa Huxley

Robert Keating

Michael Levine

Gigi Li

Sam Miller

Marco Pasanella

Damaris Reyes

The Committee would also like to acknowledge
the several Community members who actively
participated in the majority of Committee
meetings and Public Engagement Events. Thank
you for your passion and dedication. Our plan—
and our community—are better because of your
thoughtful contributions.

This document was developed by the NY Rising
Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Lower
Manhattan Planning Committee as part of the
NYRCR Program within the Governor’s Office
of Storm Recovery. The NYRCR Program is
supported by New York State (NYS) Homes and
Community Renewal, NYS Department of State,
and NYS Department of Transportation.

The document was prepared by the following
consulting firms:

e HR8&A Advisors

e Parsons Brinckerhoff

¢ Cooper, Robertson & Partners

e Mathews Nielsen Landscape Architects
e VJ Associates

* OpenPlans

e Hammes Company

e Johnson & Asberry

Cover Photos: Lower Manhattan (front). South Street
Seaport (back). Sources: Flickr user Kevin H. (front);
Flickr user James Willamore (back). Both licensed under
Creative Commons.

All photos taken by Consultant Team unless
otherwise noted.
Foreword

Introduction

In the span of approximately one year,
beginning in August 2011, the State of New
York experienced three extreme weather
events. Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee,
and Superstorm Sandy wreaked havoc on the
lives of New Yorkers and their communities.
These tragic disasters signaled that New Yorkers
are living in a new reality defined by rising sea
levels and extreme weather events that will occur
with increased frequency and power. They also
signaled that we need to rebuild our communities
in a way that will mitigate against future risks and
build increased resilience.

To meet these pressing needs, Governor
Andrew M. Cuomo led the charge to develop an
innovative, community-driven planning program
on a scale unprecedented and with resources
unparalleled. The NY _ Rising Community
Reconstruction (NYRCR) Program empowers
the State’s most impacted communities with the
technical expertise needed to develop thorough
and implementable reconstruction plans to build
physically, socially, and economically resilient
and sustainable communities.'

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Program overview

The NYRCR Program, announced by Governor
Cuomo in April of 2013, is a more than $650
million planning and implementation process
established to provide rebuilding and resiliency
assistance to communities severely damaged
by Hurricane Irene, Tropical Storm Lee, and
Superstorm Sandy. Drawing on lessons learned
from past recovery efforts, the NYRCR Program
is a unique combination of bottom-up community
participation and  State-provided technical
expertise. This powerful combination recognizes
not only that community members are best
positioned to assess the needs and opportunities
of the places where they live and work, but also
that decisions are best made when they are
grounded in rigorous analysis and informed by
the latest innovative solutions.

One hundred and two storm-affected localities
across the State were originally designated to
participate in the NYRCR Program. The State
has allocated each locality between $3 million
and $25 million to implement eligible projects
identified in the NYRCR Plan. The funding for
these projects is provided through the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) Community Development Block Grant -
Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) program.

Forty-five NYRCR Communities, each comprising
one or more of the 102 localities, were created and
led by a NYRCR Planning Committee composed
of local residents, business owners, and civic
leaders. Member s of the Planning Committees
were identified in consultation with established
local leaders, community organizations, and
in some cases municipalities. The NYRCR
Program sets a new standard for community
participation in recovery and resiliency planning,
with community members leading the planning
process. Across the State, more than 500 New
Yorkers represent their communities by serving
on Planning Committees. More than 400 Planning
Committee Meetings have been held, during
which Planning Committee members worked
with the State’s NYRCR Program team to develop
community reconstruction plans and _ identify
opportunities to make their communities more
resilient. All meetings were open to the public.
An additional 125-plus Public Engagement
Events attracted thousands of community
members, who provided feedback on the NYRCR
planning process and proposals. The NYRCR
Program’s outreach has included communities
that are traditionally underrepresented, such as
immigrant populations and students. All planning
materials are posted on the NYRCR Program’s
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

website (www.stormrecovery.ny.gov/nyrcn),
providing several ways for community members
and the public to submit feedback on materials
in progress.

Throughout the planning process, Planning
Committees were supported by staff from
the Governors Office of Storm Recovery
(GOSR), planners from New York State (NYS)
Department of State (DOS) and NYS Department
of Transportation (DOT), and consultants from
world-class planning firms that specialize in
engineering, flood mitigation solutions, green
infrastructure, and more.

With the January 2014 announcement of the
NYRCR Program’s expansion to include 22 new
localities, the program comprises over 2.7 million
New Yorkers and covers nearly 6,500 square
miles, which is equivalent to 14% of the overall
State population and 12% of the State’s overall

geography.

The NYRCR Program does not end with this
NYRCR Plan. Governor Cuomo has allocated
over $650 million of funding to the program for
implementing projects identified in the NYRCR
Plans. NYRCR Communities are also eligible for
additional funds through the program’s NY Rising
to the Top Competition, which evaluates NYRCR
Communities across eight categories, including

best use of technology in the planning process,
best approach to resilient economic growth,
and best use of green infrastructure to bolster
resilience. The winning NYRCR Community in
each category will be allocated an additional $3
million of implementation funding. The NYRCR
Program is also working with both private and
public institutions to identify existing funding
sources and create new funding opportunities
where none existed before.

TheNYRCR Program has successfully coordinated
with State and Federal agencies to help guide
the development of feasible projects. The
program has leveraged the Regional Economic
Development Council’s State Agency Review
Teams (SARTs), comprised of representatives
from dozens of State agencies and authorities,
for feedback on projects proposed by NYRCR
Communities. The SARTs review projects with
an eye toward regulatory and permitting needs,
policy objectives, and preexisting agency funding
sources. The NYRCR Program is continuing to
work with the SARTs to streamline the permitting
process and ensure shovels are in the ground as
quickly as possible.

On the pages that follow, you will see the results
of months of thoughtful, diligent work by NYRCR
Planning Committees, passionately committed to
realizing brighter, more resilient futures for their

communities.
The NYRCR Plan

This NYRCR Plan is an important step toward
rebuilding a more resilient community. Each
NYRCR Planning Committee began the planning
process by defining the scope of its planning
area, assessing storm damage, and identifying
critical issues. Next, the Planning Committee
inventoried critical assets in the community
and assessed the assets’ exposure to risk. On
the basis of this work, the Planning Committee
described recovery and resiliency needs and
identified opportunities. The Planning Committee
then developed a series of comprehensive
reconstruction and resiliency strategies, and
identified projects and implementation actions to
help fulfill those strategies.

The projects and actions set forth in this NYRCR
Plan are divided into three categories. The order
in which the projects and actions are listed in
this NYRCR Plan does not necessarily indicate
the NYRCR Community’s prioritization of these
projects and actions. Proposed Projects are
projects proposed for funding through a NYRCR
Community’s allocation of CDBG-DR funding.
Featured Projects are projects and actions that the
Planning Committee has identified as important
resiliency recommendations and has analyzed in
depth, but has not proposed for funding through
the NYRCR Program. Additional Resiliency
Recommendations are projects and actions that
the Planning Committee would like to highlight
and that are not categorized as Proposed Projects
or Featured Projects. The Proposed Projects and
Featured Projects found in this NYRCR Plan were
voted for inclusion by official voting members of
the Planning Committee. Those voting members
with conflicts of interest recused themselves from
voting on any affected projects, as required by the
NYRCR Ethics Handbook and Code of Conduct.

The NYRCR Lower Manhattan Community
is eligible for up to $25 million in CDBG-DR
implementation funds.

While developing projects for inclusion in this
NYRCR Plan, Planning Committees took into
account cost estimates, cost-benefit analyses,
the effectiveness of each project in reducing
risk to populations and critical assets, feasibility,
and community support. Planning Committees
also considered the potential likelihood that a
project or action would be eligible for CDBG-DR
funding. Projects and actions implemented with
this source of Federal funding must fall into a
Federally-designated eligible activity category,
fulfill a national objective (meeting an urgent
need, removing slums and blight, or benefiting
low to moderate income individuals), and have

NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

a tie to the natural disaster to which the funding
is linked. These are among the factors that
the Governors Office of Storm Recovery will
consider, in consultation with local municipalities
and nonprofit organizations, when determining
which projects and actions are best positioned
for implementation.

The total cost of Proposed Projects in this
NYRCR Plan exceeds the NYRCR Community’s
CDBG-DR allocation to allow for flexibility if some
Proposed Projects cannot be implemented due
to environmental review, HUD eligibility, technical
feasibility, or other factors. Implementation of
the projects and actions found in this NYRCR
Plan are subject to applicable Federal, State,
and local laws and regulations, including the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Inclusion
of a project or action in this NYRCR Plan does
not guarantee that a particular project or action
will be eligible for CDBG-DR funding or that it will
be implemented. The Governor’s Office of Storm
Recovery will actively seek to match projects with
funding sources.

In the months and years to follow, many of the
projects and actions outlined in this NYRCR Plan
will become a reality helping New York not only to
rebuild, but also to build back better.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

NYRCR Communities

Residential resiliency and education program IV-19
Small business resiliency and education program IV-27
Stormwater capture and retention study IV-33
Wetland creation at East River Park IV-39
Berming and deployable walls at Battery Park IV-43
Targeted flood protection strategy for lower West Street IV-49
Coastal protection study for IV-59
east and west side IV-59

 

V. Additional materials

Additional resiliency recommendations v-1
Master table of projects V-7
Public engagement process V-11
Community asset inventory V-17
Appendix A - Existing plans and initiatives V-21
Appendix B - Risk assessment tool V-29
Endnotes V-33

 

Glossary V-35
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Executive summary

The NY Rising Community Reconstruction (NYRCR) Plan for Lower
Manhattan is driven by the idea that community resiliency following
an emergency depends on the ability of both physical and social
structures to bounce back after such an event. Superstorm Sandy
unleashed devastating effects in Lower Manhattan, throughout New
York City, and in the tri-State area - effects that persist even today, 17
months later. Visible impacts tell of the damage done to buildings and
infrastructure: from temporary boilers that still heat some apartment
buildings, to shuttered storefronts along Front Street in Lower Manhattan,
to the lasting closure of the Montague subway tunnel. The resiliency of
physical structures, however, is no more important than social resiliency
and the strength of the ties that bind a community together.

 

Immediately after Superstorm Sandy, community organizations such as Good
Old Lower East Side (GOLES) rallied volunteers for recovery efforts.
Source: Courtesy of GOLES.

Lower Manhattan and the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan

The Governor's Office of Storm Recovery has allocated up to $25
million in Federal Community Development Block Grant-Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) dollars to fund eligible recovery and resiliency
projects in the Lower Manhattan Planning Area, a mosaic of diverse
neighborhoods in Manhattan south of 14" Street, from the Hudson
River to the East River.

The Lower Manhattan Planning Committee is made up of 17 members
of the community, including members of all three Community Boards
that fall within the Planning Area, community residents, business leaders,
and representatives of local non-profit organizations. The Committee
faced a daunting task in collectively assessing the needs and priorities
of the Planning Area, which is the single largest NYRCR Planning Area by
population and covers many neighborhoods with differing demographics,
character, density, and building types. Across these divergent localities,
there is one constant: the high price of physical interventions and
infrastructure hardening, particularly given the dense urban environment
here that dates back to New Amsterdam’s beginnings.

Many efforts led by public agencies, utilities, and private building owners
throughout Lower Manhattan are already underway. Identifying and
considering these initiatives allowed the Planning Committee to pinpoint
gaps that could be filled through the NYRCR Program.
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Sandy’s impact and the recovery

The combination of high tide, a full moon, and Superstorm Sandy’s
size and wind dynamics created a massive surge of salt water,
causing flooding and sewer backup. Flooding primarily affected the
areas with lowest elevation adjacent to the shoreline, and in some cases,
water overtopped the bulkheads and infiltrated areas inland. In addition
to direct damage caused by flooding, preventative transportation and
utility shutdowns and major power failures led to the widespread loss

of electrical power, steam, transit, and telecommunications systems,
impacting the Community even in areas not reached by flood waters.
Following Superstorm Sandy, local emergency response efforts based on
pre-existing social infrastructures seemed to materialize overnight, with
community groups jumping into action to augment public recovery and
rebuilding efforts.

A community-driven process

This Plan showcases a community-based planning process that has
integrated both social and physical resiliency to inform a plan for a
more resilient Lower Manhattan for years to come.

This Plan is the product of a collaborative community-based process
led by the Committee. Input on needs and comments on projects were
gathered through three Public Engagement Events, meetings of all three
local Community Boards, and responses received from the public through
the internet and in person. Based on this feedback, the Committee has
developed an NYRCR Plan that seeks to address the specific and unique
needs of the communities in the Lower Manhattan Planning Area. At early
Public Engagement Events, public feedback contributed to the Community Lower Manhattan is located at the southern tip of the island of Manhattan

Vision Statement, which reflects these goals. (top). Community members voiced their feedback during Public Engagement

Events (bottom).

 
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Community vision statement

Through the NY Rising Community
Reconstruction Plan, the Lower Manhattan
community aims to improve the capacity
and readiness of all community
members to prepare for, respond to, and
quickly recover from severe weather-related
events; to address needs currently
unmet by existing rebuilding and resiliency
efforts; and to support the vital and
diverse character and history of Lower
Manhattan.

The Vision Statement reflects the Committee’s focus on the strategic
use of NYRCR funding to fill gaps in resiliency efforts already underway,
with an emphasis on meeting the needs of the most vulnerable
residents in Lower Manhattan. Vulnerable populations are those
individuals who have limited mobility due to physical or other disability,
limited communication skills (e.g., due to limited English proficiency), and/
or a limited ability to control their environment. They are the most at risk
during emergency events, and their collective safety was compromised by
Community-based organizations collected food and supplies to deliver to the particular effects of Superstorm Sandy and the power failures and cold
residents throughout Lower Manhattan. Source: Courtesy of GOLES. weather that followed soon thereafter.

 
NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program—Lower Manhattan

Critical issues and approaches

To address the needs of vulnerable populations during and following
emergencies, the Committee focused on providing support to the
community-based organizations (CBOs) that serve these residents on
a daily basis.

In addition to the focus on vulnerable populations, the Planning
Committee has prioritized strategic investments that are
complementary to existing recovery and resiliency initiatives, by
boosting emergency preparedness coordination, educating residents
and small businesses about resiliency, and filling gaps in resiliency
planning. The Committee also sought ways to leverage other efforts or
investments by filling funding gaps for existing or planned government
programs, and to create or expand scalable programs that could be
replicated citywide. Finally, the Committee sought to identify projects that
are highly feasible, able to be implemented on a short timeline, and whose
benefits could thus be realized within the next few years.

Given this framework, the main areas of focus of the Committee were
bolstering community emergency preparedness by investing in existing,
unfunded initiatives; concentrating efforts and resources toward programs
that benefit vulnerable populations; and developing replicable programs
that seed further investment wherever possible.

 

A blueprint for future resiliency é

Community-based organizations quickly established supply distribution
The NYRCR Plan for Lower Manhattan offers a blueprint for the networks to deliver critical support to vulnerable populations in the wake of
implementation of the goals of the Planning Committee, outlining Superstorm Sandy. Source: Courtesy of GOLES.

concrete strategies for enhancing the Community’s resiliency.
Lower Manhattan—NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program

Recovery support functions 4&) 9)
The NYRCR Plan is informed by six Recovery Support Functions,

established by President Barack Obama in 2011 through the National Community Planning Natural & Cultural Infrastructure
. & Capacity Building Resources
Disaster Recovery Framework. These Recovery Support Functions

were used when developing needs, opportunities, strategies, and
projects to ensure that a comprehensive approach is reinforced a
throughout the effort to shape a holistic resiliency strategy for the
Community.

